TITLE: A History of Deeds Done Beyond the Sea
IDENTIFIER: williamoftyrehistory
URL: https://archive.org/download/williamoftyrehistory/William_of_Tyre_History_djvu.txt

A  H istory  of 

DEEDS  DONE  BEYOND 

THE  SEA 

» 

By  WILLIAM 

Archbishop  of  Tyre 

0 

VOLUME  ONE 


/ 


Translated,  and  Annotated  by 

EMILY  ATWATER  BABCOCK 

and 

A.  C.  KREY 


NEW  YORK  :  MORNINGSIDE  HEIGHTS 

COLUMBIA  UNIVERSITY  PRESS 

1943 


i 


Copyright  1943 

Columbia  University  Press,  New  York 

c 

Foreign  agent:  oxford  university  press,  Humphrey  Milford, 
Amen  House,  London,  E^C.  4.,  England,  and  jS.  I,  Building,  Nicol 

Road,  Bombay,  India 

I 

MANUFACTURED  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES  OF  AMERICA 


RECORDS  OF  CIVILIZATION 

SOURCES  AND  STUDIES 


EDITED  UNDER  THE  AUSPICES  OF  THE 
DEPARTMENT  OF  HISTORY,  COLUMBIA  UNIVERSITY 

Editor 

AUSTIN  P.  EVANS,  PH. D. 

Professor  of  History 


Advisory  Board 

DINO  BIGONGIARI,  Da  Ponte  Professor  of  Italian 

< 

ROBERT  HERNDON  FIFE,  l.h.d.,  Gebliard  Professor  of  the 
Germanic  Languages  and  Literatures 

CARLTON  J.  H.  HAYES,  litt.d.,  Seth  Low  Professor  of  History 

ROGER  SHERMAN  LOOMIS,  b.litt..  Associate  Professor  of 
English 

ROBERT  MORRISON  MacIVER,  litt,d.,  Lieber  Professor  of 
Political  Philosophy  and  Sociology 

DAVID  S.  MUZZEY,  ph.d.,  Gouverneur  Morris  Professor  Emeritus 
of  History 

I 

JAMES  T.  SHOTWELL,  ll.d.,  Bryce  Professor  Emeritus  of  the 

History  of  International  Relations  j  Director  of  the  Division  of 
Economics  and  History,  Carnegie  Endowment  for  International 
Peace 

LYNN  THORNDIKE,  l.h.d..  Professor  of  History 
WILLIAM  L.  WESTERMANN,  l.h.d..  Professor  of  Ancient  History 


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 


Now  as  we  near  the  end  of  our  labors  we  become  painfully  aware  of 
the  fact  that  the  task  of  translating  and  annotating  this  work  of  Arch¬ 
bishop  William  has  extented  over  quite  as  long  a  period  of  time  as  he 
required  for  composing  it.  As  in  his  case,  so  also  in  ours,  the  work  has 
sujffered  from  many — if  not  as  important — interruptions,  with  the  usual 
consequence  of  many  broken  threads. 

Several  of  those  on  whom  we  called  frequently  for  help  in  the  early 
stages  of  translation  have  already  passed  on  to  their  final  reward.  Our 
debt  was  especially  great  to  two  of  these:  to  Sister  Frances  Rita  Ryan, 
C.S.J.,  and  to  Professor  Joseph  B.  Pike,  former  head  of  the  Depart¬ 
ment  of  Latin  at  the  University  of  Minnesota,  whose  expert  knowledge 
of  medieval  Latin  was  so  generously  placed  at  our  disposal.  The  late 
Mr.  Willoughby  M.  Babcock,  though  immediately  concerned  with 
his  legal  practice,  nevertheless  gave  generously  of  his  time  to  untangle 
many  a  knotty  problem  of  translation.  And  last,  but  not  least,  we  wish 
to  express  our  debt  to  the  late  Professor  D.  C.  Munro  of  Princeton, 
who  did  so  much  to  inspire  this  undertaking. 

It  is  quite  impossible  to  render  adequate  acknowledgment  of  assist¬ 
ance  received  from  those  of  our  colleagues  who  are  primarily  interested 
in  medieval  studies.  The  citation  of  their  published  works  indicates  but 
a  fraction  of  our  indebtedness,  for  they  were  repeatedly  called  on  for 
advice  and  counsel  at  many  meetings  of  the  American  Historical  Asso¬ 
ciation  and  of  the  Mediaeval  Academy  of  America  as  well  as  on  other 
occasions  when  opportunity  offered.  The  complete  list  of  those  who 
have  contributed  in  this  way  would  include  not  only  most  of  the  Amer¬ 
ican  medievalists  who  have  worked  on  the  period  of  the  Crusades,  but 
also  many  other  scholars  in  related  fields.  Old  friends  and  fellow 
^^Crusaders,”  Professors  E.  H.  Byrne  of  Columbia  University,  F.  Dun- 
calf  of  the  University  of  Texas,  E.  Joranson  of  the  University  of 
Chicago,  and  J.  L.  La  Monte  of  Pennsylvania  University,  were  per¬ 
sistently  plagued  with  questions. 

Part  of  our  work  was  done  during  a  sabbatical  year  (1939-1940) 
which  events  transformed  from  a  visit  at  the  scene  of  the  Crusades  to 
study  at  libraries  in  this  country.  A  special  tribute  should  be  paid  to  the 


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 


Vlll 

authorities  of  Harvard  University,  whose  usual  hospitality  was  put  to 
an  extraordinary  strain  by  an  abnormal  number  of  migrant  scholars. 
They  not  only  placed  all  the  available  space  at  the  disposal  of  these 
visitors,  but  transformed  seminar  rooms  and  ofSces  into  studies  so  that 
all  could  be  accommodated.  The  faculty  was  no  less  generous  in  hospi¬ 
tality,  which  it  would  be  a  pleasure  to  acknowledge,  but  we  must  here 
confine  ourselves  to  naming  those  whose  special  researches  were  placed 
at  our  service.  Among  these  must  be  included  Professors  R.  P.  Blake, 
S.  H.  Cross,  N.  S.  B.  Gras,  C,  H.  Mcllwain,  and  E.  K.  Rand.  To  Har¬ 
vard  University  we  are  also  indebted  for  the  opportunity  of  discussing 
our  problems  with  other  visiting  professors,  among  whom  are  included 
Professors  C.  W.  David  of  Bryn  Mawr,  P.  B.  Fay  of  the  University 
of  California,  W.  K.  Ferguson  of  New  York  University,  Gaines  Post 
of  the  University  of  Wisconsin,  T.  C.  Van  Cleve  of  Bowdoin  College, 
and  C.  Webster  of  the  American  University  of  Beirut.  Princeton  Uni¬ 
versity  was  no  less  generous  in  giving  access  to  its  magnificent  collection 
of  books  on  the  history  of  the  Crusades  and  the  Near  East.  Its  faculty 
was  equally  hospitable,  and  our  gratitude  is  especially  due  Professors 
E.  C.  Armstrong,  Gray  C.  Boyce,  P.  K.  Hitti,  and  J.  R.  Strayer.  The 
Universty  of  North  Carolina  proved  to  be  an  equally  kind  host,  its 
authorities  and  faculty  no  less  cordial.  There  Professors  G.  R.  Coffman, 
U.  T.  Holmes,  Jr.,  L.  C.  McKinney,  and  J.  C.  Russell  lent  us  their 
advice  on  a  number  of  problems.  Thanks  to  the  happy  cooperation  of 
the  libraries  of  North  Carolina  and  Duke  Universities,  the  resources 
of  the  latter  were  also  of  assistance,  and  two  of  its  faculty.  Professors 
E.  W.  Nelson  and  Dorothy  M.  Quynn,  were  especially  helpful.  Con¬ 
scious  of  the  fact  that  we  have  failed  to  mention  all  to  whom  we  have 
become  indebted  over  the  long  interval  of  years,  we  must  close  the 
list  by  expressing  to  Professors  D.  Bjork  of  the  University  of  California 
at  Los  Angeles,  R.  L.  Reynolds  of  the  University  of  Wisconsin,  and 
Lynn  White  of  Stanford  University  our  appreciation  for  aid  and  com¬ 
fort. 

It  would,  however,  be  highly  ungracious  after  acknowledging  the 
assistance  of  other  universities  to  fail  to  name  that  of  our  own,  whose 
authorities  have  been  more  than  kind  in  furthering  this  work.  Likewise 
our  colleagues  in  many  fields  have  borne  patiently  with  us  while  we 
drew  on  their  special  funds  of  knowledge.  We  hope  that  all  of  them 
will  feel  themselves  represented  if  we  single  out  for  mention  only 


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 


IX 

President  Guy  Stanton  Ford,  who  encouraged  and  aided  us  in  this 
work  through  all  its  stages,  and  Mr.  F.  K.  Walter,  librarian,  who  never 
failed  us  when  we  needed  his  help  and  not  infrequently  anticipated 
our  needs.  In  like  manner  we  hope  that  all  the  members  of  the  Medi¬ 
eval  Seminar  who  have  given  their  help  on  these  problems  over  the 
period  of  years  will  feel  themselves  included  in  the  special  mention  of 
Gertrude  Doxey,  Beatrice  Siedschlag,  and  Wentworth  Morris,  all  of 
whom  have  since  become  worthy  members  of  the  historical  profession. 

In  the  more  immediately  punishing  tasks  of  preparing  the  manu¬ 
script  for  publication  our  debt  is  likewise  great.  We  have  received  from 
Mr.  Willoughby  M.  Babcock,  Jr.,  and  Mrs.  A.  C.  Krey  assistance 
which  only  bonds  of  relationship  could  command.  Mrs.  Zephyra  Shep¬ 
herd  and  Mrs.  T.  S.  Basford  both  have  rendered  devoted  service  be¬ 
yond  all  possibility  of  remuneration.  The  sketch  maps  were  prepared 
for  us  by  Mr.  D.  A.  Melander,  a  student  in  architecture.  A  grant-in-aid 
generously  allotted  by  the  Carnegie  Corporation  of  New  York  did 
much  to  further  the  final  stages  of  our  work  and  make  its  completion 
possible.  Finally,  our  thanks  are  due  to  the  Columbia  University  Press, 
to  its  vigilant  editor,  Dr.  William  Bridgwater,  and  to  Professor  Austin 
P.  Evans,  the  editor  of  the  series  in  which  this  work  finds  a  place,  who 
made  countless  valuable  suggestions  for  Improving  both  translation 
and  notes.  We  wish  also  to  pay  special  tribute  to  the  latter’s  almost 
unceasing  patience  and  good  humor  through  the  taxing  labor  of  con¬ 
scientiously  editing  this  work. 

In  spite  of  all  the  help  that  these  scholars  and  friends  have  given  us, 
we  cannot,  of  course,  hope  that  the  printed  result  is  entirely  free  of 
error.  Indeed  the  circumstances  under  which  we  have  labored,  the 
great  lapse  of  time,  the  variety  of  sources  from  which  we  have  drawn, 
the  immensity  of  the  task  as  well  as  our  own  natural  fallibility  have 
rendered  it  certain  that  many  mistakes  must  have  occurred.  For  this 
we  can  only  crave  the  indulgence  of  the  reader  and  invoke  the  prayer 
with  which  the  good  archbishop  himself  concluded  his  prologue. 

E.  A.  B. 

A.  C.  K. 

Saint  Paul,  Minn. 

May,  1943 


CONTENTS 


Volume  One 


Introduction 
Prologue 
Book  I. 


Book  II. 


Book  III. 


Book  IV. 


Book  V. 
Book  VI. 
Book  VII. 


Book  VIII. 
Book  IX. 


Book  X. 
Book  XI. 


« 

3 

53 

Christianity  Aroused  for  the  Relief  of  Jerusalem: 
Peter  the  Hermit  and  Other  Bands  Begin  the  March  6o 

The  Armies  of  the  First  Crusade  Proceed  to  Con¬ 
stantinople  1 1 6 

Capture  of  Nicaea  and  the  March  through  Asia 
Minor  152 

Crusaders  Overrun  Northern  Syria  and  Begin  Siege 
of  Antioch  187 


Siege  and  Capture  of  Antioch 
Crusaders  Besieged  5  A  Miraculous  Victory 


225 

261 


Dissension  among  the  Crusaders;  They  March  on 
Jerusalem  298 

End  of  the  Pilgrimage:  Jerusalem  Captured  339 

Godfrey,  Defender  of  the  Holy  Sepulchre:  Pre¬ 
carious  Tenure  of  Jerusalem  and  Antioch  379 

■1 

King  Baldwin  I:  Expansion  of  the  Kingdom  415 

End  of  the  Reign  of  Baldwin  I:  Further  Conquests 
by  Jerusalem  and  Antioch  4^0 


Book  XII. 


Baldwin  II:  Troubles  in  Northern  Syria 


517 


dk-BooK  XIII. 


Book  XIV. 


Volume  Two 

Capture  of  Tyre;  Extension  of  Royal  Influence  to 
Other  Latin  States 

Fulk  of  Anjou  as  King  of  Jerusalem:  Troubles  in 
Northern  Syria 


47 


CONTENTS 


■  • 

Xll 

Book  XV.  Emperor  John  Seeks  to  Extend  His  Influence  over 

the  Latin  States  94 

Book  XVI.  Joint  Rule  of  Baldwin  III  and  His  Mother  Meli- 

send:  The  Second  Crusade  136 

Book  XVII.  The  Capture  of  Ascalon  Offsets  the  Failure  of  the 

Second  Crusade  184 

^  Book  XVIII.  Latin  Jerusalem  at  Its  Height  under  Baldwin  III: 

The  Lure  of  Egypt  235 

■ 

Book  XIX.  Amaury  I:  The  Struggle  for  Egypt,  First  Stage  295 

Book  XX.  The  Struggle  for  Egypt:  Alliance  with  Emperor 

Manuel  344 

Book  XXI.  Baldwin  IV,  the  Leper,  Forced  to  Assume  Rule  of 

Jerusalem  397 

.  Book  XXII.  Conflict  of  Interests  446 

w 

Book  XXIII.  Could  Jerusalem  Be  Saved  by  Raymond  of  Tripoli?  505 

Abbreviations  512 

Bibliography  513 

Index  523 

Maps 


Routes  of  the  Principal  Crusading  Expeditions,  10Q7—1184.  A.  D.  I:  2q8 

4  ^  m  w  ✓ 

The  Regions  of  William  of  Tyre  II:  238 


I 


INTRODUCTION 


INTRODUCTION 


The  crusades  still  hold  a  place  in  the  treasured  memories  of  Western 
people  which  is  approached  only  by  the  story  of  the  discovery  of  the 
New  World-  To  a  long  record  of  adventurous  exploration,  the  crusad¬ 
ing  chronicles  add  equally  romantic  accounts  of  the  pursuit  of  a  pious 
ideal.  True,  the  ultimate  goal  of  that  endeavor,  several  times  so  nearly 
won,  was  never  fully  attained.  In  the  effort  to  reach  it,  however,  much 
was  .gained  that  was  never  to  be  lost  j  for  during  the  period  of  the 
crusades  the  civilization  of  Europe  advanced  materially,  intellectually, 
and  spiritually  to  new  levels.  Furthermore,  all  of  Western  Europe 
was  involved  in  the  effort  to  occupy  the  Holy  Land.  If  the  regions  of 
France  contributed  most  to  this  endeavor,  the  other  countries  did  not 
lag  far  behind,  Britain  had  its  Richard  Lionheart,  Germany  its  Freder¬ 
ick  Barbarossa,  Italy  its  Bohemond  and  Tancred,  the  Lowlands  their 
Godfrey  of  Bouillon,  their  Baldwins,  and  Robert  of  Flanders,  and 
the  Scandinavian  lands  their  Sigurd  ^^Jorsalfar.”  Nor,  during  the  two 
centuries  of  greatest  crusading  activity,  were  the  regions  of  Spain,  of 
Ireland,  and  of  Scotland  unrepresented.  The  story  of  the  triumphs 
and  failures,  of  the  heroic  episodes  and  the  tragic  suffering  involved 
in  the  crusades  was,  therefore,  of  more  than  casual  concern  to  all  the 
peoples  in  the  Western  world.  The  interest  in  that  story,  which  began 
with  the  very  first  of  the  expeditions,  as  people  back  home  waited 
anxiously  for  news  of  their  relatives  on  the  march,  has  continued  ever 
since  5  and  as  the  descendants  of  the  participants  have  spread  over  the 
earth,  they  have  carried  that  interest  with  them.  As  a  result,  there  has 
grown  up  a  vast  literature  about  the  crusades  ranging  from  extravagant 
fiction,  song,  poetry,  and  drama  to  critical  history  and  philosophical 
interpretation. 

In  this  accumulation  of  literature  the  history  of  William,  archbishop 
of  Tyre,  occupies  a  position  of  unique  distinction.  Its  enduring  im¬ 
portance  is  well,  if  whimsically,  illustrated  by  the  story  that  the  British 
historian,  H.  Pirie-Gordon,  chose  to  write  an  unsigned  account  of 
General  Allenby’s  capture  of  Jerusalem  in  1917,  so  that  his  work  might 
be  regarded  “as  the  final  anonymous  continuation  of  William  of 
Tyre.”  ^  This  allusion,  of  course,  was  intended  to  refer  to  the  fact 

^  J.  L.  La  Monte,  “Some  Problems  in  Crusading  Historiography,’^  SfeculuiUy  XV 
(1940),  60. 


INTRODUCTION 


4 

that,  in  recounting  the  history  of  the  later  crusades,  the  writers  of  the 
thirteenth  century  were  almost  uniformly  content  to  add  their  anony¬ 
mous  contributions  to  the  story  related  by  William  of  Tyre.  William’s 
account  is  generally  regarded  as  the  first  comprehensive  history  of 
the  crusades.  Before  his  time,  however,  the  First  Crusade  had  been 
described  not  only  by  participants,  whose  accounts  were  necessarily 
incomplete,  but  also  by  men  of  letters,  some  of  whom  had  tried  to 
round  out  the  earlier  stories.  On  these  primary  sources  of  informa¬ 
tion  William  drew  for  part  of  the  material  in  his  earlier  books  or  chap¬ 
ters.  Taking  Jerusalem  as  the  center  of  his  theme,  he  added  to  these 
antecedent  works  an  introduction  which  ran  back  to  the  loss  of  that 
city  by  the  Christians  in  614  and  continued  on  to  the  verge  of  its  fall 
before  Saladin  in  1187.  The  manner  in  which  he  performed  this  task 
is  well  stated  in  the  words  of  a  modern  historian:  ‘‘This  great  move¬ 
ment  found  its  fitting  chronicler  in  William  of  Tyre,  an  historian  who 
surpasses  nearly  all  other  of  his  medieval  fellows  as  much  in  the  artistic 
symmetry  of  his  work  as  he  does  in  the  inherent  interest  and  almost  epic 
completeness  of  his  theme.”  -  Once  this  work  became  known,  it  was  used 
by  other  writers  as  the  base  for  their  own  addition  of  later  events. 
Such  additions,  covering  the  two  most  active  centuries  of  crusading 
history,  were  made  by  various  scribes  down  to  the  end  of  the  thirteenth 
century.  William’s  work,  therefore,  comprises  the  main  trunk  of  the 
literature  on  the  crusades,  the  roots  of  which  are  to  be  found  in  ante¬ 
cedent  writings  and  the  branches  in  numerous  later  anonymous  addi¬ 
tions. 


HIS  LIFE 

William  of  Tyre,  the  author  of  this  work,  was  archbishop  of  Tyre 
from  1175  to  1184  or  11855  he  remained  chancellor  of  the  Latin 
Kingdom  of  Jerusalem  from  1174  until  his  death.  So  much  of  his 
career  may  be  established  on  the  basis  of  objective  evidence.^  The 
rest  of  our  knowledge  of  his  life  has  been  built  up  chiefly  from  hints 
and  incidental  allusions  in  his  record  of  his  own  times.  This  reconstruc¬ 
tion — a  process  not  unlike  that  by  which  scientists  have  reassembled 


^  T.  A.  Archer,  “On  the  Accession  Dates  of  the  Early  Kings  of  Jerusalem,”  Eng¬ 
lish  Historical  Review j  IV  (1889),  89. 

®  There  are  surprisingly  few  references  to  William  by  contemporary  writers.  Men¬ 
tion  of  him  is  largely  confined  to  legal  documents,  nearly  all  of  which  are  listed  by 
R.  Rdhricht  in  his  Regesta  regni  Hierosolymitani^ 


INTRODUCTION 


5 

the  skeletons  of  prehistoric  animals  out  of  scattered  bones — has  re¬ 
sulted  from  the  continuous  efforts  of  a  long  succession  of  scholars,  be¬ 
ginning  with  the  first  printed  edition  of  the  history  in  the  sixteenth 
century  and  continuing  down  to  the  present  time.  The  list  of  those 
who  have  contributed  to  this  reconstruction  of  William’s  career  in¬ 
cludes  Pantaleon,  Bongars,  Pastoret,  Michaud,  Ranke,  Sybel,  Jaffe, 
Riant,  Kugler,  Mas  Latrie,  P.  Paris,  Rey,  Prutz,  T.  A.  Archer,  Roh- 
richt,  Hagenmeyer,  W.  B.  Stevenson,  D.  C.  Munro,  Brehier,  and  La 
Monte.**  This  cumulative  reconstruction  has  been  accomplished  through 

^  The  authorities  here  cited  are  but  a  few  of  those  who  have  had  occasion  to  com¬ 
ment  on  William’s  career.  So  far  as  is  known,  the  first  attempt  to  write  a  life  of 
William  of  Tyre  is  contained  in  one  of  the  earliest  printed  editions  of  the  work, 
H.  Pantaleon,  Historia  belli  sacri  verissime  .  .  .  authors  olim  Willelmo  Tyrio  .  .  . 
una  cum  continuations  .  .  ,  Cum  fraefatione  Henrici  Pantaleonis  atqus  ifsius  au- 
thoris  vita*  The  diplomat  historian,  J.  Bongars,  wrote  a  brief  biography  of  William 
in  his  edition  of  chronicles  of  the  crusades,  Gesta  Dei  /per  Francos.  C.  Pastoret,  who 
regarded  William  as  of  French  origin,  wrote  an  article  summarizing  the  findings  of 
scholars  up  to  his  own  time  for  the  Histoire  littsraire  ds  la  FrancSy  XIV  (1817), 
587—96.  With  the  opening  of  the  nineteenth  century  came  a  new  interest  in  the  his¬ 
tory  of  the  crusades,  represented  by  the  monumental  works  of  F.  Wilken  {Geschichte 
der  Kreuzziige  nach  morgenldndischen  tmd  ah  endian  dischen  Berichten)  and  also  of 
J.  Michaud.  The  latter  devoted  many  pages  to  an  appraisal  of  William  as  historian 
in  his  Bibliotheque  des  croisades,  I,  134—68.  Ranke  submitted  the  sources  of  infor¬ 
mation  for  the  history  of  the  crusades  to  the  critical  scrutiny  of  his  seminar,  and  one 
of  his  most  brilliant  students.  Von  Sybel,  published,  in  1841,  a  critical  study  of  the 
literature  of  the  First  Crusade.  He  included  an  extended  treatment  of  William’s  life 
and  the  value  of  his  history  for  our  knowledge  of  the  First  Crusade  (H.  von  Sybel, 
Geschichte  des  ersten  KreuzzugSy  pp.  108—43).  Critical  scrutiny  was  then  directed 
to  William’s  account  of  the  Second  Crusade,  where  the  similarity  of  his  treatment  to 
that  of  the  Gesta  Ludovici  VII  raised  some  question  of  borrowing.  After  considerable 
debate,  William’s  originality  was  confirmed  and  the  evidence  summarized  by  B.  Kug¬ 
ler,  Studien  zur  Geschichte  des  zvjeiten  KreuzzugSy  pp.  21— 34J  also  his  Analecten 
zur  Geschichte  des  zvjeiten  Kreuzzugs.  It  was  unfortunate  that  Paulin  Paris  made 
little  or  no  use  of  these  critical  studies,  for  the  authority  of  his  name  was  to  lead 
many  students  of  medieval  literature  to  ignore  them  likewise.  Count  Riant,  how¬ 
ever,  did  not  overlook  the  critical  work  of  contemporary  scholars  but  contributed 
to  it  significantly  in  his  wide  and  varied  studies  on  the  crusades,  some  of  which  will 
be  cited  in  the  footnotes.  It  remained  for  H.  Prutz  to  undertake  a  comprehensive 
and  critical  study  of  William  and  his  work.  This  appeared  in  his  ‘‘Studien  fiber 
Wilhelm  von  Tyrus,”  Netties  Archiv  der  Gesellschajt  fiir  alters  deutsche  Geschichts- 
kundSy  VIII  (1882),  93—132,  and  was  summarized  in  his  Kulttcr geschichte  der 
Kreuzziigey  pp.  458—69.  Since  those  studies  appeared,  further  contributions  to  our 
knowledge  of  William  have  been  of  a  supplementary  nature,  often  as  an  incidental 
part  of  other  research.  In  his  article,  pp.  91—105  (see  note  2),  T.  A.  Archer  sought 
to  disentangle  the  chronological  confusion  of  William’s  list  of  kings.  This  problem 
received  further  attention  from  W.  B.  Stevenson,  The  Crusaders  in  the  Easty  pp. 
361—71.  R.  Rohricht  added  considerably  to  the  knowledge  of  William’s  work  as 
chancellor  in  his  monumental  Regesta.  Important  contributions  likewise  resulted  from 
H.  Hagenmeyer’s  editions  of  chronicles  of  the  First  Crusade,  which  are  cited  else¬ 
where.  Additions,  too,  were  made  by  L.  Brehier  in  VEglise  et  VOrtent  and  by  J.  L. 


6 


INTRODUCTION 


venturesome  hypotheses  and  conjectures,  many  of  which  have  proven 
mistaken,  while  others  have  served  as  brilliant  guides  to  further  ad¬ 
vance.  Indeed,  erroneous  conjectures  regarding  William’s  career  began 
to  appear  long  before  critical  scholarship  applied  itself  to  the  subject. 
Unfortunately  these  early  mistakes,  as  well  as  the  false  clues  entertained 
at  times  by  modern  scholars,  have  likewise  become  a  permanent  part  of 
the  literature  on  the  crusades,  so  that  the  unwary  reader  is  easily  be¬ 
guiled  into  accepting  error  along  with  fact.  This  danger,  which  is 
illustrated  in  Grousset’s  recent  three-volume  history  of  the  crusades, 
is  so  great  that  it  seems  essential  to  present  here  a  summary  of  our 
present  authentic  knowledge  of  William’s  career.^ 

William  was  a  native  of  the  kingdom  of  Jerusalem,  where  he  was 
born  about  the  year  1130,  perhaps  in  Jerusalem  itself.®  Probably  both 
of  his  parents  were  from  the  West.  Who  they  were,  whence  they  came 
to  Jerusalem,  or  when — none  of  these  facts  has  been  determined. 
Various  conjectures  have  been  offered  as  to  the  place  of  their  origin, 
which  has  been  variantly  cited  as  England,  Germany,  France,  and 
Italy,  William,  who  has  so  much  to  say  about  the  genealogy  of  others, 
is  singularly  reticent  about  his  own,  maintaining  throughout  all  his 

La  Monte  in  his  Feudal  Monarchy.  While  these  scholars  have  made  the  more  sub¬ 
stantial  contributions  since  Prutz  published  his  “Studien,”  nearly  every  modern  scholar 
who  worked  on  twelfth-century  crusading"  history  has  helped  to  fortify  our  knowl¬ 
edge  of  William’s  life  and  works.  An  effort  to  summarize  our  present  knowledge  of 
the  subject  appears  in  the  article  by  A.  C.  Krey,  ‘‘The  Making  of  an  Historian  in  the 
Middle  Ages,”  Sfeculumj  XVI  (1941),  149— 66.  Additional  bibliography  may  be  ob¬ 
tained  from  the  standard  works  of  reference  on  medieval  literature  and  history: 
M.  Manitius,  Geschtchte  der  lateinischen  Literatur  des  Mittelalters G.  Grober, 
Grundrus  der  romantschen  Philologie;  U.  Chevalier,  Repertoire  des  sources  historiques 
du  moyen  age:  Bio-bibliographie;  A.  Potthast,  Bibliotheca  historica  medii  aevi;  A. 
Molinier,  Les  Sources  de  Vhistoire  de  France  des  origines  aux  guerres  dUtaliCy  Vol.  II. 
Paradoxically  enough,  the  brief  notices  by  Grober  and  Manitius  are  more  accurate 
than  those  of  Potthast  or  Molinier. 

^  R.  Grousset,  Histoire  des  croisades  et  du  royaume  franc  de  J erusalenty  II,  i—ii, 
757.  Errors  appear  throughout  the  first  two  volumes  in  which  he  has  followed 
chiefly  the  old  French  translation  of  William’s  work  as  edited  by  P.  Paris.  Many  of 
these  and  some  of  her  own  errors  appear  in  the  edition  of  Caxton’s  Godeffroy  de 
Boloyne  by  Mary  Noyes  Colvin.  More  unfortunate  is  the  fact  that  both  Potthast  and 
Molinier,  whose  bibliographical  notes  are  the  standard  reference  of  historians,  have 
perpetuated  several  serious  errors.  Thus  Hagenmeyer,  or  probably  some  assistant,  in 
his  last  important  work  (H.  Hagenmeyer,  ed.,  Fulcheri  Carnotensis  historia  Hiero- 
solymitanay  p.  85),  was  betrayed  by  Potthast  into  the  use  of  1190  as  the  date  of 
William’s  death,  though  Prutz  had  thoroughly  convinced  him  earlier  that  it  was 
an  error  (H.  Hagenmeyer,  ed.,  Galterii  Cancellarii  bella  Antiochenaj  p.  47). 

®  No  evidence  has  yet  appeared  to  challenge  these  conclusions  of  Prutz.  J.  B.  Bury 
gives  1127  as  the  date  of  William’s  birth,  in  his  edition  of  Gibbon  (E.  Gibbon,  Decline 
and  Fall  of  the  Roman  Empire y  VI,  527). 


INTRODUCTION  7 

work  a  silence  so  complete  as  to  remain  impenetrable  to  the  present 
time. 

The  claims  of  the  first  two  regions,  however,  may  be  readily  dis¬ 
missed.  Those  for  England  doubtless  arose  from  a  hasty  confusion 
of  the  historian  with  the  first  William,  archbishop  of  Tyre,  who  was 
an  Englishman.  Though  our  William  has  much  to  say  of  English 
participants  in  crusading  affairs,  his  attitude  is  scarcely  that  of  a  per¬ 
son  of  English  antecedents.  He  esteems  Robert  of  Normandy,  scorns 
Henry  I,  praises  Stephen,  and  denounces  Queen  Eleanor.  He  dislikes 
Hadrian,  the  English  pope,  and  ascribes  the  elevation  of  Ralph  as 
bishop  of  Bethlehem  to  the  fact  that  he  was  a  fellow  countryman  of 
this  pope.  The  claims  for  Germany  as  the  home  of  his  ancestors  are 
even  less  convincing.  His  statements  about  German  affairs  are  rela¬ 
tively  few  and  the  proportion  of  inaccuracies  greater  than  for  any 
other  important  region.  In  addition,  he  fails  to  mention  a  number  of 
important  German  nobles  who  were  in  the  Holy  Land  during  his  own 
lifetime.'^ 

On  the  other  hand,  his  references  to  France  and  to  the  regions  of 
France  are  most  extensive  and  usually  very  accurate.  It  has,  therefore, 
often  been  assumed  that  William  was  himself  of  French  origin.  This 
view  was  held  by  Prutz,  whose  study  of  William  of  Tyre  is  still  the 
most  thorough  ever  attempted.  There  are  grounds,  however,  for  ques¬ 
tioning  this  conclusion  also.  For  example,  William  possesses  an  extraor¬ 
dinarily  accurate  knowledge  of  Italy,  and,  in  referring  to  the  history 
of  Sicily,  he  includes  a  number  of  details  which  are  inessential  to  his 
main  story.  Furthermore,  he  names  Tancred  as  a  hero  almost  equal 
to  Godfrey,  and  not  only  lists  France  as  ‘^ultramontane,”  but  identifies 
Henry  of  Champagne  as,  not  from  Camfania  in  Italy,  but  from  Can'h 
fania  “across  the  mountains.”  Such  references  would  scarcely  be  ex¬ 
pected  of  any  Frenchman,  or  even  of  any  son  of  French  parents.  In 
addition,  there  are  other  facts  of  his  life,  to  be  discussed  later,  which 
strengthen  this  hesitancy  and  incline  one  to  suspect  Italian,  or  Italian- 
Norman,  origin. 

The  status  and  occupation  of  his  father  have  not  been  determined. 
Pastoret,  basing  his  statement  upon  a  chronicle  now  lost,  held  that 

Notably  Duke  Henry  the  Lion  (see  E.  Joranson,  *^The  Pilgrimage  of  Henry 
the  Lion,”  Medieval  and  Historiografhical  Essays  tn  Honor  of  James  Westfall 
Thompson) ,  William,  moreover,  frankly  confesses  his  ignorance  of  the  names  of 
many  of  the  German  leaders  of  the  Second  Crusade. 


8 


INTRODUCTION 


William  was  related  to  most  of  the  leading  noble  families  of  the  king¬ 
dom  of  Jerusalem.^  This  statement  coupled  with  William’s  own  com¬ 
plete  silence  regarding  his  forebears  might  suggest  that  he  had  good 
reason  for  concealing  his  genealogy.  Against  this  inference,  however, 
is  the  fact  that  William  is  known  to  have  had  a  brother,  Ralph,  who  is 
mentioned  in  a  charter  of  the  year  1175  as  a  witness  to  a  transfer  of 
property  at  Jerusalem.®  Inasmuch  as  Ralph’s  name  is  placed  low  in 
the  list  of  witnesses  and  carries  no  other  designation  than  his  relation¬ 
ship  to  the  archbishop,  it  has  been  assumed  that  the  father  was  neither 
of  the  noble  class  nor  of  military  calling.  In  that  event,  he  may  very 
well  have  been  a  merchant  or  a  notary,  both  of  which  occupations  were 
well  represented  in  the  Holy  Land  at  the  time.  As  a  rule  such  persons, 
if  from  the  West,  were  of  Italian  origin.^®  William’s  own  unfamiliarity 
with  military  matters,  together  with  his  sympathetic  interest  in  the 
activities  of  merchants,  imparts  a  certain  degree  of  support  to  this 
supposition.  Furthermore,  the  permanent  Latin  colony  at  Jerusalem 
at  the  time  was  so  small  that  even  ordinary  merchants  and  especially 
notaries  were  on  friendly  terms  with  the  nobles  of  the  court. 

William’s  boyhood,  then,  was  spent  in  Palestine,  probably  most  of 
it  in  Jerusalem.  Such  early  recollections  as  are  incidentally  recorded 
in  his  history  all  center  there.  His  work  reveals  an  intimate  knowledge 
of  the  streets  and  the  buildings  of  that  city.^^  Furthermore,  his  extraor¬ 
dinary  command  of  languages  could  best  have  been  acquired  by  a 
youth  living  in  the  East.  This  familiarity  included  knowledge  of 
French,  the  language  of  the  court,  of  Arabic,  which  shared  with  French 
the  field  of  commerce,  and  of  Greek,  which  was  likewise  extensively 
used  in  the  East.  In  addition,  he  appears  to  have  had  at  least  a  smatter¬ 
ing  of  other  Eastern  tongues — of  Hebrew  and  even  of  Persian.  Latin 

®  See  note  4.  He  cites  a  history  by  one  “Etienne  dc  Lusignan/^  which  has  since 
been  lost. 

^  R.  Reg.j  no,  531. 

The  activities  of  the  Italian  merchants,  to  which  William  himself  devotes  much 
attention,  have  been  treated  quite  fully  by  recent  historians.  In  addition  to  the  great 
pioneer  work  of  W.  Heyd,  Histoire  du  commerce  dti  Levant  au  moyen  dge^  see  also 
H.  Kretschmayr,  Geschichte  von  Venedtg,  and  the  more  recent  publications  of 
E.  H.  Byrne,  especially  “Genoese  Trade  with  Syria  in  the  Twelfth  Century,”  Ameru 
can  Historical  Revievjy  XXV  (1919—20),  1 91— 219,  dealing  with  various  aspects 
of  the  Genoese  maritime  empire. 

William’s  knowledge  of  the  city  of  Jerusalem  was  the  subject  of  a  study  by  F. 
Lundgreen,  “Das  Jerusalem  des  Wilhelm  von  Tyrus  und  die  Gegenwart,”  Neue  kirch^ 
licher  Zeitsc/irifty  XX  (1909),  973—92. 


INTRODUCTION 


9 

was,  of  course,  the  language  of  the  Church  and  of  the  schools,  and 
William’s  exceptional  command  of  it  implies  that  he  must  have  en¬ 
joyed  excellent  training.  This  circumstance  arouses  an  interesting 
speculation  as  to  whether  he  may  not  have  received  instruction  along 
with  Prince  Baldwin,  who  was  almost  exactly  his  own  age.  To  support 
this  conjecture,  it  is  possible  to  cite  William’s  curious  error  regarding 
Baldwin’s  father.  King  Fulk,  whom  he  indicates  as  about  twenty  years 
older  than  he  actually  was — a  mistaken  impression  which  might  quite 
easily  have  persisted  from  his  childhood. 

It  is  probable  that  William  decided  early  upon  a  career  in  the  Church. 
Almost  no  one  mentioned  by  him  is  accorded  more  genuine  affection 
and  respect  than  is  Peter  of  Barcelona,  who  was  prior  of  the  canons 
of  the  Holy  Sepulchre  from  1130  to  1158,  a  period  corresponding  to 
the  first  twenty-eight  years  of  William’s  life.  The  cathedral  chapter 
over  which  Peter  presided  made  definite  provision  for  the  training 
of  priests.  It  would  be  no  rash  assumption,  therefore,  especially  in  view 
of  William’s  later  scholarship,  to  infer  that  he  displayed  an  early  apti¬ 
tude  for  learning  which  must  have  commended  him  to  the  attention 
of  his  teachers.  Probably  It  was  this  very  fact  that  first  brought  William 
to  Peter’s  notice  and  led  to  an  intimate  friendship  which  was  to  mean 
much  to  the  lad.  Though  in  the  military,  frontier  state  of  Jerusalem 

there  were  hardly  enough  children  to  justify  the  development  of  im- 

« 

portant  schools,  there  were  few  places  in  the  West  where  more  scholars 
were  gathered. True,  most  of  these  were  pilgrims  who  had  come 
only  to  visit  the  shrines  of  the  Holy  Land  and  intended  soon  to  depart. 
Since,  however,  some  of  the  older  visitors  planned  to  end  their  days 
there,  the  monasteries  contained  a  number  of  men  with  excellent 
pretensions  to  scholarship.  Among  them  Geoffrey,  abbot  of  the  Temple 
of  the  Lord,  was  especially  marked  for  his  expert  knowledge  of  Greek. 
An  able,  eager  youth  like  William  must,  therefore,  have  had  good 
opportunity  to  improve  his  learning  by  associating  with  such  men, 
whether  on  journeys  to  shrines  or  in  the  monasteries  and  church  es¬ 
tablishments.  Doubtless  Peter  of  Barcelona  guided  the  education  of 

The  Holy  Land  as  a  point  of  contact  between  scholars  of  the  West  and  East 
in  the  twelfth  century  has  scarcely  received  the  attention  that  it  deserves.  D.  C.  Munro 
touched  upon  it  in  a  number  of  his  writings  (see  especially  his  ^‘Christian  and  Infidel 
in  the  Holy  Land,”  Essays  on  the  Crusades)^  and  C.  H.  Haskins  treated  one  im¬ 
portant  aspect  of  the  subject  in  his  Renaissance  of  the  Twelfth  Century^  chap.  ix. 
A  comprehensive  treatment  of  the  topic,  however,  is  still  to  be  made. 


10 


INTRODUCTION 


his  young  favorite.  It  is  a  singular  fact  that  William  has  little  to  say 
of  military  events  that  occurred  during  his  late  teens  and  early  twenties. 
Even  such  a  major  event  as  the  siege  and  capture  of  Ascalon  in  ii53 
interested  him  less  in  its  military  aspects  than  because  of  the  deter¬ 
mined  stand  of  Patriarch  Fulcher  in  demanding  the  continuance  of 
the  siege  after  the  king  had  despaired  of  taking  the  city.  This  patri¬ 
arch,  who  had  held  the  office  since  William^s  sixteenth  year,  was  an¬ 
other  churchman  who  commanded,  the  young  man^s  unqualified  respect 
and  affection.  All  indications,  then,  seem  to  point  to  William’s  early 
decision  to  embark  upon  an  ecclesiastical  career  and  to  imply  that  he 
pursued  his  studies  for  the  priesthood  without  interruption. 

Whether  he  received  his  ordination  at  the  hands  of  Patriarch  Fulcher, 
who  lived  to  William’s  twenty-eighth  year,  or  at  the  hands  of  Peter 
of  Barcelona,  who  became  archbishop  of  Tyre  when  William  was 
eighteen,  is  not  known.  Certainly  his  friendship  with  both  men  con¬ 
tinued  until  their  deaths,  his  admiration  and  affection  for  both  of 
them  to  his  own.  Sooner  or  later  William  became  a  member  of  the 
archbishop’s  official  family  at  Tyre  3  and  almost  certainly  he  was  the 
canon  of  Tyre  referred  to  in  a  document  of  1161  and  also  in  a  deed 
of  gift  by  Archbishop  Peter  in  the  year  1163.^^ 

Sometime  before  1 1 63,  William  had  gone  ^^across  the  sea”  to  con¬ 
tinue  his  studies.  This  period  of  his  education  he  had  intended  to 
describe  in  his  history,  but  only  the  caption  of  that  chapter  has  been 
preserved.  Whether  it  was  lost  or,  more  probably,  never  written  still 
remains  a  mystery.  As  it  is,  his  only  reference  to  his  education  is  in¬ 
cluded  in  an  incidental  statement  in  connection  with  the  separation  of 

The  first  of  these  documents  {R,  Reg,y  no.  370)  has  been  dated  1161  without 
more  definite  indication  of  day  and  month;  the  other  (R,  Reg.y  no.  385)  in  1163, 
likewise  indefinitely,  though  Rohricht  has  placed  it  toward  the  end  of  the  year.  Both 
documents  involve  an  adjustment  of  property  between  Archbishop  Peter  and  the 
canons  of  the  Holy  Sepulchre.  A  WillelmuSy  canonicus  .  .  .  ecclesiae  Tyrensis  is  a 
signator  of  both.  In  the  second,  another  William  who  was  archdeacon  of  Tyre  at 
the  time  is  also  listed.  Rohricht  has  accidentally  confused  this  William,  who  was 
shortly  made  bishop  of  Acre,  with  the  historian,  who  did  not  become  archdeacon  of 
Tyre  until  1167.  It  is  possible  for  Canon  William  to  have  left  Tyre  with  the  pil¬ 
grims  returning  to  Europe  after  Easter,  1161,  and  to  have  come  back  with  the  fall 
sailing  from  Italy  in  1163.  This  would  have  permitted  him  two  full  academic  years 
in  the  schools  of  Italy,  quite  enough  for  the  ‘‘postgraduate”  study  of  law,  and  still 
enabled  him  to  sign  both  documents.  Such  a  conjecture  receives  a  certain  degree  of 
confirmation  from  the  paucity  and  vagueness  of  his  recollection  of  events  in  the 
Holy  Land  from  1161  to  1163.  The  events  before  1161  as  well  as  those  for  1164 
and  1165  are  relatively  fully  and  accurately  reported. 


INTRODUCTION 


II 


Amaury  from  his  wife,  Agnes,  before  his  coronation  in  1163.  William 
excuses  his  ignorance  of  this  event  at  the  time  because  he  ^^was  not 
yet  returned  from  across  the  sea,  where  he  was  engaged  in  the  study 
of  the  liberal  arts  in  the  schools.”  In  translating  this  passage,  a  French 
chronicler  of  the  thirteenth  century,  when  Paris  and  the  liberal  arts 
were  almost  synonymous,  assumed  that  any  such  allusion  referred 
naturally  to  France  and  so  translated  the  reference — an  assumption 
which  has  been  accepted  almost  without  question  by  modern  scholars. 
At  the  time  indicated,  however,  William  was  already  thirty-three  years 
old,  much  too  old  to  be  concerned  with  the  ordinary  liberal  arts.  The 
passage,  therefore,  must  refer  to  some  special  study,  such  as  law,  which 
at  this  period  was  only  just  beginning  to  be  differentiated  from  the 
liberal  arts  and  was  still  frequently  included  under  that  term.^®  Since 
such  knowledge  was  more  and  more  being  required  of  those  responsible 
for  the  operation  of  the  increased  business  of  the  Church,  it  was  not 
uncommon  for  archbishops  to  send  members  of  their  establishments, 
usually  archdeacons,  to  acquire  this  new  training  abroad.  Such  study, 
however,  was  done  in  Italy,  not  in  Paris.  It  is,  therefore,  quite  probable 
that  Peter  of  Barcelona,  still  guiding  the  education  of  his  protege, 
had  sent  William  from  Tyre,  perhaps  in  the  interval  between  the 
dates  of  the  two  documents  cited  above,  to  equip  himself  for  carrying 
on  the  legal  business  of  the  diocese.  Certainly  William  was  thus  en¬ 
gaged  when  King  Amaury  ascended  the  throne,  and  it  is  possible  that 
the  dates  of  the  two  documents  mentioned  mark  his  absence  from  the 
kingdom  quite  closely.  At  any  rate,  by  the  fall  of  1163  he  seems  to  have 
been  back  at  Tyre  prepared  to  look  after  the  legal  business  of  the 
diocese. 

Little  is  known  of  his  life  during  the  next  four  years.  His  friend 
and  patron.  Archbishop  Peter,  soon  died,  and  Frederick,  who  suc¬ 
ceeded  him  as  archbishop  of  Tyre,  was  a  very  different  type  of  man. 
He  was  a  noble  “according  to  the  flesh”  and  much  more  interested  in 
military  affairs  than  was,  according  to  William,  proper  for  a  church¬ 
man.  Ultimately  there  was  to  be  a  quarrel  between  the  two.  For  the 
time  being,  however,  it  may  be  assumed  that  William  devoted  himself 

See  French  translation  included  with  Latin  text  in  RecueiL  des  historiens  des 
crotsadeSy  Historiens  occidentauXy  I,  1004. 

H.  Rashdall,  The  Universities  of  Europe  in  the  Middle  AgeSy  I,  no,  note  2. 
The  evidence  on  William’s  probable  study  of  law  in  Italy  is  assembled  by  Krey, 
*The  Making  of  an  Historian  in  the  Middle  Ages,”  Speculumy  XVI  (1941),  149-66. 


12 


INTRODUCTION 


to  the  routine  duties  of  his  office.  Whether  these  included  all  the 
legal  business  as  marked  out  for  him  by  Archbishop  Peter  or  involved 
less  specialized  activities  is  not  determined.  It  seems  safe  to  assume 
that,  with  his  legal  training,  he  was  naturally  intent  upon  improving 
his  chances  of  promotion  in  the  ecclesiastical  hierarchy.  His  friends  and 
patrons,  Archbishop  Peter  and  Patriarch  Fulcher,  doubtless  served 
as  the  models  whom  he  would  emulate.  Under  favorable  circumstances 
he,  too,  might  become  an  archbishop  and,  in  his  dreams,  even  a  patri¬ 
arch. 

The  year  1167  was  to  prove  unusually  fateful  in  his  career.  Through¬ 
out  his  life,  the  prospects  of  the  kingdom  of  Jerusalem  had  been  steadily 
improving  j  its  boundaries  were  being  extended,  the  advances  insured 
by  the  erection  of  fortresses,  and  the  gaps  in  its  defenses  secured  in 
similar  fashion.  Ascalon,  the  last  seaport  in  Muslim  hands,  had  been 
captured  and  securely  fortified  against  recapture.  Indeed,  the  affairs 
of  the  kingdom  appeared  so  prosperous  that  the  king  felt  justified  in 
embarking  upon  new  adventures  in  Egypt,  whither,  just  before  his 
death,  Baldwin  III  had  already  ventured.  Amaury,  Baldwin’s  brother, 
who  was  now  king,  had  followed  that  lead  by  a  series  of  expeditions 
of  which  the  one  in  1167  had  been  the  most  successful.  Acting  as  the 
ally  of  the  Egyptians  against  Saljuq  invaders,  he  had  penetrated  well 
up  the  Nile.  His  men  had  been  received  in  the  sacred  city  of  Cairo,  and, 
finally,  his  army  had  succeeded  in  capturing  the  commercial  metropolis 
of  Alexandria  from  Saladin,  who  was  just  then  entering  upon  his  career. 
Amaury  was  dazzled  by  so  much  success.  Earlier,  anticipating  the  need 
of  help  in  the  conquest  of  Egypt,  he  had  negotiated  a  marriage  alliance 
with  a  Greek  princess  of  Constantinople.  Upon  his  return  from  the 
successful  Egyptian  campaign,  this  princess,  Maria,  with  her  escort, 
awaited  him  at  Tyre,  where  their  marriage  was  celebrated  on  August 
28,  1167.  The  conquest  of  Egypt  now  seemed  well  assured.  An  eager 
student  of  history,  Amaury  foresaw  his  achievement  as  second  only 
to  the  capture  of  Jerusalem,  and  he  was  determined  to  find  a  proper 
historian  to  record  that  triumph.  This  thought  must  have  been  in  his 
mind  as  he  rode  back  from  Egypt  5  and  the  matter  appears  to  have 
been  settled  when,  three  days  after  his  marriage,  he  not  only  arranged 
to  have  Canon  William  made  archdeacon  of  the  church  at  Tyre,  but 
also  allotted  to  him  an  income  perhaps  somewhat  larger  than  was 
customary  in  that  office. 


INTRODUCTION 


13 

Just  how  Amaury^s  attention  was  attracted  to  William  as  the  person 
best  qualified  for  the  task  of  writing  this  history,  whether  by  impulse 
or  by  careful  inquiry,  is  nowhere  stated.  Doubtless  William  had  already 
displayed  some  of  those  qualities  which  were  so  well  revealed  in  his 
final  work.  Certainly  he  was  more  highly  educated  than  most  of  his 
colleagues;  his  knowledge  of  languages  was  probably  superior,  and 
his  skill  in  speech  and  writing  correspondingly  marked.  However,  he 
had  no  training  as  an  historian,  nor,  so  far  as  is  known,  was  he  engaged 
in  work  of  that  nature.  Furthermore,  William  appears  not  to  have 
been  very  eager  to  undertake  such  an  assignment,  perhaps  regarding 
it  as  a  distraction  from  the  career  that  he  had  mapped  out.  In  fact,  it 
required  a  definite  assurance  of  Amaury’s  favor  to  overcome  his  re¬ 
luctance  ;  and  the  promotion  to  the  office  of  archdeacon  ^^at  the  request 
and  in  the  presence  of  the  king”  was  the  first  evidence  of  such  favor. 
Had  Amaury’s  judgment  been  as  wise  in  his  other  enterprises  as  in 
his  selection  of  an  historian,  he  would  doubtless  have  been  regarded 
as  the  greatest  king  of  Jerusalem. 

Once  committed  to  this  task,  William  appears  to  have  entered  upon 
it  with  real  enthusiasm  and  energy.  He  interviewed  the  king  and  his 
lieutenants  about  the  recent  Egyptian  campaign  with  a  thoroughness 
which  must  have  been  gratifying  to  his  royal  patron.  Amaury’s  regard 
for  his  historian  grew  with  their  acquaintance — so  much  so  that  when 
the  details  of  the  treaty  for  Greek  cooperation  In  the  conquest  of 
Egypt  had  been  worked  out,  he  sent  William  to  Constantinople  to 
obtain  the  emperor’s  signature.  This  mission  probably  afforded  Wil¬ 
liam  his  first  glimpse  of  that  great  metropolis  and  his  first  acquaintance 
with  Emperor  Manuel,  whom  he  found  In  camp  some  distance  away 
in  the  Balkan  regions.  After  some  months,  he  returned  with  the  treaty 
duly  signed,  only  to  find  that  Amaury,  overpersuaded  that  he  could 
achieve  the  conquest  of  Egypt  alone,  had  already  departed,  ten  days 
before,  on  that  venture.  Perhaps  it  was  fortunate  that  William  did  not 
see  the  king  again  for  more  than  a  year,  since  his  opinion  of  the  move, 
which  is  recorded  in  this  history,  could  not  have  been  flattering.  Be¬ 
fore  Amaury  returned,  however,  William  was  forced  to  go  to  Rome 
to  answer  charges  which  his  archbishop,  Frederick,  had  there  made 
against  him.  These  charges,  which  doubtless  concerned  the  income 
that  Amaury  had  insisted  upon  for  his  historian,  William  evidently 
answered  to  the  satisfaction  of  the  papal  court.  Incidentally  he  im- 


INTRODUCTION 


14 

proved  his  knowledge  of  the  curia.  The  affair,  however,  necessitated 
his  absence  from  the  kingdom  through  most  of  the  year  1 1 69,  and  he 
did  not  again  see  the  king  until  the  latter’s  return  from  another  Egyp¬ 
tian  expedition  after  Christmas,  1169. 

When  Amaury  and  William  at  last  met,  the  latter  resumed  his  his¬ 
torical  labors  by  inquiring  diligently  about  the  two  recent  campaigns  j 
but  the  outcome  of  the  venture  had  spared  William  the  necessity  of 
expressing  his  condemnation  of  the  king’s  course.  Their  friendship 
was  thus  resumed  without  friction.  Indeed  Amaury ’s  admiration  for 
his  historian  was  so  greatly  increased  that  he  now  asked  him  to  under¬ 
take  the  care  of  his  son’s  education.  This  son,  Baldwin,  offspring  of 
Amaury’s  earlier  marriage  with  Agnes  de  Courtenay,  had  been  legiti¬ 
mized  in  1163  when  Agnes  was  divorced  on  grounds  of  consanguinity. 

Baldwin  was  nine  years  old  and  heir  to  the  throne  when,  at  the 
beginning  of  1170,  Amaury  entrusted  him  to  William’s  care — an  as¬ 
signment  which  William  undertook  with  even  more  reluctance  than 
he  had  felt  in  assuming  his  historical  tasks.  The  latter  duty,  while  add¬ 
ing  little  to  his  ecclesiastical  stature,  did  permit  him  to  continue  his 
calling  and  enabled  him  to  keep  in  close  touch  with  men  and  affairs. 
This  new  duty,  however,  threatened  to  confine  him  closely  to  the  person 
of  the  young  prince  for  an  indefinite  number  of  years,  thus  removing 
him  from  the  main  flow  of  ecclesiastical  promotions.  The  king’s  re¬ 
peated  urging,  together  with  his  very  positive  assurance  of  further 
royal  favors,  finally  prevailed;  and  in  1170  William  undertook  the 
duties  of  tutor  to  the  young  prince.  As  events  turned  out,  he  was  thus 
engaged  for  the  next  four  years. 

Having  agreed,  finally,  to  accept  this  assignment,  William  dis¬ 
charged  it  conscientiously,  if  not  with  enthusiasm.  The  prince  had 
several  companions — doubtless  sons  of  nobles,  though  their  names  are 
nowhere  stated — who  shared  some  of  his  tutor’s  attention.  In  carrying 
out  his  commission  William  did  not  confine  his  instruction  to  letters; 
for,  as  he  says,  he  was  equally  concerned  about  the  moral  and  physical 
welfare  of  his  charge.  He  speaks  with  pride  of  young  Baldwin’s  skill  in 
horsemanship;  and  other  allusions  justify  the  conjecture  that  William 
not  infrequently  accompanied  these  lads  on  rides  through  the  country¬ 
side  of  Tyre.  It  was  from  the  playground  that  William  first  learned 
that  the  prince  was  afflicted  with  a  malady  which  was  ultimately  to  be 
recognized  as  leprosy.  This  observation  he  at  once,  of  course,  reported 


INTRODUCTION 


15 

to  the  kingj  and  then  began  a  series  of  vain  remedial  treatments  which 
were  to  continue  up  to  the  time  of  Baldwin’s  death.  Under  these  circum¬ 
stances,  it  was  perhaps  natural  that  the  tutor  should  have  developed 
a  deep  affection  for  his  pupil,  whose  progress  in  all  fields  of  instruction 
he  records  with  pardonable  approval.  This  attachment  was  returned 
with  respect  and  admiration. 

These  new  duties  confined  William  closely,  but  they  did  not  engross 
either  all  his  thought  or  all  his  time.  King  Amaury  visited  Tyre  as 
often  as  possible  and,  as  a  rule,  saw  much  of  William  on  these  occasions. 
Their  conversation  turned  frequently  to  the  proposed  history;  and 
probably  in  their  discussion  of  a  proper  background,  or  introduction, 
to  the  Gesta  Amalrici  they  discovered  the  lack  of  any  previous  chronicle. 
There  proved,  indeed,  to  be  no  systematic  account  of  any  of  the  reigns 
in  Jerusalem  since  Fulcher  of  Chartres  had  stopped  writing,  about 
1127.^®  There  were  a  number  of  accounts  of  the  earlier  period,  but  by 
1170  these  chronicles  must  have  appeared  crude  and  inadequate.  At 
all  events,  Amaury  appears  to  have  decided  that  an  adequate  history 
of  the  kingdom  of  Jerusalem  from  its  very  beginning  ought  to  be 
written.  William  concurred  in  this  opinion  and  agreed  to  undertake 
the  composition  of  such  a  work.  By  common  consent,  then,  the  Gesta 
Amalrici  was  laid  aside,  except  for  such  notes  as  William  might  collect 
on  current  affairs,  with  the  understanding  that  the  earlier  years  of 
Amaury’s  reign  were  to  be  written  when  the  account  of  the  previous 
reigns  had  arrived  at  that  point.  For  the  time  being,  therefore,  William 
was  to  work  upon  the  Gesta  regumy  beginning  with  the  council  of  Cler¬ 
mont  in  1095  or,  rather,  with  the  supposed  pilgrimage  of  Peter  the 
Hermit  in  1094. 

Almost  at  once  William  began  collecting  all  available  written  sources 
as  well  as  a  large  assortment  of  oral  tradition.  He  was,  therefore,  soon 
engaged  in  the  actual  composition  of  his  work;  and  before  long  the 
king,  on  his  visits  to  Tyre,  was  able  to  read  extended  installments,  or, 
as  he  preferred,  to  listen  to  their  reading.  So  rapid  was  William’s 
progress,  despite  his  tutorial  cares,  that  Amaury  was  encouraged  to 

The  lack  of  a  chronicle  after  Fulcher  of  Chartres  had  been  noticed  in  the  reign 
of  Baldwin  III.  Whether  at  the  instigation  of  this  king  or  upon  his  own  initiative, 
an  anonymous  author  then  undertook  to  write  a  history  which  should  carry  the 
narrative  to  Baldwin’s  reign.  The  author  began  by  abbreviating  Fulcher’s  account 
as  the  beginning  of  his  own.  He  had  scarcely  finished  this  when  he  stopped  writing. 
His  work  has  been  preserved  under  the  title  Balduini  III  historia  Nicaena  vel  An- 
tiochena  necnon  Jerosolymitana  in  R.H.C.Oc.,  V,  133—85.  See  also  H.F.y  pp.  83-84. 


i6 


INTRODUCTION 


press  upon  him  still  another  task.  Not  content  with  an  introduction 
that  went  back  to  1094,  the  king  was  curious  to  know  more  about  the 
Muslim  history  that  lay  behind  the  coming  of  the  Latins.  The  splendor 
of  that  civilization,  of  which  he  had  seen  evidence  in  Egypt,  doubtless 
whetted  his  curiosity.  He  therefore  urged  William  also  to  write  a 
history  of  the  princes  of  the  Orient.  To  facilitate  this  undertaking,  he 
himself  supplied  William  with  certain  Arabic  accounts  from  which  it 
might  be  compiled.  These  books  were  probably  originally  from  the 
private  library  of  Usamah  which  Baldwin  III  had  confiscated  in  a 
shipwreck  near  Acre  in  1154.^'^  Only  one  of  them,  that  written  by  Said 
ibn  Batrik,  is  mentioned  by  William.  Since,  however,  this  carried  the 
story  only  to  a.d.  937,  he  must  have  used  others  as  well.  The  work  of 
Said,  or  Seith,  or  Eutychius,  as  he  was  variously  designated,  was  so 
satisfactory  that,  for  this  earlier  period  of  oriental  history,  William 
could  content  himself  with  translating  it.  He  was  thus  able  to  make 
rather  rapid  progress  on  the  Gesta  orientalium  frincifum  as  well  as 
on  the  Gesta  regum.  Whenever  King  Amaury  visited  Tyre  thereafter, 
he  must  have  found  himself  well  satisfied  with  the  progress  of  both 
works.  Meanwhile,  William  was  not  neglecting  his  duties  as  tutor. 

Had  such  conditions  continued,  William^s  histories  might  well  have 
been  brought  up  to  date  in  another  four  years.  At  least  a  full  half  of 
the  Gesta  regum  was  composed  during  this  time,  and  there  is  reason 
to  believe  that  a  corresponding  portion  of  the  Gesta  orientalium  frin- 
cifum  was  likewise  written.  Unfortunately  an  unkind  fate  intervened 
in  the  form  of  an  illness  from  which  King  Amaury  died  at  the  early 
age  of  thirty-eight.  William  blamed  the  king’s  premature  death  on 
the  incompetence  of  the  physicians,  but  this  was  only  another  way  of 
confessing  his  own  deep  sorrow  at  the  event.  It  meant  not  only  the  loss 
of  a  great  personal  friend.  Scarcely  less  tragic  was  the  thought  that  now 
his  afflicted,  and  only  partially  educated,  pupil,  who  was  barely  thirteen 
years  of  age,  must  assume  the  duties  of  kingship.  His  own  career,  too, 
was  seriously  affected.  No  sooner  was  the  young  king  crowned  than 
both  the  king  and  the  kingdom  were  taken  in  charge  by  Milon  de 
Plancy,  whom  William  detested  as  the  worst  of  the  late  king’s  advisers. 
There  is  some  reason  to  believe  that  William  decided  to  close  his  his¬ 
torical  labors  at  this  time.  After  all,  he  had  undertaken  them  reluctantly 

See  P.  K.  Hitti,  An  Arah-Syrian  GentleiTian  and  Warrior  in  the  Period  of  the 
Crusades^  Memoirs  of  Usamah  ibn-Munqidh^  p.  6i. 


INTRODUCTION 


17 

at  the  king’s  request  and  with  the  assurance  of  the  king’s  favor,  neither 
of  which  any  longer  held.  If  he  was  to  regain  his  place  in  the  procession 
of  ecclesiastical  promotion,  he  saw  that  he  must  apply  himself  to  those 
activities  from  which  the  more  academic  pursuits  of  writing  history 
and  teaching  the  young  prince  had  so  long  distracted  him.  We  may, 
therefore,  picture  him  as  devoting  the  next  few  months  after  the 
funeral  of  Amaury  and  the  coronation  of  Baldwin  IV  to  the  completion 
of  his  historical  writings  up  to  the  point  which  he  had  then  reached.^® 

If  such,  indeed,  was  his  purpose  and  those  his  activities,  they  were 
to  be  as  suddenly  interrupted  as  they  had  been  undertaken,  for  in  the 
fall  of  1174  Milon  de  Plancy  was  murdered  on  the  streets  of  Acre. 
Shortly  thereafter  Raymond  III  of  Tripoli  was  chosen  regent  of  the 
kingdom  until  the  king  should  reach  the  legal  age  of  fifteen.  This 
turn  of  affairs  marked  a  sharp  change  in  the  prospects  of  both  the  king¬ 
dom  and  William.  The  latter  was  now  called  upon  to  fill  the  vacant  post 
of  chancellor  of  the  kingdom,  and  this  office  brought  him  again  into 
close  touch  with  his  former  pupil.  The  previous  chancellor  had  occupied 
the  bishopric  of  Bethlehem,  an  office  likewise  still  vacant,  as  was  the 
archbishopric  of  Tyre.  Both  offices  were  much  sought  and  were,  at 
the  moment,  so  hotly  contested  that  the  regent  did  not  feel  ready  to 
use  his  influence  in  obtaining  either  as  the  proper  dignity  for  the  new 
chancellor.  William’s  own  preference  was  doubtless  for  the  latter  ap¬ 
pointment.  Momentarily,  however,  his  dignity  and  income  were  en¬ 
hanced  by  assigning  to  him  the  archidiaconate  of  Nazareth,  in  addition 
to  that  of  Tyre,  which  he  already  held.  The  difficulties  of  ecclesiastical 
politics  were  not  fully  unravelled  for  more  than  six  months — not  until 
June  6,  11755  when  William  was  at  last  confirmed  as  archbishop  of 
Tyre.  Thus  he  whom  the  death  of  the  king  and  the  regency  of  Milon 
de  Plancy  appeared  to  have  relegated  to  the  obscurity  of  a  minor  ec¬ 
clesiastic  was,  within  less  than  a  year,  occupying  a  position  of  great 
dignity  and  influence  in  the  affairs  of  both  state  and  church. 

For  the  next  year  and  a  half  William  probably  spent  most  of  his 
time  at  court,  continuing,  if  in  somewhat  less  formal  fashion,  his  inter¬ 
rupted  instruction  of  the  young  king.  During  this  time,  no  doubt,  he 
himself  was  learning  from  Raymond  of  Tripoli  and  others  the  more 

See  Prologue,  note  10.  William^s  repeated  allusion  to  570  years  as  the  period 
covered  in  his  Gesta  orientalium  frincifum  is  obviously  according  to  Muslim  reckon¬ 
ing.  The  year  570  a.H.  was  the  year  of  Amaury’s  death  and  betrays  William’s  origi¬ 
nal  intention  of  stopping  the  work  at  that  point,  A.i>.  1 1 74. 


INTRODUCTION 


i8 

intimate  details  of  the  conduct  of  public  affairs.  Fortunately,  his  long 
and  close  association  with  Amaury  had  given  him  some  insight  into 
the  practical  problems  of  statecraft.  All  that  learning  and  more  he 
required  in  1176  when,  Baldwin  IV  having  attained  his  fifteenth  birth¬ 
day  and  Raymond  having  automatically  retired  from  the  regency,  he 
found  himself  chief  adviser  to  the  king. 

Presumably,  the  major  problems  of  state  had  been  solved  before 
Raymond's  retirement.  Royal  succession  had  been  safeguarded  by  the 
marriage  of  Baldwin’s  older  sister,  Sibylla,  to  William  of  Montferrat, 
a  close  relative  of  both  the  French  and  the  German  royal  families. 
The  alliance  with  Constantinople  as  well  as  the  disorder  aroused  in 
the  surrounding  Muslim  states  on  the  death  of  Nureddin  had  excited 
good  hope  of  success  in  the  Egyptian  venture.  The  other  Latin  states 
did  not  require  any  emergency  aid.  William’s  responsibilities  as  chief 
adviser,  therefore,  promised  to  consist  chiefly  in  the  continued  instruc¬ 
tion  of  his  royal  pupil. 

If  such  was  his  conception  of  his  role,  his  expectations  were  to  be 
rudely  shattered  within  a  year  by  the  appearance  of  a  number  of  un¬ 
expected  emergencies.  William  of  Montferrat  died  in  June,  i  177) 
leaving  his  young  wife  pregnant.  An  embassy  arrived  from  Constanti¬ 
nople  to  press  the  execution  of  the  alliance  for  the  conquest  of  Egypt, 
but  the  king  was  taken  seriously  ill.  At  this  juncture  Count  Philip  of 
Flanders  also  arrived  with  a  considerable  military  force  from  the 
West.  The  presence  of  this  army  aroused  the  cupidity  of  the  other 
Latin  states,  each  of  which  had  plans  for  the  expansion  of  its  frontiers. 
The  probability  that  the  king  was  in  no  condition  to  make  immediate 
use  of  Philip’s  army  led  them  to  exert  every  means  in  their  power  to 
turn  it  and  him  to  their  own  ends.  To  add  further  to  the  confusion, 
one  of  Philip’s  lieutenants,  the  advocate  of  Bethune,  saw  in  the  situa¬ 
tion  an  opportunity  to  advance  his  own  family  interests.  He  therefore 
prevailed  upon  Philip  to  urge  the  marriage  of  the  advocate’s  sons 
to  the  sister  and  the  younger  half  sister  of  the  king.  This  suggestion 
was  both  unexpected  and  unwelcome  to  the  barons  of  Jerusalem,  be¬ 
cause  the  proposed  marriages  did  not  promise  to  add  power,  prestige, 
or  even  influence  to  the  kingdom.  Following  all  these  complications, 
it  became  William’s  unfortunate  duty  to  act  as  intermediary  between 
the  sick  king,  the  royal  council,  Philip,  and  the  Greek  envoys. 

The  diplomatic  problems  created  by  the  impact  of  so  many  conflict- 


INTRODUCTION 


19 

Ing  aims  and  purposes  might  well  have  taxed  the  resources  of  one  far 
more  highly  skilled  in  statecraft  than  William.  To  begin  with,  he  sought 
to  execute  the  Greek  treaty,  Philip  to  serve  as  leader  of  the  military 
forces.  At  the  same  time,  he  invoked  both  canon  and  customary  law 
against  any  proposals  for  the  marriage  of  the  king^s  sister  until  a  year 
should  have  elapsed  since  the  death  of  Sibylla’s  husband.  This  decision 
created  an  impasse  with  Philip,  which  the  latter  finally  resolved  by 
accepting  the  invitation  to  help  the  other  Latin  states,  both  Tripoli  and 
Antioch.  Some  of  the  forces  of  the  kingdom  accompanied  Philip  on  this 
campaign  j  and  to  add  to  William’s  discomfiture,  Saladin  chose  this 
moment,  while  the  crusading  army  was  engaged  in  the  siege  of  Harim 
in  northern  Syria,  to  make  a  grand  invasion  of  the  kingdom  of  Jeru¬ 
salem.  In  this  crisis  William  accompanied  the  king,  who,  though  suffi¬ 
ciently  recovered  to  assume  the  command  of  such  forces  as  remained  in 
the  kingdom,  probably  handed  over  the  active  direction  of  the  army  to 
Renaud  de  Chatillon.  It  was  a  brilliant  campaign,  and,  though  Sala- 
din’s  larger  force  had  swept  a  wide  countryside  virtually  up  to  the  walls 
of  Jerusalem  itself,  the  small  royal  army  was  able  to  inflict  a  disastrous 
defeat  upon  him.  Under  the  circumstances  William  may  well  be  par¬ 
doned  for  regarding  the  victory  as  a  miracle  and,  in  view  of  the  ulti¬ 
mate  failure  of  the  larger  army  under  Philip  to  take  Harim,  as  a  judg¬ 
ment  of  the  Lord  regarding  the  righteousness  of  their  respective  un¬ 
dertakings.  For  fear  that  Philip,  on  his  return,  might  seek  to  prejudice 
the  West  against  the  court  of  Jerusalem,  William  hastened  to  send  his 
story  of  these  events  to  the  chief  rulers  in  that  region.  Fortunately,  the 
leading  chroniclers  of  England  and  Normandy  accepted  both  his  story 
of  the  events  and  the  evidence  of  the  Lord’s  judgment.^® 

William’s  sense  of  relief  after  the  successful  campaign  against  Sala¬ 
din  and  the  departure  of  Count  Philip,  whose  various  efforts  had  come 
to  nothing,  continued  with  the  more  favorable  conditions  of  the  follow¬ 
ing  year.  The  king’s  health  was  improved.  Saladin’s  defeat  had  been 
too  disastrous  to  permit  of  any  further  immediate  threat.  Instead, 
the  king  was  able  to  extend  and  fortify  his  eastern  border.  William’s 
thoughts  could,  therefore,  safely  turn  to  ecclesiastical  affairs. 

Circumstances  were  now  so  shaping  themselves  as  to  encourage  his 

Robert  of  Torigni,  the  so-called  chronicle  of  Benedict  of  Peterborough,  William 
of  Newburgh,  and  Ralph  of  Diceto  all  have  more  or  less  extended  accounts  of  the 
events  of  1177  in  the  spirit  of  William’s  interpretation. 


20  INTRODUCTION 

hope  of  attaining  the  highest  ambition  of  his  life,  the  patriarchate  of 
Jerusalem.  Amalrich,  the  incumbent,  who  had  already  held  the  ofEce 
for  more  than  twenty  years,  was  growing  old  and  feeble,  and  at  the 
funeral  services  for  the  king^s  brother-in-law  he  was  too  ill  to  officiate. 
The  selection  of  William  to  perform  that  honor,  therefore,  also  carried 
certain  implications  of  probable  succession  to  the  office.  This  impression 
was  heightened  when  the  patriarch  was  likewise  unable  to  accept  the 
invitation  to  attend  the  Lateran  council  which  Pope  Alexander  III  was 
summoning  in  1178.  The  leadership  of  the  ecclesiastical  delegation 
from  Jerusalem  therefore  also  devolved  upon  William,  who,  as  pro¬ 
spective  patriarch,  had  every  reason  to  look  forward  to  the  meeting  as 
an  opportunity  to  advance  the  cause  of  both  the  church  and  the  state  of 
Jerusalem.^^ 

Neither  southern  Italy  nor  the  papal  curia  was  strange  to  him  and 
there  is  every  reason  to  believe  that  he  enjoyed  the  months  between  his 
arrival  and  the  opening  of  the  council  in  the  following  spring.  Cer¬ 
tainly  he  made  many  friends  among  the  ecclesiastical  dignitaries  who 
had  assembled  for  the  gathering  from  all  parts  of  Christendom,  for 
he  was  chosen  to  draw  up  a  record  of  the  personnel  and  acts  of  the 
council.  He  took  a  prominent  part  in  the  deliberations  of  that  body  and 
was  one  of  the  leaders  in  the  fight  to  impose  some  curb  upon  the  com¬ 
plete  independence  of  the  military  orders  from  the  local  hierarchy.  His 
success  on  this  occasion  must  have  afforded  him  not  only  deep  satis¬ 
faction,  but  also  consolation  for  the  earlier  total  failure  of  his  idol,  Pa¬ 
triarch  Fulcher,  to  obtain  a  similar  concession  from  Pope  Hadrian  IV. 
Pope  Alexander,  too,  was  apparently  favorably  impressed  by  William, 
for,  after  the  council  was  over,  he  asked  him  to  undertake  a  special 
mission  to  the  imperial  court  at  Constantinople.  This  request  undoubt¬ 
edly  involved  some  preparatory  negotiations  for  a  union  of  the  Greek 
and  Roman  Churches — a  project  again  made  possible  by  Emperor 
ManuePs  great  friendship  for  the  West.  Though  this  undertaking 
prevented  William’s  early  return  to  Jerusalem,  he  was  wise  enough 
to  see  that  it  offered  him  yet  other  opportunities  for  advancing  the 
interests  of  both  kingdom  and  church.  He  was  not  a  stranger  to  the 

20  Peter,  prior  of  the  canons  of  the  Holy  Sepulchre,  is  listed  as  the  personal  repre¬ 
sentative  of  Patriarch  Amalrich,  but  William,  as  in  liis  own  list,  is  recog-nized  as 
leader.  For  the  various  accounts  of  the  personnel  and  acts  of  this  council  see  J.  D. 
Mansi,  Sacrorum  conciliorum  nova  et  amflissima  collection  Vol.  XXII.  It  is  probable 

that  some  of  these  accounts  were  based  upon  that  drawn  up  by  William. 

* 


INTRODUCTION 


21 


court  at  Constantinople  and,  indeed,  found  himself  warmly  welcomed 
there,  where  the  emperor  detained  him  for  seven  months.  During  this 
time  he  witnessed  not  only  the  betrothal  of  the  emperor’s  son  to  the 
daughter  of  Louis  VII  of  France,  but  also  the  marriage  of  the  emper¬ 
or’s  daughter  to  Conrad,  a  brother  of  William  of  Montferrat.-^  Recon¬ 
ciled  to  his  departure,  perhaps  by  a  special  mission  which  William 
agreed  to  discharge  for  him  at  Antioch,  the  Emperor  Manuel  finally 
reluctantly  permitted  his  guest  to  depart. 

After  an  absence  6f  almost  two  years,  William  came  back  to  Tyre 
feeling  certain,  no  doubt,  that  he  had  made  good  use  of  his  travels.  He 
returned,  however,  to  a  very  different  Jerusalem  from  that  which  he 
had  left  in  1178.  Baldwin’s  feelings  toward  him  had  not  altered — 
there  is  no  evidence  of  that — ^but  quite  definitely  the  health  of  the  king 
had  changed  for  the  worse.  The  leprosy,  progressing  on  its  remorseless 
course,  had  become  aggravated  by  intervals  of  acute  illness.  These 
incapacitating  spells  had  raised  the  question  of  regency  and,  inciden¬ 
tally,  that  of  succession  as  well.  On  these  questions  the  nobles  of  the 
kingdom  had  various  opinions  which  led  finally  to  the  formation  of 
two  factions.  Sibylla,  the  king’s  sister,  who  had  hitherto  been  an  in¬ 
strument  of  state  policy  in  the  solution  of  this  problem,  finally  decided 
that  her  marriages  were  primarily  a  matter  of  her  own  concern.  On 
this  theory,  she  had  given  her  heart  to  a  handsome  young  adventurer, 
Guy  de  Lusignan,  a  man  of  even  less  consequence  than  the  son  of  the 
advocate  of  Bethune.  In  this  resolve  she  was  abetted  by  her  mother, 
Agnes,  whose  influence  over  the  king  had  greatly  increased  during  the 
periods  of  his  illness.  Such  a  marriage  was  opposed  by  the  older, 
established  nobility  of  the  kingdom  and  by  Raymond  of  Tripoli  in 
particular.  Had  William  been  present,  he  certainly  would  have  op¬ 
posed  it  also,  and  his  intimate  friendship  with  the  king  might  have 
prevented  it.  In  his  absence,  however,  the  influence  of  Agnes  pre¬ 
vailed  5  and  when  it  was  announced  that  Raymond  of  Tripoli  and  Bohe- 
mond  of  Antioch  were  entering  the  kingdom  with  followers,  the  king 
was  persuaded  that  they  had  sinister  designs  upon  the  throne  which 
could  best  be  thwarted  by  hastening  the  marriage  of  Sibylla  and  Guy. 
Baldwin,  accordingly,  granted  his  permission,  and  just  before  Ray- 

William  only  partially  describes  the  elaborateness  of  the  ceremonial  involved 
in  these  wedding  celebrations.  Their  significance  in  the  diplomatic  designs  of  Manuel 
is  treated  by  Chalandon,  Histoire  de  la  domination  normande  en  Italie  et  en  SidUy 
II,  605. 


I 


22  INTRODUCTION 

mond  arrived  the  marriage  was  rushed  through,  at  the  unprecedented 
time  of  Holy  Week.  Guy  therefore  had  become  a  potential  regent  and 
successor  to  the  throne,  and  in  these  pretensions  he  was  supported  by 
virtually  all  the  newcomers  and  adventurers  who  were  seeking  lands 
and  place  in  the  East.  The  old,  established  nobility,  however — ^those 
whose  fiefs  were  founded  by  grandfathers  or  even  great-grandfathers 
— rather  generally  preferred  Raymond  of  Tripoli  as  regent.  Thanks 
to  Agnes,  the  king’s  mother,  however,  Guy’s  party  was  now  in  control 
of  the  court  j  and  as  fate  would  have  it,  at  just  this  juncture  Patriarch 
Amalrich  finally  died.  King  and  clergy,  according  to  all  accounts,  al¬ 
most  solidly  supported  William  of  Tyre  as  his  successor,  but,  since 
custom  required  the  presentation  of  two  names  for  the  king’s  consid¬ 
eration,  the  clergy  also  suggested  that  of  Heraclius,  archbishop  of 
Caesarea.  The  chief  qualifications  of  this  candidate  were  his  attractive 
personality  and  the  friendship  of  Agnes.  Nevertheless,  since  the  party 
in  control  at  court  refused  to  countenance  the  election  of  one  so  closely 
associated  as  William  with  the  opposing  faction,  these  slight  virtues 
sufficed  to  guarantee  the  election  of  the  second  nominee. In  the 
midst  of  so  much  clamor,  the  feeble  king  probably  lacked  the  strength 
to  assert  his  own  preference  for  his  former  tutor,  and  on  October  1 6, 
1 1 8o,  Heraclius  was  duly  made  patriarch. 

This  act  closed  to  William  the  door  of  further  ecclesiastical  promo¬ 
tion,  for  Heraclius,  his  junior  in  service,  promised  to  live  as  long  as  he. 
The  hostility  of  the  court  party,  also,  made  it  clear  that  his  influence 
at  court  was  virtually  at  an  end.  For  as  long  as  his  enemies  controlled 
the  king,  all  the  knowledge  of  international  affairs  that  he  had  gained 
at  Rome  and  Constantinople  would  be  wasted.  Though  he  was  still 
chancellor  of  the  kingdom,  William’s  services  were  now  demanded 
as  little  as  possible,  probably  only  upon  the  most  formal  occasions.  Such 
a  turn  of  affairs  must  have  been  a  bitter  blow  to  his  feelings.  In  1 1  78, 
as  the  most  influential,  if  not  most  powerful,  official  in  the  kingdom, 
he  had  been  sent  to  advance  the  fortunes  of  his  state  and  church  in  the 
greatest  centers  of  the  world.  Now  on  his  return,  he  found  himself 
shorn  of  both  power  and  influence.  In  reflecting  upon  his  plight,  how- 

The  account  of  this  election  is  furnished  in  great  detail  by  Ernoul  (see  L.  de 
Mas  Latrie,  ed.,  Chronique  d? Ernoul  et  de  Bernard  le  Tresoriery  pp.  82—86).  The 
party  divisions  in  the  kingdom  of  Jerusalem  at  this  time  are  most  fully  discussed  by 
M.  W.  Baldwin,  Raymond  III  of  Tripolis  and  the  Fall  of  Jerusalem  (r 7 1^7), 
passim. 


INTRODUCTION 


23 

ever,  he  refused  to  shift  his  allegiance  from  either  his  country  or  his 
king.  If  he  could  not  serve  them  directly  by  personal  advice  and  activ¬ 
ity,  he  could  still  do  so  indirectly.  In  some  such  spirit  he  now  resumed 
the  writing  of  his  histories. 

For  the  next  two  and  a  half  years  this  was  apparently  his  chief 
occupation.  He  interspersed  the  hours  of  his  writing  with  reading, 
much  of  it  in  the  classical  authors  with  whom  he  had  become  acquainted 
in  his  school  days.  His  audience  was  no  longer  the  king  and  court.  He 
was  writing,  he  realized  now,  for  all  Christendom.  With  this  larger 
purpose  in  mind,  he  went  back  through  his  earlier  work  and  added 
many  items  of  geographical  and  archaeological  lore  which  his  more 
immediate  audience  had  not  required.  Doubtless,  too,  as  he  reread 
some  of  the  earlier  passages  in  his  history,  he  revised  them  in  light  of 
his  fuller  knowledge  and  changed  viewpoint. 

He  could  not,  however,  be  altogether  oblivious  to  current  affairs. 
No  one  understood  the  situation  of  the  kingdom  or  its  place  in  inter¬ 
national  affairs  better  than  he.  Nearly  everything  that  the  court  party 
did  must  have  seemed  to  him  blundering  or  worse.  Since  for  the  time 
being  there  was  a  truce  with  Saladin,  who  was  therefore  free  to  devote 
himself  to  Muslim  affairs  in  the  east  and  north,  the  kingdom  rested 
under  an  illusion  of  security.  To  William,  however,  the  ominous  sig¬ 
nificance  of  Saladin^s  activities  in  uniting  the  Muslim  world  was  per¬ 
fectly  clear.  The  situation  called  for  the  utmost  efforts  to  marshal  every 
resource  against  the  impending  attack.  Instead,  he  saw  the  court  party 
committing  one  act  after  another  to  alienate  the  loyalty  of  the  estab¬ 
lished  barons.  Matters  reached  a  climax  in  the  spring  of  1182,  when 
the  king’s  advisers  provoked  him  to  the  verge  of  declaring  war  on  his 
most  powerful  vassal,  Raymond  of  Tripoli.  Civil  war  at  this  juncture, 
William  realized,  would  mean  suicide  for  the  kingdom.  Hastily,  there¬ 
fore,  he  interrupted  his  writing  and,  with  the  saner  members  of  both 
factions,  prevailed  upon  the  king  to  become  reconciled  with  Raymond. 
Perhaps  the  special  grant  which  Baldwin  made  to  the  archbishop  of 
Tyre  in  April,  1182,  to  which  Raymond  of  Tripoli  was  a  witness, 
served  to  mark  that  reconciliation  and  William’s  part  in  it.^^  However, 
the  court  party  remained  in  power,  its  capacity  to  err  undiminished. 
Two  ill-advised  engagements  with  Saladin  in  the  summer  and  fall  of 
that  year  both  resulted  in  defeat.  These  disasters  were  crowned  by 

R,  Reg.y  no.  615. 


24  INTRODUCTION 

Saladin’s  contemptuous  departure  to  the  Muslim  North  without  trou¬ 
bling  so  much  as  to  make  a  truce  with  the  kingdom.  This  unnecessary 
series  of  injuries  and  insults  disgusted  William,  and  he  decided  to  stop 
recording  so  shameful  a  series  of  blunders.  His  friends  tried  to  induce 
him  to  continue  his  writing,  but  for.  some  time  he  resisted  all  their  ap- 

The  king,  who,  at  the  end  of  the  year,  was  again  able  to  move  with 
his  troops,  stopped  at  Tyre  to  celebrate  Christmas.  His  conversations 
with  his  old  friend  and  tutor  have  not  been  recorded,  but  they  could 
not  have  included  much  that  was  complimentary  to  the  conduct  of 
affairs  by  Guy  and  other  members  of  his  following. 

When  Saladin  again  invaded  the  kingdom  in  1183,  the  greatest 
levy  ever  mustered  within  the  kingdom  was  called  out  against  him. 
Guy  was  in  command,  for  the  king  was  again  ill.  There  was  much 
bickering  among  the  Christian  leaders  but  no  action,  and  Saladin’s 
cavalry  virtually  held  Guy’s  army  in  a  state  of  siege.  When  Saladin 
finally  withdrew,  the  great  army  was  disbanded  without  having  struck 
a  blow.  The  people  were  disgusted  at  the  incompetence  of  such  leader¬ 
ship.  When  Saladin  struck  again  to  besiege  Kerak,  ancient  Petra  of  the 
Desert,  the  king  himself  assumed  command,  though  he  gave  the  active 
military  direction  to  Raymond.  Not  only  had  Guy  forfeited  the  con¬ 
fidence  of  the  king,  but  his  further  conduct  had  so  incensed  Baldwin  that 
the  latter,  pulling  his  ebbing  strength  together  in  one  final  effort,  de¬ 
prived  Guy  of  the  regency  and  made  arrangements  to  insure  against 
any  possibility  of  his  succession.  He  even  tried  to  compel  his  sister  to 
divorce  Guy.  In  this  effort  he  was  unsuccessful  j  but  he  did  get  the 
barons  of  the  realm  to  recognize  the  son  of  William  of  Montferrat  as 
his  heir  and  Raymond  of  Tripoli  as  regent  for  a  period  of  ten  years. 
This  was  the  last  important  act  of  Baldwin’s  reign. 

With  Raymond  again  regent,  William  felt  that  the  kingdom  was  in 
competent  hands.  Furthermore,  a  truce  which  Raymond  made  with 
Saladin  assured  immediate  peace,  and  the  future  again  looked  hopeful 
enough  for  William  to  feel  justified  in  resuming  his  writing.  Some 
stroke  of  illness,  however,  must  have  befallen  him  about  this  time; 
for  in  1 1 84,  when  he  revised  or  wrote  the  preface  to  his  work  as  a 
whole,  he  described  his  plan  of  dividing  the  work  into  twenty-three 
books,  to  which  he  would  add  as  events  dictated,  and  then  closed  with 
the  ominous  words  vita  comite.  And,  indeed,  the  twenty-third  book 


INTRODUCTION 


25 

was  only  just  begun,  the  choice  of  Raymond  as  regent  being  the  last 
entry,  when  he  died.  The  circumstances  of  his  death  and  its  exact 
date  are  undetermined,  but  it  must  have  occurred  some  time  before 
May,  1185,  when  his  vice-chancellor  was  already  established  as  chancel¬ 
lor.^^  He  did  not  live,  therefore,  to  see  that  his  fond  hopes  were  illu¬ 
sory  j  that,  through  the  repeated  blunders  of  the  faction  which  he  had 
always  opposed,  Jerusalem  was  to  fall,  as  he  had  feared  that  it  might, 
before  the  united  Muslim  power  of  Saladin. 

The  events  of  the  next  two  years  were  to  establish  the  soundness  of 
William’s  judgment.  In  1185  Baldwin  IV  finally  succumbed  to  his 
leprosy.  The  son  of  William  of  Montferrat  bore  the  title  of  Baldwin  V 
for  scarcely  a  year,  dying  in  1186.  The  ousted  faction,  led  by  Joscelin, 
the  brother  of  Agnes,  and  Sibylla,  then  perpetrated  a  couf  d^etat  by 
which  Guy  was  made  king  of  Jerusalem,  and  Raymond’s  regency  was 
ended  with  bitter  feelings.  When  Saladin  resumed  hostility  in  1187, 
the  situation  of  the  summer  of  1183  was  repeated.  This  time,  however, 
Guy  chose  to  fight,  permitting  Saladin  to  pick  the  battlefield  of  Hattin. 

Willlam^s  death  is  usually  erroneously  dated,  e.g.,  1190  by  Potthast  and  Hagen- 
meyerj  1186  by  Molinier  and  Rohricht.  It  was  a  natural  mistake  for  later  Western 
chroniclers  to  supply  William’s  name  for  that  otherwise  anonymous  archbishop 
of  Tyre  who  was  preaching  the  crusade  in  the  West  in  1188  and  1189.  Joscius,  a 
former  suffragan  of  William’s,  was  then  archbishop  of  Tyre.  Prutz  had  demonstrated 
this  error  fully  and  clearly  in  his  “Studien.”  R.  Rohricht’s  conclusion  {Geschichte 
des  Kbnlgreichs  Jerusalem^  iioo—i2giy  pp.  39i-“92>  note  5)  that  William’s  death 
could  be  fixed  within  the  interval  October  17  to  21,  1186,  the  dates  of  the  last  extant 
document  mentioning  William  and  the  first  mentioning  Joscius  as  archbishop,  has 
been  accepted  by  many  recent  writers.  This  too  must  be  regarded  as  erroneous.  The 
interval  itself  is  quite  too  brief  to  have  allowed  for  the  death  and  burial  of  William, 
the  election  and  consecration  of  Joscius.  Furthermore,  Joscius  is  not  characterized 
as  “elect”  but  referred  to  as  one  already  well  established.  Likewise  the  mention  of 
William  in  the  document  of  October  17  is  not  convincing  evidence  of  his  existence 
at  the  time.  The  document  records  the  closing  of  a  legal  case  in  which  William  ap¬ 
peared  as  one  of  five  judges  delegate  appointed  by  Pope  Urban  III  some  time  be¬ 
fore.  The  names  of  all  the  judges  would  be  included,  for  the  sake  of  the  record, 
whether  they  were  living  at  the  time  or  not.  Indeed,  it  is  quite  possible  that  William 
was  not  living  at  the  time  of  the  original  appointment,  which  was  made  at  Rome 
sometime  in  1185.  The  only  implication  it  could  have  regarding  William’s  life  is 
that  Pope  Urban  III  had  not  yet  heard  of  William’s  death  when  he  made  the  ap¬ 
pointment.  William’s  death  must  have  occurred  before  May  16,  1185,  when  his 
vice-chancellor,  Peter,  already  appears  as  chancellor  (i?,  Reg.j  no.  643).  It  is  quite 
unlikely  that  William  could  have  been  deposed  from  that  office,  which  he  still  held 
in  1184,  for  his  friend,  Raymond  of  Tripoli,  was  regent  of  the  kingdom.  The  last 
events  recorded  by  William  occurred  early  in  1184.  The  failure  of  the  papal  chan¬ 
cery  to  be  aware  of  his  death  by  the  end  of  November,  1185,  when  Urban  III 
became  pope,  might  imply  that  William  had  died  after  the  spring  sailing  of  that 
year.  His  death  can  therefore  not  be  placed  later  than  the  early  spring,  1185,  and  it 
can  hardly  have  been  before  then. 


26 


INTRODUCTION 


Since  virtually  all  the  forces  of  the  kingdom  had  been  mustered,  their 
disastrous  defeat  permitted  Saladin  to  regain,  at  one  stroke,  nearly  all 
that  the  crusaders  and  the  kings  of  Jerusalem  had  acquired  in  the  pre¬ 
vious  eighty-eight  years. Tyre  alone,  of  all  the  cities  in  the  kingdom, 
remained  in  Christian  hands  to  become  a  base  of  operations  for  the 
recapture  of  Acre  in  the  Third  Crusade.  A  kind  fate  had  spared  Wil¬ 
liam  the  tragic  happenings  of  these  years.  They  were,  however,  fully 
foreshadowed  in  what  he  had  written.  The  events  of  1187  only  added 
the  period  to  the  epic  which  his  pen  had  inscribed  through  the  year 

1183. 


HIS  WORKS 

Such  is  the  story  of  the  life  of  William,  archbishop  of  Tyre,  as  nearly 
as  the  cumulative  efforts  of  scholarship  to  the  present  time  have  per¬ 
mitted  us  to  know  it.  Although  he  was  important  both  as  a  churchman 
and  a  statesman,  his  fame  rests  almost  entirely  upon  his  work  as  a 
writer  and  an  historian.  Not  all  of  his  works  have  been  preserved.  Vir¬ 
tually  none  of  his  state  papers,  written  chiefly  as  letters  in  the  name  of 
the  king,  survive,  except  as  they  are  echoed  in  contemporary  chronicles, 
including  his  own.  Of  the  documents  which  he  issued  as  chancellor  only 
a  few,  which  record  transfers  of  property  or  confirmation  of  privileges, 
remain  today.  These  are  all  of  a  routine  character,  a  number  of  them 
obviously  the  product  of  the  chancery  without  much,  if  any,  personal 
attention  from  him,  though  they  bear  his  signature.^® 

The  account  of  the  Third  Later  an  Council  which  he  wrote  at  the 
request  of  his  colleagues,  a  copy  of  which  he  deposited  in  the  archives 
at  Tyre,  is  lost.  It  is  not  improbable,  however,  that  some  of  the  accounts 
of  this  council  which  have  been  preserved  were  drawn  from  this  re¬ 
port. Even  more  regrettable  is  the  disappearance  of  his  Gesta  ori¬ 
ent  alium  frincifum.  Copies  of  this  work  were  known  to  exist  more  than 
a  century  later,  one  of  them  at  St.  Albans  in  England,  but  these  have 
apparently  since  become  lost.-®  Something  of  its  nature,  however,  may 

For  these  events,  which  occurred  after  William’s  death,  see  Baldwin,  Raymond  III, 
pp.  68—1455  Stevenson,  Crusaders^  pp.  230—565  and  R.K.J,,  pp.  402—72. 

Thus  several  of  the  documents  which  bear  his  signature  as  chancellor  were  drawn 
up  in  Jerusalem  while  he  was  absent  at  Rome  and  Constantinople  {R.  Reg.,  nos.  577, 

579>  582,  5^7)  588,  591,  and  593). 

See  note  20. 

Matthew  Paris,  in  his  Historia  minor,  specifically  mentions  the  two  works  of 
William  as  in  the  library  of  St.  Albans,  where  he  invites  his  readers  to  consult  them 


INTRODUCTION 


27 

be  learned  from  the  borrowings  made  from  it  by  Jacques  de  Vitry, 
William  of  Tripoli,  and,  indeed,  by  William  himself.^®  The  only  sub¬ 
stantial  work  that  has  been  preserved  is  the  one  which  is  here  trans¬ 
lated.  Fortunately,  this  is  so  extensive  that  it  permits  a  fairly  adequate 
appraisal  of  his  qualities  both  as  an  historian  and  as  a  man  of  letters. 

Whether  William  supplied  a  title  for  this  work  as  it  finally  appeared 
we  do  not  know.  It  is  certain,  however,  that  the  title  which  it  now  bears 
was  devised  in  Western  Europe.  As  indicated  by  the  story  of  his  life, 
he  started  three  histories,  not  one  alone,  and  all  of  them  at  the  re¬ 
quest  of  King  Amaury,  The  first  was  the  Gesta  Amalrici  regis  upon 
which  he  began  work  in  1167.  This  task,  however,  was  interrupted  in 
1170,  in  order  to  satisfy  Amaury^s  request  for  a  comprehensive  intro¬ 
ductory  work  on  the  earlier  history  of  the  kingdom.  The  title  of  this 
second  work  may  be  taken  from  William’s  description  of  it  as  Gesta 
Hiersolymitanorum  re  gum.  This  work  was  to  extend  from  the  First 
Crusade — ^that  is,  from  1094  or  1095 — to  the  beginning  of  Amaury’s 
reign  in  1 163.  The  third  history,  begun  some  time  after  this,  but  long 
before  1 1 74,  was  the  Gesta  orientalium  frincifumy  which  was  designed 
to  recount  the  history  of  the  Muslim  East  from  the  time  of  Muham¬ 
mad  to  the  ^^present.”  William  worked  at  these  last  two  tasks  simul¬ 
taneously  up  to  about  1175.  Though  during  the  next  five  years  his 
other  cares  did  not  permit  of  any  systematic  writing,  he  appears  not  to 
have  neglected  his  histories  altogether,  and  toward  the  end  of  1 180  he 
again  resumed  his  task.  By  1182,  when  the  course  of  events  in  the 
kingdom  so  disgusted  him  that  he  decided  to  close  his  account,  he  had 
brought  the  Gesta  re  gum  near  enough  to  the  Gesta  Amalrici  to  permit 
a  hasty  welding  of  the  two  into  a  single  continuous  narrative.  Then 
viewing  the  work  as  a  whole,  he  found  it  inadequate  for  the  enlarged 
reading  public  to  which  he  was  now  addressing  his  work.  It  required,  he 
now  realized,  more  explanatory  material  and  a  general  rounding  out. 
To  accomplish  this,  he  selected  material  from  the  Gesta  orientalium 

(F.  Madden,  ed.,  Matthaei  Parisiensisy  mon-achi  Sancti  Albanty  historia  Anglorum  swe^ 
ut  vulgo  dicituTy  historia  minor y  I,  163).  The  library  of  St.  Albans  shared  the  vicis¬ 
situdes  of  other  English  monastic  libraries  in  the  sixteenth  century,  but  the  manu¬ 
script  of  William’s  chief  work  in  the  British  Museum  is  believed  to  be  the  one  from 
St.  Albans.  The  manuscript  of  the  Gesta  orientalium  frincifumy  however,  is  missing. 

The  probable  use  of  this  lost  work  by  Jacques  de  Vitry  had  been  noticed  by  others, 
but  Prutz  completed  the  proof,  and  his  conclusions  are  supported  by  the  two  later 
studies  of  G.  Zacher,  Die  Historia  orientalis  des  Jacob  von  Vitry y  and  P.  Funk,  Jakob 
von  Vitry y  Leben  und  Werke. 


28 


INTRODUCTION 


frincifumy  and  inserted  a  summary  introduction  to  link  the  first  loss 
of  Jerusalem  by  the  Christians  in  614  with  the  determination  to  re¬ 
cover  it  in  1094  or  1095.  At  the  same  time,  he  added  other  selections 
from  that  work  to  explain  more  fully  some  later  events  in  connection 
with  the  Egyptian  campaigns.  It  is  probable  that  the  story,  as  he 
thought  he  was  ending  it  in  1182,  carried  the  continuous  narrative  up 
to  the  end  of  1179  or  early  1180.  He  may,  however,  have  made  some 
further  revisions  when  he  again  took  up  his  writing  toward  the  end  of 
1183  or  early  1 1 84.  His  preface,  which  he  wrote  in  1 1 84?  describes  the 
arrangement  into  books  and  chapters  according  to  his  final  plan,  which 
included  the  prospect  of  such  further  additions  as  circumstances  might 
dictate.  The  prologue,  however,  was  probably  the  last  chapter  that  he 
wrote.  He  had  carried  his  narrative  to  1 1 84. 

WILLIAM  AS  HISTORIAN 

In  appraising  William’s  work  as  an  historian  it  is  necessary  to  bear 
in  mind  that  he  had  had  no  special  training  for  his  task.  His  schooling 
had  been  directed  toward  a  career  in  the  hierarchy  of  the  Church,  and 
he  was  already  well  started  upon  this  career  when  he  was  called  upon 
to  write  history.  His  specialization,  if  such  it  may  be  called,  was  in  the 
field  of  law  3  and  for  several  years  before  he  took  to  writing  history 
he  had  probably  been  engaged  in  the  legal  work  of  the  church  of  Tyre. 
Furthermore,  he  was  already  well  advanced  toward  middle  age  when 
he  began  his  work  as  an  historian.  These  facts  are  evident  in  his  work, 
where  men  and 'affairs  are  viewed  with  both  the  moral  judgment  of  a 
churchman  and  the  objectivity  of  a  lawyer,  and  where  ecclesiastical  and 
legal  matters  are  accorded  an  unusually  large  amount  of  attention. 
What  steps,  if  any,  he  took  to  acquaint  himself  with  the  requirements 
of  his  new  task  when  he  agreed  to  write  the  Gesta  Amalrici  in  1167  are 
not  known.  His  immediate  procedure  is  clear  enough.  It  was  to  inter¬ 
view  leaders  of  the  recent  Egyptian  campaign  on  the  events  of  that 
campaign.  In  fact,  he  interviewed  not  one,  but  several,  taking  good  care 
to  weigh  and  sift  all  their  testimony  with  judicial  thoroughness.  As 
late  as  1 170,  this  was  still  his  procedure.  Presumably  he  usually  wrote 
the  results  of  his  inquiries  as  soon  as  he  was  satisfied  that  he  had  the 
necessary  information.  Noteworthy  of  his  work  at  this  stage  is  the 
range  of  information  which  he  deemed  pertinent  to  his  task.  This  in¬ 
cluded  the  details  not  only  of  the  Egyptian  campaigns,  but  also  of  the 


INTRODUCTION 


29 

diplomatic  negotiations  regarding  them.  In  addition,  he  decided  that 
he  must  acquaint  himself  with  the  characteristics  of  the  land  and  the 
people,  as  well  as  gain  a  detailed  knowledge  of  court  ceremonial  at 
Cairo  and  of  the  commercial  interests  and  importance  of  Alexandria. 
In  all  these  inquiries  he  was  following  no  contemporary  chronicler. 

It  was  when  he  began  his  second  work,  the  Gesta  regumy  that  he 
found  himself  confronted  with  the  more  conventional  problems  of  the 
historian.  Much  of  this  history,  especially  the  earlier  portion,  had  to 
be  drawn  from  written  sources.  William’s  use  of  these  sources,  how¬ 
ever,  is  not  conventional.  He  was  not  content,  as  were  most  chroniclers 
of  the  period,  to  select  one  account  and  incorporate  it  either  as  a  whole, 
or  in  abbreviated  form,  in  the  body  of  his  own  work.  For  the  First 
Crusade  he  clearly  used  the  written  accounts  of  the  anonymous  author 
of  the  Gesta  Francoruniy  as  well  as  those  of  Raymond  d’Aguilers, 
Walter  the  Chancellor,  Fulcher  of  Chartres,  and  Albert  of  Aix.  Ap¬ 
parently  he  had  these  works  in  his  study  as  he  wrote,  and  he  drew  upon 
all  of  them.  If  at  times  he  appears  to  follow  one  writer  to  the  exclusion 
of  others,  this  preference  is  almost  always  due  to  the  fact  that  the  par¬ 
ticular  material  appears  only  in  the  one.  Usually  his  own  conclusion 
is  derived  from  a  comparison  of  several  accounts.  Where  these  conflict, 
he  either  follows  his  own  judgment  or,  occasionally,  presents  the  di¬ 
vergent  statements.  Sometimes,  as  in  the  case  of  the  more  fanciful 
stories  of  Albert  of  Aix,  he  refuses  to  accept  obvious  exaggerations, 
even  though  these  offer  the  only  written  account  of  the  matter  in  ques¬ 
tion.  He  also  drew  on  oral  tradition. In  fact,  he  appears  to  make  no 
distinction  between  this  variety  of  knowledge  and  the  accounts  of  these 
chroniclers  of  the  First  Crusade.  He  mentions  none  of  them  by  name, 
but  regards  them  all  as  setting  forth  merely  the  testimony  of  tradition, 
which  must  be  weighed  and  sifted.  In  the  light  of  his  own  sense  of  what 


Von  Sybel,  in  a  somewhat  hypercritical  vein,  left  the  impression  that  William 
followed  Albert  of  Aix  quite  closely  to  the  taking  of  Jerusalem  and  Fulcher  of  Chartres 
thereafter.  Hagenmeyer  has  done  much  to  correct  von  SybePs  error.  In  his  successive 
editions  of  writings  on  this  period  (^Ekkehardiy  1877,  Anonyinij  1890,  Galteriiy  1896, 
Efistulae^  and  Fulcheriy  1913),  Hagenmeyer  made  almost  a  line-for-line  com¬ 

parison  of  each  of  these  accounts  with  that  of  William  as  well  as  those  of  other  later 
writers.  His  final  judgment  on  William’s  use  of  these  sources  is  most  nearly  expressed 
in  the  introduction  to  his  last  work  {H.F.y  pp.  85—91).  This  is  more  fully  corroborated 
in  the  copious  footnotes  of  all  of  these  works,  to  which  should  be  added  his  Chronologic 
(H.  Hagenmeyer,  ^^Chronologic  de  la  premiere  croisade,  1094—1100,”  and  ‘‘Chro¬ 
nologic  de  Phistoire  du  royauine  de  Jerusalem:  regne  de  Baudoin  I,”  Revue  de  VOrient 
Latin y  VI— XII). 


INTRODUCTION 


30 

was  reasonable,  he  reserved  the  right  to  reject  and  correct  any  or  all 
of  their  statements,  for  he  was  aware  that  he  possessed  a  more  accurate 
knowledge  of  the  geography  and  the  antiquity  of  the  region  as  well 
as  a  fuller  acquaintance  with  the  course  of  later  developments.  His  own 
account,  resulting  from  this  practice,  is  almost  entirely  set  down  in  his 
own  words,  relatively  rarely  in  those  of  his  sources.  Unlike  them,  too, 
he  preferred,  irrespective  of  the  length  of  time  involved,  to  follow  a 
particular  topic  through  from  some  definite  beginning  to  its  conclusion. 
In  all  these  respects,  his  usual  procedure  followed  no  contemporary 
model.  In  fact  it  is  almost  that  of  a  modern  historical  scholar  and,  to 
that  extent,  is  superior  to  any  of  his  contemporaries. 

William  apparently  followed  the  same  general  plan  in  dealing  with 
Arabic  sources  for  his  Gesta  orientalimn  frincifum.  Since,  however, 
the  work  itself  is  lost,  this  can  not  be  as  fully  determined  as  in  the  case 
of  the  Gesta  regum.  Furthermore,  he  mentions  only  one  Arabic  source 
by  name.^^  That,  however,  stopped  at  a.d.  937,  whereas  William  spe¬ 
cifically  states  that  his  own  work  extends  at  least  to  1182.  The  other 
sources  which  he  used  were  only  partly  included  in  the  collection  of 
Arabic  books  to  which  King  Amaury  gave  him  access.  It  is  quite  clear 
from  passages  dealing  with  Muslim  history  that  he  must  have  drawn 
some  of  his  information  from  oral  sources  and  some  from  inscriptions 
on  buildings.  Likewise  there  were  some  matters  of  Muslim  history 
about  which  his  sources  differed,  or  were  so  uncertain  that  further  in¬ 
vestigation  was  required.  Since  Tyre  in  his  time  maintained  four 
mosques  to  serve  its  Muslim  inhabitants  and  visitors,  William  probably 
had  little  difficulty  in  finding  learned  Arabs  or  books  to  help  solve  his 
difficulties.^^ 

The  circumstances  under  which  he  composed  his  histories — the 
changes  in  his  own  position,  the  irregular  intervals  of  writing  over  a 
period  of  seventeen  years,  and  the  haste  in  which  he  closed  his  work, 
leaving  no  opportunity  for  either  rewriting  or  complete  revision — all 
enable  us  to  follow  the  improvement  in  his  historical  craftsmanship. 
He  wrote  at  first  as  the  literary  client  of  a  royal  patron,  Amaury  I, 

See  Prologue,  note  8. 

The  Spanish  Arab,  Ibn  Jubair,  spent  some  ten  days  at  Tyre  in  1184.  He  was 
more  than  favorably  impressed  by  the  pleasant  relations  between  Christian  and  Muslim 
existing  there.  A  portion  of  the  account  of  his  journey  which  was  a  pilgrimage  to 
Mecca  appears  in  the  Recueil  des  historiens  des  croisadeSj  Historiens  orientauXj  III, 

445-51* 


INTRODUCTION 


31 

intent  primarily  upon  the  entertainment  and  edification  of  the  king, 
and  perhaps  also  of  the  court.  Though  too  mature  and  too  conscious  of 
an  independent  ecclesiastical  career  ever  to  become  a  mere  servile  cour¬ 
tier,  he  reveals  in  his  earlier  work  less  critical  ability  than  is  apparent  in 
his  later  writing.  With  Baldwin  IV,  his  former  pupil,  William’s  rela¬ 
tions  with  the  king  were  almost  reversed.  He  was  no  longer  the  client, 
but  the  adviser  and  mentor  of  the  young  king,  whose  infirmity  ren¬ 
dered  that  relationship  a  pathetically  responsible  one.  Though  he  was 
still  writing  for  a  personal  and  immediate  audience,  his  tone,  from  this 
time  on,  was  sobered  by  his  responsibilities.  Edification  and  entertain¬ 
ment  were  still  to  be  served,  but  instruction  in  affairs  of  state  became 
his  dominant  motive.  The  shift  in  politics  which  made  William  almost 
a  stranger  to  the  court  also  brought  about  a  further  development  in  his 
point  of  view.  His  audience  was  no  longer  personal  or  immediate.  It 
was,  instead,  the  reading  public  of  all  Latin  Christendom,  and  his  pur¬ 
pose  that  of  insuring  the  continued  existence  of  his  own  nation,  the 
Latin  Kingdom  of  Jerusalem.  There  was  little  room  now  for  idle 
words.  All  the  keen  insight  into  international  affairs  that  he  had  ac¬ 
cumulated  at  Rome  and  Constantinople  and  had  hoped  to  place  at  the 
disposal  of  the  king,  went,  instead,  into  his  work. 

Though,  when  he  resumed  writing  in  1180,  he  worked  upon  the 
material  in  Books  XVI  to  XXI,  much  of  the  earlier  portion  was  writ¬ 
ten  from  notes  made  as  early  as  1167  (e.g..  Book  XIX,  chapters  13-32) 
and  required  little  revision.  His  full  development  as  an  historian, 
therefore,  must  be  sought  in  what  he  composed  and  wrote  after  1180, 
more  distinctly  in  Books  XXI  to  XXIII  (inclusive)  and  in  his  pro¬ 
logue  to  the  work  as  a  whole.  During  the  period  of  his  apprenticeship, 
he  had  learned  much  about  the  writing  of  history  as  well  as  about  the 
problems  of  statesmanship.  He  therefore  no  longer  allowed  himself  to 
indulge  in  those  concessions  to  person  or  office  to  which  he  had  occa¬ 
sionally  yielded  in  his  earlier  writing.  The  legendary  and  the  trivial 
disappeared  before  the  stern  judgment  of  more  mature  knowledge  for¬ 
tified  by  a  passionate  patriotism.  The  survival  and  welfare  of  his  coun¬ 
try  Imposed  obligations  which  neither  personal  friendship  nor  respect 
for  high  office  could  compel  him  to  shirk.  Likewise,  his  inclination  to 
supplement  the  usual  medieval  explanation  of  events  as  due  to  divine 
interposition,  a  tendency  already  present  in  his  earlier  writing,  now 
also  reaches  its  full  development.  Indeed,  few  writers  in  any  time  have 


INTRODUCTION 


32 

viewed  their  own  age  with  sterner  impartiality  and  insight,  or  with 
fuller  understanding.  More  unusual  yet,  applying  to  himself  the  same 
rigid  standards  that  he  exacted  of  others,  he  resisted  the  pardonable 
impulse  to  denounce  those  responsible  for  his  own  personal  disappoint¬ 
ments.  Even  Agnes  de  Courtenay,  the  chief  offender,  is  censured  only 
once  and  then  for  an  act  not  concerned  with  himself.  His  impartiality, 
which  even  scientific  historians  of  modern  times  seldom  equal,  is, 
however,  scarcely  less  impressive  than  his  critical  skill  in  sifting  the 
highly  emotional,  fragmentary,  and  partisan  oral  testimony  from 
which  his  information  was  derived.  Thus,  his  analysis  of  the  reasons 
for  both  the  Greek  uprising  against  the  Latins  at  Constantinople  in 
1182  and  for  Saladin’s  success  has  required  but  little  addition  or  cor¬ 
rection  from  modern  scholarship. 

Coupled  with  these  sterner  virtues,  William’s  advance  in  the  gentler 
arts  of  the  historian  must  also  be  noted.  He  allowed  himself  no  arbi¬ 
trary  prejudice  regarding  race,  creed,  or  social  class.  Not  only  Latins, 
but  Greeks  and  Armenians,  Syrians,  Arabs,  and  Turks  were  capable  of 
praiseworthy  acts.  So,  too,  were  peasants  and  merchants  and  nobles. 
Even  the  Muslim  was  acknowledged  to  have  commendable  moral 
standards  and  ideals.  In  his  earlier  writing,  William  had  frequently 
repeated  the  conventional  prejudices  of  the  West,  but  now  this  tend¬ 
ency  was  almost  completely  gone.  His  conception  of  what  should  be 
included  in  recounting  the  events  of  the  past  remained  as  broad  as  ever. 
Only  the  trivialities  of  court  gossip,  to  which  he  had  occasionally  lent 
ear  in  his  earlier  work,  were  rejected.  The  ordinary  concerns  of  life, 
its  industries,  architecture,  and  social  life,  continued  to  receive  his  at¬ 
tention  along  with  the  more  usual  military  and  ecclesiastical,  diplo¬ 
matic  and  governmental  affairs.  And  all  of  these,  except  the  military, 
were  treated  with  greater  sympathetic  insight  than  was  customary 
among  the  chroniclers  of  the  time. 

In  so  many  respects  William  so  nearly  approaches  the  standards  of 
modern  historical  scholarship  that  it  is  a  matter  of  surprise  to  find  him 
in  any  way  subject  to  the  limitations  of  his  own  age.  Yet,  since  his  point 
of  reference  continued  to  be,  or  perhaps  became  even  more  strictly,  the 
Latin  Kingdom  of  Jerusalem,  he  at  times  lacked  breadth  of  outlook. 
Though  he  touched  upon  matters  of  concern  not  only  to  the  whole 
Mediterranean  world  but  to  Western  Europe  also,  he  confined  himself 
almost  exclusively  to  the  connection  of  those  matters  with  the  land  in 


INTRODUCTION 


33 

which  he  dwelt.  Only  rarely  did  he  choose  to  consider  the  broader  as¬ 
pects  of  the  problems  with  which  kings,  emperors,  and  popes  had  to 
deal.  Therefore,  at  times  he  was  unjust  in  his  judgment  of  their  poli¬ 
cies  toward  the  kingdom  of  Jerusalem.  In  the  same  way,  he  never 
ceased  to  be  a  churchman  of  the  secular  hierarchy.  This  inclination, 
which  led  him  to  devote  a  disproportionate  amount  of  space  to  the 
problems  of  ecclesiastical  organization  in  the  East,  has  also  laid  him 
open  to  the  charge  of  entertaining  a  certain  bias  against  the  military 
and  monastic  organizations  which  had  gained  more  or  less  complete 
independence  from  the  secular  hierarchy  of  Jerusalem.  These  faults, 
if  such  they  be,  seem  to  have  grown  upon  him  with  the  years  and  are 
even  more  marked  in  his  later  writing. 

That,  also,  is  true  of  another  defect  which  reflects  his  lack  of  any 
formal  training  for  his  work  as  historian.  Though  almost  no  medieval 
chronicler  who  touched  so  wide  a  field  can  be  said  to  be  entirely  free 
from  chronological  error,  William’s  mistakes  are  greater  than  usual. 
He  was  scrupulous  in  tracing  the  succession  of  events  within  each  given 
topic.  He  was  almost  meticulous  in  noting  the  sequence  of  related 
events  as  he  wrote.  His  difficulties  arose  when  he  had  to  enter  in  his 
history  separate,  unrelated  events  whose  only  bond  with  the  rest  of 
his  material  was  chronological.  So,  also,  he  had  not  made  a  habit  of 
translating  the  several  systems  of  reckoning  used  by  his  sources,  both 
written  and  oral,  into  a  single  system.  Furthermore,  his  absence  abroad 
while  he  was  studying  law  not  only  prevented  him  from  obtaining 
direct  information  about  the  early  years  of  Amaury’s  reign,  but  led  also 
to  a  serious  hiatus  in  joining  the  Gesta  Amalrici  to  the  Gesta  re  gum. 
The  year  ii66  is  accordingly  almost  a  blank,  and  the  events  of  the 
years  i  i6o  to  1163  are  very  inadequately  recorded.  He  did  not  realize 
until  far  too  late  the  need  of  a  systematic  framework  of  chronology  to 
bind  his  work  together.  By  that  time,  the  task  had  reached  the  propor¬ 
tions  of  a  major  problem  in  historical  research  which  he  had  neither 
the  necessary  aid  nor  the  leisure  to  undertake.  As  a  consequence,  the 
chronological  framework  which  he  hastily  evolved  is  more  often  con¬ 
fusing  than  helpful.  For  example,  the  Arab  chronology,  several  times 
used  without  designation,  conflicts  with  the  Christian  era.  Again,  the 
reigns  of  the  separate  kings  are  variantly  stated — ^in  the  aggregate,  in 
successive  regnal  years,  and  in  terms  of  the  Christian  era,  the  three 
forms  frequently  conflicting.  By  the  irony  of  fate,  the  reign  which 


INTRODUCTION 


34 

offers  the  greatest  chronological  inconsistency  is  that  of  Amaury,  who 
was  responsible  for  William’s  writing  of  history.  Several  modern 
scholars  have  sought  to  reconcile  all  this  divergence,  Stevenson  kindly 
suggesting  that  the  chronological  calculations  were  superimposed  upon 
the  work  by  some  later  person.^^  One  need  only  read  the  prologue, 
however,  to  realize  that  William  alone  was  probably  entirely  responsi¬ 
ble  for  the  confusion  which  makes  it  necessary  to  determine  every 
doubtful  point  of  chronology  in  his  text  by  comparison  with  other  in¬ 
dependent  sources. 

WILLIAM  AS  A  MAN  OF  LETTERS 

No  appraisal  of  William’s  work  would  be  complete  without  some 
consideration  of  its  literary  quality.  As  he  so  eloquently  states  in  his 
prologue,  this  quality  in  his  work  was  as  much  a  matter  of  his  conscious 
concern  as  the  truth  of  his  statements.  His  Latin  is  singularly  pure, 
Manitius  noting  only  two  terms  lacking  classical  justification.^^  The 
range  of  his  vocabulary  is  unusually  wide.  In  these  respects  he  com¬ 
pares  favorably  with  the  best  of  his  contemporaries,  even  with  John  of 
Salisbury.  Both  reflect  a  careful  study  of  the  classics  and,  more  than 
that,  a  genuine  appreciation  of  letters.^^  His  favorite  authors,  to  whom. 

See  note  4. 

One  of  these,  loricator^  he  took  over,  apparently  with  pleasure,  from  Albert  of 
Aix.  See  Manitius,  Lateinische  Literatur^  III,  430—39. 

It  is  impossible  to  determine  fully  the  range  of  William^s  knowledge  of  classical 
literature.  Prutz  is  inclined  to  ascribe  to  him  a  knowledge  of  nearly  all  the  authors 
cited  by  him  as  wtU  as  those  quoted  without  citation  who  have  been  identified  by 
the  editors  of  William’s  text.  Manitius,  on  the  other  hand,  is  very  conservative  in  his 
estimate  of  William’s  classical  learning.  Unlike  John  of  Salisbury,  William  had  little 
occasion  to  draw  upon  classical  literature  for  information.  His  own  interest  in  classi¬ 
cal  writings  appears  to  have  been  primarily  literary  and  aesthetic.  His  use  of  them 
was  largely  to  enrich  his  vocabulary  and  to  enhance  the  expression  of  his  own  thoughts 
of  the  moment.  Such  an  interest  might  lead  him  rather  to  drink  deeply  of  certain 
favorite  authors  than  to  explore  as  wide  a  range  of  authors  as  possible.  Thus  in  the 
case  of  Ovid  he  cites  only  the  Metamorf hoses  and  the  HeroideSy  but  innumerable 
phrases  indicate  that  he  was  also  thoroughly  familiar  with  the  Tristia  and  the  Efts- 
tulae  ex  Ponto.  His  familiarity  with  Cicero  is  similarly  inadequately  revealed  by  his 
direct  citations.  The  fact  that  so  large  a  proportion  of  his  quotations  from  classical 
authors  appear  in  the  portions  of  his  work  manifestly  written  after  1180  seems  to 
indicate  that  they  were  not  a  mere  reminiscence  of  his  grammar-school  days  but  the 
result  of  a  genuine  passion  which  he  was  indulging  in  those  later  years.  It  is,  how¬ 
ever,  doubtful  whether  his  knowledge  of  Greek  extended  to  familiarity  with  the 
ancient  works.  All  his  citations  of  Greek  classics,  except  those  from  Josephus,  have 
been  traced  to  Latin  translations.  The  works  of  Josephus  too  were  available  in  Latin 
translations,  though  not  all  of  these  have  yet  been  printed,  and  it  is  quite  possible 
that  William,  like  Fulcher  of  Chartres,  drew  upon  them.  Perhaps  it  would  be  more 


INTRODUCTION 


35 

in  his  later  years,  he  again  turned  for  comfort  and  satisfaction,  were 
Virgil,  Horace,  Ovid,  and  Cicero.  Beyond  any  Latin  prose  writer  of 
his  day  William  was  a  raconteur.  This  quality  of  his  work  is  revealed 
not  only  in  those  stories  which  later  literature  was  to  appropriate,  but 
also  by  his  consistent  practice  in  tracing  a  series  of  connected  events 
from  some  definite  beginning  to  a  logical  ending.  Doubtless  his  per¬ 
sonal  inclination  toward  such  treatment  was  enhanced  by  the  fact  that 
he  wrote  originally  for  an  aural  audience,  a  fact  overlooked  by  his¬ 
torians  but  finally  noted  by  literary  scholars. 

This  desire  to  round  out  his  tale  for  the  benefit  of  his  listeners,  how¬ 
ever,  did  not  lead  him  to  indulge  in  the  colloquialisms  which  such  prac¬ 
tice  so  easily  breeds.  His  language  remained  pure,  his  imagery  digni¬ 
fied  and  elegant.  Indeed,  urbanity  in  discourse  was  a  quality  which  he 
prized  so  highly  that  he  is  very  sparing  in  his  use  of  the  term  of  Ute^ 
ratus — a  highly  complimentary  description  which  very  few  persons 
were  able  to  win  from  him,  and  most  of  these  only  in  limited  degree. 
The  quality  of  his  literary  judgment  is  even  more  directly  indicated  by 
his  use  of  the  word  urhanitas  itself  and  by  his  evident  approval  of  the 
great  Muslim  caliph,  Harun  al-Raschid,  who  still  enjoyed  such  repu¬ 
tation  among  Arabic  scholars.  In  this  refinement  of  expression  and  out¬ 
look  William  far  excelled  all  other  Latin  writers  of  his  time.  This 
particular  quality  of  his  style,  however,  can  not  be  explained  solely  on 
the  basis  of  his  reading  of  the  Latin  classics  j  for  the  broad  human  tol¬ 
erance  and  genteel  scepticism  which  marked  his  writing  was  also  de¬ 
rived  from  acquaintance  with  Arabic  literature  and  from  association 
with  cultivated  Arabs  in  the  cosmopolitan  and  sophisticated  society  of 
the  East.^®  These  attributes  did  not  represent  merely  an  artificial  ve¬ 
neer  which  William  had  acquired  through  study  and  conscious  effort, 
but  rather  the  nature  of  his  genuine  preferences. 

William^s  sense  of  literary  form  was  not  confined  to  the  rounding 
out  of  single  episodes  and  related  events.  It  increased  with  the  years  j 
and  when  at  last  he  decided  to  conclude  his  writings,  he  was  evidently 
dissatisfied  to  issue  them  as  three  separate  works.  They  were  all,  he 

accurate  to  represent  William’s  classical  learning  as  somewhat  less  than  that  esti¬ 
mated  by  Prutz  but  greater  than  that  allowed  by  Manitius. 

This  quality  of  urbanity  for  which  William  is  so  preeminent  among  the  Latin 
writers  of  the  twelfth  century  is  also  marked  in  the  vernacular  literature  of  this  cen¬ 
tury,  especially  in  the  court  epic.  It  is  possible  that  Eastern,  Greek  and  Arabic,  in¬ 
fluence  may  also  have  played  an  important  role  in  this  development. 


36  INTRODUCTION 

realized,  grouped  around  a  unified  theme,  the  loss  and  recovery  of 
Jerusalem,  and  to  this  central  theme  each  contributed.  A  union  of  the 
Gesta  re  gum  and  the  Gesta  Amalrici  had  been  foreseen,  but  the  volume 
on  the  princes  of  the  Orient  had  been  planned  as  a  separate  enterprise. 
However,  events  of  1094  and  1095  no  longer  seemed  to  him  to  present 
a  proper  beginning  for  the  royal  chronicle,  which  he  now  thought 
ought  to  include  the  original  loss  of  Jerusalem  by  the  Christians. 
Hence,  from  his  Gesta  orientalium  frinciftcmy  he  supplied  a  summary 
of  events  back  to  614.  This  step  was  not  the  only  part  of  his  final  revi¬ 
sion  which  was  dictated  by  his  aesthetic  sense.  In  his  treatment  of  the 
separate  kings  of  Jerusalem  he  tried  also  to  achieve  a  certain  uniform¬ 
ity.  To  this  end,  he  planned  to  allot  two  books  to  each  ruler,  the  first 
to  open  with  a  pen  picture  and  the  second  to  end  with  an  account  of 
the  king’s  death.  The  two  exceptions  to  this  arrangement — the  one 
book  for  Godfrey  and  the  three  for  Baldwin  III — were  amply  justified 
by  the  relative  length  of  their  reigns,  Godfrey  ruling  only  one  year, 
while  Baldwin’s  reign  extended  over  twenty,  during  part  of  which 
time  his  mother  was  joint  ruler.  Since  the  amount  of  material  involved 
in  the  separate  reigns  varied  considerably,  these  dictates  of  form  in¬ 
volved  William  in  some  difficulty.  For  example,  the  last  years  of  Bald¬ 
win  II  and  the  whole  reign  of  Fulk  required  a  good  deal  of  padding 
— a  fact  which  probably  accounts  for  the  amount  of  petty  court  gossip 
and  the  number  of  ecclesiastical  documents  which  William  saw  fit  to 
include  in  his  discussion  of  Fulk’s  reign.  By  these  various  devices,  how¬ 
ever,  he  was  able  to  accord  a  relatively  equal  amount  of  space  to  each 
of  the  several  kings.  Events  themselves  were  to  give  to  his  work,  as  he 
finally  shaped  it,  the  complete  unity  which  his  sense  of  style,  if  not  his 
patriotic  hopes,  dictated,  for  Jerusalem  was  to  be  lost  again  in  less  than 
three  years  by  a  series  of  circumstances  which  he  had  recounted,  in 
almost  perfect  rehearsal,  in  the  years  1182  and  1183. 

Certain  conclusions  emerge  from  this  account  of  William’s  progress 
as  an  historian  and  the  analysis  of  his  achievement  as  a  writer.  If  he 
lacked  technical  training  for  the  task  and  thus  fell  into  errors  from 
which  more  adequate  preparation  might  have  saved  him,  he  likewise 
was  free  from  the  restrictions  which  such  training  might  have  imposed 
upon  him.  Had  he  been  more  technically  proficient,  he  might  not  have 
chosen  to  include  in  his  work  so  full  a  treatment  of  so  many  human  ac¬ 
tivities  and  interests.  And  even  judging  his  performance  by  the  stand- 


INTRODUCTION 


37 

ards  of  modern  historical  scholarship,  there  are  relatively  few  respects 
in  which  he  is  excelled  by  any  of  his  contemporaries.  Without  doubt, 
many  were  more  accurate  in  their  general  chronology,  and  Otto  of 
Freising,  for  instance,  was  more  profound  in  his  philosophic  conception 
of  history.  Similarly,  John  of  Salisbury  was  more  fully,  if  not  better, 
acquainted  with  classical  literature  as  a  source  of  illustration  and  com¬ 
parison  in  human  affairs.  Yet  none  excelled  William  in  critical  use  of 
written  sources  or  equalled  him  in  sifting  oral  testimony  or  judging 
contemporary  events.  None  equalled  him,  either,  in  freedom  from 
prejudice,  whether  racial,  social,  or  religious.  The  impartiality  of  his 
judgments,  the  breadth  of  his  tolerance,  and  the  range  of  his  interests 
exceeded  those  of  any  of  the  contemporary  chroniclers.  The  purity  of 
his  language,  the  dignity  of  his  treatment,  the  interesting  manner  of 
his  narrative  are  all  of  distinctive  excellence.  In  the  combination  of  all 
these  qualities  his  work  is  superior  to  that  of  any  other  Latin  historian 
since  classical  times  and,  until  the  period  of  the  late  Renaissance,  is 
scarcely  equalled  by  any  later  writer. 

william’s  influence  on  later  writers 

William’s  history  has  been  recognized  by  all  later  historians  as  a 
primary  source  of  information  on  its  period.  For  the  years  between 
1144  and  1184,  it  has  admittedly  been  their  chief,  and  often  their 
only,  source.  Their  debt,  however,  is  much  greater  than  has  generally 
been  admitted.  William’s  statement,  at  the  opening  of  his  sixteenth 
book,  to  the  effect  that  hitherto  he  had  had  to  rely  upon  ^^tradition,” 
but  that  henceforth  he  was  writing  as  an  eyewitness,  has  been  misin¬ 
terpreted  to  mean  that  he  had  drawn  the  previous  material  from  writ¬ 
ten  accounts.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  however,  there  was  no  written  account 
beyond  1127  or  One,  it  is  true,  had  been  undertaken  in  the 

This  is  probably  the  most  persistent  and  universally  accepted  error  regarding 
William’s  work.  Virtually  every  writer  on  William,  even  the  most  critical,  has  re¬ 
peated  it,  though  not  one  has  made  any  attempt  to  designate  what  written  sources 
William  used  for  the  period  from  1127  to  1144.  The  abortive  chronicle  sponsored 
by  Baldwin  III  is  in  itself  convincing  evidence  that  there  was  no  Latin  treatment 
of  that  interval.  There  was  an  Arab  chronicle  covering  the  period,  that  of  al-Qalanisi, 
but  William  owed  little,  if  any,  of  his  information  to  it.  Nor  is  there  any  evidence 
that  he  knew  the  Armenian  chronicle  of  Matthew  of  Edessa  {Extraits  de  la  chronique 
de  Matthieu  d^Edessa  in  Receitil  des  historietis  des  croisadeSy  Documents  armenienSy 
I,  I— 150).  Obviously  he  could  scarcely  report  as  eyewitness  the  events  occurring  at 
the  time  of  his  birth  or  during  his  infancy.  For  such  material  he  was  dependent  upon 
the  reports  of  others,  hence  ‘^tradition.” 


INTRODUCTION 


38 

reign  of  Baldwin  III  3  but  the  anonymous  author  of  that  chronicle  suc¬ 
ceeded  only  in  writing  his  introduction,  an  abbreviated  version  of  the 
account  of  Fulcher  of  Chartres,  to  which  he  added  a  paragraph  or  two. 
William  was  doubtless  familiar  with  this  work,  but  it  was  of  little  use 
to  him,  and  it  did  not  supply  him  with  any  material  later  than  1128. 
The  material  after  that  date  was  not  to  be  found  in  written  sources  and 
had  therefore  to  be  gleaned  from  the  recollections  of  living  witnesses. 
William’s  statement,  then,  must  mean  that  in  1 144,  at  the  age  of  four¬ 
teen,  he  felt  old  enough  to  begin  taking  note  of  historical  events.  The 
period  for  which  he  is  the  chief  primary  source,  therefore,  must  be 
extended  back  to  1127.  For  the  period  before  that  time  he  had  used 
the  chronicles  already  mentioned,  but  to  them  he  added  a  considerable 
amount  of  new  material — of  antiquarian  lore,  for  example,  both  lit¬ 
erary  and  archaeological,  of  geographical  information,  as  well  as  an 
appraisal  of  past  events  in  the  light  of  later  developments.  Further¬ 
more,  he  made  good  use  of  both  the  royal  and  ecclesiastical  archives, 
and  in  a  number  of  instances  drew  additional  information  from  the 
testimony  of  a  few  eyewitnesses  who  were  still  living  in  his  time.  In 
other  words,  even  for  the  period  from  1094  to  1127  William’s  history 
has  some  value  as  primary  source  material.  A  more  correct  statement 
of  the  importance  of  his  work  would  include  recognition  of  the  fact 
that  for  the  years  from  1127  to  1184  it  remains  our  chief  primary 
source,  and  for  the  period  before  1127  an  important  supplementary 
chronicle. 

The  influence  of  William’s  work  was  not  limited  to  its  value  as  a 
source  of  contemporary  information  for  later  historians.  Instead,  vari¬ 
ous  circumstances  suggest  that  it  became  early  and  widely  known.  It  is 
quite  impossible  to  determine  how  many  copies  were  made  under  his 
own  direction.  However,  the  resources  of  the  archiepiscopal  household, 
not  to  mention  the  additional  help  of  professional  scribes  with  whom 
Tyre  appears  to  have  been  well  provided,  would  certainly  have  per¬ 
mitted  the  completion  of  more  than  the  two  known  copies — his  own 
and  the  incomplete  one  which  he  had  circulated  in  1 1 82.'^®  None  of  the 

®®The  conjecture  that  William  circulated  some  copies  of  this  work  as  he  thought 
he  had  completed  it  in  1182  rests  not  only  upon  his  many  allusions  to  1182  as  the 
time  when  he  stopped  writing  and  the  statement  of  that  resolve  in  the  prologue  to 
the  twenty-third  book,  but  also  upon  the  performance  of  Ernoul  in  his  continuation 
of  William’s  history.  After  a  brief  summary  of  some  of  William’s  earlier  books, 
Ernoul  launches  upon  his  own  continuation  at  about  the  year  1180.  This  was  about 
the  point  reached  by  William  at  the  close  of  his  twenty-first  book,  much  of  which 


INTRODUCTION 


39 

nine  manuscript  copies  which  survive  has  been  dated  earlier  than  the 
thirteenth  century.^^  Therefore,  at  best,  they  must  all  be  regarded  only 
as  copies  of  the  first  version,  which  probably  reached  at  least  some 
readers  within  little  more  than  two  years  after  William’s  death. 

At  that  time.  Tyre  was  the  only  important  place  in  the  kingdom  of 
Jerusalem  still  remaining  to  the  Christians.  It  was,  therefore,  a  city 
of  refuge  for  all  the  Latins  who  had  escaped  Saladin’s  hands.  How 
many  of  these  whiled  away  their  idle  hours  in  the  archbishop’s  library 
can  not  be  stated,  but  those  who  did  must  have  had  the  opportunity 
of  reading,  or  even  of  copying,  William’s  history.  During  the  next 
four  years,  when  Tyre  was  the  chief  base  of  operations  for  the  siege 
of  Acre,  the  men  of  letters  who  accompanied  the  Third  Crusade  prob¬ 
ably  also  found  that  library  an  attractive  place  of  resort.  To  what  ex¬ 
tent  William’s  history  served  them  as  a  source  of  information,  a  point 
of  departure,  or  a  model  of  treatment  for  their  own  accounts  is  like¬ 
wise  indeterminable. 

Before  1192  at  least  one  English  chronicler  was  acquainted  with  the 
work,  though  not  with  the  author,  for  prior  to  that  date  he  announced 
his  intention  of  adding  his  own  account  of  later  events  in  the  East  to 
those  earlier  chronicles  which  William  had  written  so  eloquenter  et  ele- 
ganter,  Ernoul  possessed  a  copy — probably  the  earlier  version  which 
Balian  d’lbelin  had  received  in  1 182 — ^which  he  used  as  the  basis  of  the 
French  continuation  of  William  that  he  wrote,  later,  in  Cyprus.  At 
least  one  copy  was  circulating  in  France  early  in  the  thirteenth  century, 
there  to  become  the  basis  of  the  work  ascribed  to  Bernard  the  Treas¬ 
urer.  Jacques  de  Vitry  appears  to  have  found  a  copy  of  both  the  Gesta 


clearly  was  written  in  1182.  The  events  which  follow  in  the  next  book — the  mar¬ 
riage  of  Sibylla  and  Guy  de  Lusignan,  the  hostility  of  Baldwin  IV  toward  Raymond 
of  Tripoli,  and  the  election  of  Heraclius  as  patriarch, — were  not  of  a  nature  to 
afford  William  any  pleasure.  Balian  d’lbelin,  a  member  of  the  older  nobility  whose 
lands  lay  close  to  Tyre,  was  undoubtedly  one  of  ‘‘the  friends”  who  were  interested 
in  William’s  history.  It  was  this  Balian  whose  service  Ernoul  entered  as  a  young 
squire,  possibly  shortly  after  the  death  of  William.  At  any  rate,  Ernoul  was  serving 
as  Balian’s  squire  in  the  battle  of  Hattin  in  1187.  Nearly  a  quarter  of  a  century 
later,  Ernoul,  then  a  distinguished  jurist  of  Cyprus,  undertook  to  write  his  continu¬ 
ation  of  William’s  history.  A  number  of  his  statements,  including  the  story  of  Wil¬ 
liam’s  death  at  Rome,  are  so  clearly  contradicted  by  William’s  own  statements  (Pro¬ 
logue,  Books.  XXII  and  XXIII)  as  to  suggest  that  the  copy  of  William’s  history 
which  he  had  did  not  include  these  later  portions.  This  could  be  most  easily  explained 
on  the  assumption  that  Ernoul  possessed  or  used  a  copy  which  William  had  sent  to 
Balian  in  1182. 

Potthast,  Bibliotheca  historica  medii  aeviy  I,  560. 


INTRODUCTION 


40 

regum  and  the  Gesta  orientalium  frincifum  in  the  bookstores  of  Da- 
mietta  in  1218.  Pierre  des  Roches,  bishop  of  Winchester,  brought 
copies  of  both  these  works  from  the  Holy  Land  in  1231,  and  either 
these,  or  copies,  were  mentioned  by  Matthew  Paris  as  among  the  proud 
possessions  of  St.  Albans.^®  Both  Roger  Wendover  and  Matthew  Paris 
derived  their  accounts  of  crusading  history  before  the  Third  Crusade 
almost  entirely  from  William^s  history.^ ^  Perhaps  it  would  not  be  far 
amiss  to  say  that  thereafter  nearly  all  Latin  chroniclers  who  had  occa¬ 
sion  to  write  on  crusading  history  followed  the  same  practice  indirectly, 
when  not  directly.  William’s  interpretation  of  that  history  certainly 
became  the  commonly  accepted  version  in  England,  where  its  influence 
may  be  clearly  traced  as  late  as  in  the  standard  history  of  the  crusades 
by  Archer  and  Kingsford. 

Nor  was  William’s  later  influence  confined  to  the  clergy  and  to 
writers  of  history.  In  the  story  of  what  the  Christian  warriors  had  ac¬ 
complished  in  the  lands  beyond  the  seas,  the  whole  secular  world,  in¬ 
cluding  the  military  nobility  and  the  merchants,  took  a  naturally  deep 
interest.  Though  the  members  of  this  laity  had  been  increasing  in  liter¬ 
acy,  Latin  was  still  an  awkward,  if  not  an  unknown,  medium  to  most 
of  them.  French,  however,  which  was  rapidly  becoming  a  universal 
language  for  chivalry  and  commerce,  they  could  both  read  and  write. 
Probably  for  this  reason,  Villehardouin  and  Robert  de  Clari  composed 
their  accounts  of  the  Fourth  Crusade  in  that  tongue,  while  Ernoul, 
who  had  command  of  both  languages,  chose  also  to  write  his  continua¬ 
tion  of  William’s  history  in  French.  Similarly,  some  unknown  scribe, 

Marianne  Salloch  is  certain  that  the  anonymous  Latin  continuator  of  William’s 
history  was  at  w'ork  upon  his  task  as  early  as  1192.  It  is  also  probable  that  the  earli¬ 
est  French  translation  of  William’s  work  was  made  from  a  twelfth-century  manu¬ 
script  (see  L.  de  Mas  Latrie,  ‘‘Essai  de  classification  des  continuateurs  de  I’histoire 
des  croisades  de  Guillaume  de  Tyr,”  Bibliotheque  de  PE  cole  des  charteSy  5  th  ser.,  I, 
38—140).  It  is  not  clear  whether  Jacques  de  Vitry  acquired  his  copy  of  this  work 
of  William  at  Damietta  in  1218  or  only  the  copy  of  the  Gesta  orientalium  frincifum. 
It  is  certain  that  he  possessed  both  when  he  wrote  his  own  work.  If  he  did  obtain  it 
there,  it  was  probably  also  a  twelfth-century  copy.  The  copy  which  the  bishop  of 
Winchester  brought  back  from  the  Holy  Land  in  1231  may  have  been  made  in  the 
thirteenth  century.  Whether  Matthew  Paris  obtained  this  copy  as  a  permanent  pos¬ 
session  or  made  from  it  his  own  copy  for  St.  Albans  is  uncertain,  but  the  unusually 
beautiful  copy  of  William’s  work  in  the  British  Museum,  which  is  said  to  have  come 
from  St.  Albans,  is  dated  in  the  thirteenth  century  (Madden,  ed.,  Historia  minory 
I,  163,  note  4). 

H.  R.  Luard,  ed.,  Matthaei  Parisiensisy  monachi  Sancti  Albaniy  chronica  majoray 


INTRODUCTION 


41 

realizing  that  William’s  account  would  be  of  interest  to  this  increasing 
audience,  translated  it  at  an  early  date  into  a  French  version,  which 
soon  gained  wide  popularity.  Likewise,  when  Bernard  the  Treasurer 
published  his  continuation  in  1232,  he  accompanied  it  with  a  French 
translation  of  William’s  work-  and,  as  new  crusades  occurred,  further 

s 

additions  were  made  to  the  various  popular  versions.  This  process  con¬ 
tinued  to  the  very  end  of  the  thirteenth  century  and  was  carried  on  in 
both  the  East  and  the  West.  How  many  different  writers  participated 
in  these  continuations  has  not  yet  been  determined.  At  least  seventy-one 
manuscripts  containing  a  French  translation  of  William’s  history,  to¬ 
gether  with  more  or  less  extensive  continuations,  are  known  to  be  ex¬ 
tant.'*^  So  far,  L.  de  Mas  Latrie  (^^Essai  de  classification  des  continua- 
teurs  de  I’histoire  des  croisades  de  Guillaume  de  Tyr,”  Bibliotheque  de 
VEcole  des  chartesy  5th  ser.,  I  [1871],  38—140)  has  made  the  most 
serious  effort  to  determine  the  relationship  of  these  differing  versions 
both  to  each  other  and  to  William’s  original.  His  work,  however,  has 
served  mainly  to  reveal  the  magnitude  and  complexity  of  the  problem, 
which  still  awaits  a  definite  solution.  Meanwhile  we  are  still  uncertain 
whether  the  first  French  translation  served  all  these  continuators  or 
whether  several  of  them  made  their  own  independent  translations.  In 
either  case,  every  continuator  was  consciously  or  unconsciously  per¬ 
suaded  to  compose  his  own  addition  on  the  model  thus  provided. 

On  the  whole,  it  appears  that  the  accord  extended  to  William’s  work 
was  based  on  some  wider  appeal  than  its  value  as  a  source  of  informa¬ 
tion  for  later  historians.  It  is  significant  that  no  subsequent  chronicler 
seems  to  have  felt  called  upon  to  improve  the  quality  of  his  writing. 
Instead,  all  appear  to  have  been  content  to  supply  their  contributions 
anonymously.  This  practice  began  as  early  as  1192,  when  one  writer — 
probably  an  Englishman — undertook  to  add  his  account  of  recent 
events  to  those  which  William  had  already  reported^  and  it  continued 
as  long  as  crusading  armies  still  marched  to  the  East,  Even  in  the 
twentieth  century,  as  has  been  already  stated,  Pirie-Gordon  chose  out 
of  deference  to  William  to  write  an  anonymous  account  of  General 

If  the  translations  into  Italian,  Spanish,  English,  and  Norse  be  included,  the 
number  is  considerably  greater.  Riant,  who  made  the  count  in  1 8  8 1 ,  felt  convinced 
that  the  number  would  be  greatly  increased  if  private  collections  could  also  be  can¬ 
vassed.  The  illuminations  on  most  of  these  manuscripts  have  made  them  exceptionally 
attractive  to  collectors  (see  P,  Riant,  “Inventaire  sommaire  des  manuscrits  de  VEracles^^ 
in  Archives  Ae  VOrient  latifty  I,  247— 56). 


INTRODUCTION 


42 

Allenby^s  capture  of  Jerusalem.  And  Grousset,  whose  comprehensive 
history  of  the  crusades  appeared  in  1938,  twenty  years  after  Pirie- 
Gordon’s  account  and  more  than  seven  and  a  half  centuries  after  Wil- 
liam’Sj  frankly  accepted  not  only  William^s  plan  but  most  of  his  words 
as  well.  All  this  tribute  bears  testimony  to  the  fact  that,  in  a  sense,  Wil¬ 
liam  has  established  a  norm  for  the  writing  of  crusading  history. 

It  is  probable,  indeed,  that  his  influence  upon  later  historical  litera¬ 
ture  was  even  wider  than  has  been  suggested.  He  may  have  supplied 
to  later  historians  not  only  information  which  they  used,  but  also  some¬ 
thing  of  his  own  broader  conception  of  the  scope  of  history  and  of  the 
functions  of  the  historian.  His  tolerance,  his  sympathetic  interest  in  a 
varied  range  of  human  activities,  above  all  his  impartiality  and  his 
courage  in  applying  to  the  men  of  his  own  times,  whatever  their  station, 
the  same  standards  that  he  applied  to  other  men  and  other  times — all 
these  virtues  his  superior  historical  outlook  reflected.  It  would  be  inter¬ 
esting  to  know  to  what  extent  the  later  historians  who  reveal  some  of 
the  same  qualities  were  indebted  to  him. 

The  question  is  made  all  the  more  intriguing  in  the  use  of  William’s 
work  by  Matthew  Paris,  commonly  recognized  as  the  greatest  English 
historian  of  the  Middle  Ages.  In  the  manuscript  of  Matthew’s  Historia 
minor y  there  is  a  marginal  notation  that  the  writer  had  personally  ob¬ 
tained  the  copy  of  William’s  work  from  Bishop  Peter  of  Winchester, 
who  brought  it  from  the  Holy  Land  in  1231.  The  excerpts  which  Mat¬ 
thew  made  from  it  are  almost  identical  with  those  made  by  Roger 
Wendover,  historiographer  of  St.  Albans  to  1235.  Matthew,  who 
succeeded  Roger  in  that  position,  was  probably  already  acting  as  his 
understudy  during  the  previous  years.  It  is  not  improbable  that  Roger 
had  Matthew  prepare  those  excerpts  for  his  own  chronicle.  If  so,  it  is 
interesting  to  speculate  how  deeply  Matthew’s  own  conception  of  his¬ 
tory  may  have  been  modified  by  such  careful  study  of  William’s  history 
on  the  threshold  of  his  own  career.  Doubtless  part  of  the  difference 
between  his  own  general  outlook  and  that  of  Roger  Wendover  is  to 
be  ascribed  to  the  influence  of  William  of  Tyre.  Matthew’s  work  was 
to  serve  for  centuries  as  the  model  of  historical  composition  for  later 
English  historians,  if  not  also  for  the  historians  of  continental  Europe. 

It  is  always  difficult  to  establish  the  indebtedness  of  later  writers  to 
any  single  author  for  such  intangible  values  as  are  involved  in  a 
broader  conception  of  their  tasks.  In  the  case  of  William,  it  is  particu- 


INTRODUCTION 


43 

larly  hard  to  trace  this  relationshipj  for,  in  the  prolonged  process  of 
copying  and  recopying  the  French  version  of  his  work  to  accommodate 
the  later  continuations,  all  traces  of  his  original  authorship  gradually 
became  obliterated.  The  predominantly  lay  interest  served  by  the 
French  version  led,  even  in  the  first  translation,  to  the  omission  of 
much  of  William’s  ecclesiastical  matter.  In  the  later  versions  even  the 
personal  allusions  originally  preserved  in  the  third  person  disappeared. 
So  completely,  indeed,  were  all  traces  of  his  authorship  erased  by  the 
fourteenth  century  that  the  Dominican,  Franciscus  Pipinus  of  Bologna, 
retranslated  a  portion  of  the  work  into  Latin,  ascribing  it  to  Bernard 
the  Treasurer,  and  remaining  quite  unaware  that  it  had  been  originally 
written  in  Latin  far  superior  to  his  own.  It  is  all  the  more  astonishing, 
therefore,  that  Caxton,  who  translated  a  portion  of  William’s  history 
from  a  French  version  into  English,  correctly  ascribed  its  origin  to 
William."^ 

If  William’s  personal  reputation  thus  suffered  in  this  drift  toward 
anonymity,  the  total  effect  of  that  circumstance  was  undoubtedly  to 
expand  the  circle  of  his  influence.  For  in  promoting  his  own  work,  each 
anonymous  copyist  or  continuator  gave  added  circulation  to  William’s. 
In  fact,  the  number  of  manuscripts  of  the  various  continuations  still 
extant  would  imply  that  William’s  history  must  have  been  known  in 
nearly  every  castle  and  considerable  town  in  Europe.  As  perhaps  the 
most  widely  read  chronicle  in  the  later  Middle  Ages,  it  could  scarcely 
have  failed  to  help  shape  the  cultivated  lay  mind.  This  fact,  in  itself, 
must  have  provided  a  more  appreciative  public  for  those  later  his¬ 
torians  who  wrote  both  in  Latin  and  in  the  vernacular.  Doubtless  Join- 
ville  and  Froissart  were  familiar  with  it. 

It  was  probably  also  through  the  French  versions  that  William  ex¬ 
ercised  his  most  important  influence  on  literature.  Certainly,  as  he 
depicted  Peter  the  Hermit,  Godfrey  of  Bouillon,  Tancred,  Nureddin, 
and  Saladin,  so  do  these  figures  appear  in  literary  works  from  Dante’s 
Divine  Comedy  down  to  those  of  our  own  day.  His  history  continued 
to  furnish  material  and  inspiration  for  literature,  even  though,  in 
the  process  of  borrowing,  later  writers  lost  all  touch  with  the  original 

L.  A.  Muratori,  ed.,  Rerum  Italicarum  serif  tores  ab  anno  aerae  christianae  500 
ad  /500,  Vol.  IX.  It  is  no  less  remarkable  that  the  learned  editor  who  selected  this 
excerpt  from  Pipino’s  chronicle  should  have  been  unaware  of  William^s  Latin  origi¬ 
nal.  In  contrast,  Caxton’s  identification  of  the  authorship  of  only  a  portion  of  the 
account  which  he  obtained  from  its  French  translation  seems  truly  remarkable. 


INTRODUCTION 


44 

work.  Both  literature  and  history  are  therefore  the  richer  for  the  con¬ 
tributions  which  William  made  to  each  field.  That  he  has  not  received 
full  recognition  in  either  is  doubtless  due  to  the  prepossession  of  later 
scholars  with  national  concerns.  Historians  interested  in  the  crusades 
or  the  Near  East  of  the  twelfth  century  have  not  failed  to  appreciate 
his  greatness,  but  his  true  place  in  both  history  and  literature  remains 
still  to  be  appraised. 


EDITORIAL  PROBLEMS 

The  edition  of  William’s  history  used  as  the  basis  of  this  translation 
is  that  prepared  by  A.  Beugnot  and  A.  Le  Prevost  for  the  French 
Academy.  It  Is  still,  though  made  nearly  a  century  ago,  the  best  edition 
available.  A  critical  edition,  in  accord  with  the  best  modern  scholarship, 
has  not  as  yet  been  undertaken.  The  task  involves  not  only  the  collation 
of  all  existing  manuscripts  of  the  Latin  version,  but  also  a  careful  com¬ 
parison  with  the  various  Old  French  versions,  which  are  even  more 
numerous.  Mas  Latrie  has  indicated  the  magnitude  of  the  latter  prob¬ 
lem.  Neither  the  edition  of  the  Old  French  version  included  with  the 
Latin  by  Beugnot  and  Le  Prevost  nor  the  edition  by  P.  Paris  quite 
meets  the  needs  of  modern  scholarship.  Perhaps  the  preparation  of 
such  an  edition  of  William’s  work  will  require  the  collaboration  of 
several  scholars  and  years  of  time.  It  is,  however,  a  highly  desirable 
undertaking,  all  the  more  so  In  view  of  the  importance  of  William’s 
text  in  the  literature  of  the  crusades. 

The  present  translation  has  been  done  by  Mrs.  Babcock.  Her  aim 
was  to  present  to  English  readers  a  clear  account  of  William’s  story  of 
the  crusades  and  of  the  kingdom  of  Jerusalem.  To  accomplish  this 
end,  she  found  it  necessary  to  break  up  the  occasional  long  periodic 
sentences  of  the  original  and  to  paraphrase  some  of  William’s  idioms. 
While,  therefore,  this  translation  is  not  quite  literal,  it  has  neverthe¬ 
less  been  kept  as  close  to  the  original  as  the  demands  of  clarity  would 
permit.  The  style  of  any  writer  usually  suffers  in  translation,  and 
that  has  doubtless  happened  in  the  case  of  William.  Yet  anyone  familiar 
with  the  original  will  probably  be  pleasantly  surprised  to  find  how 
much  of  his  style  the  translator  has  managed  to  preserve. 

The  transliteration  of  proper  names,  whether  of  place  or  person, 
is  always  a  vexing  problem  in  dealing  with  medieval  sources.  In  the 
translation  of  William’s  history,  this  difficulty  has  been  many  times 


INTRODUCTION 


45 

multiplied  in  that  so  much  of  the  scene  is  laid  in  the  East.  There  many 
great  civilizations  have  flourished,  each  leaving  not  only  archaeological 
remains  but  also  active  traditions.  There  almost  any  city  or  landmark 
has  borne  in  succession  well-known  Hebrew,  Greek,  Roman,  and  Arabic 
names,  all  in  turn  modified  by  Latin  occupation.  Hither  came  pilgrims 
from  every  point  of  the  compass,  with  dialects  as  varied  as  the  regions 
from  which  they  sprang j  and  all  were  naturally  anxious  to  identify 
many  places  of  Scriptural  fame.  William,  whose  life  was  spent  in  the 
midst  of  all  this  confusion  and  whose  learning  gave  him  contact  with 
all  of  these  elements,  could  not  fail  to  reflect  this  varied  influence.  He, 
too,  indulged  occasionally  in  the  practice  of  identifying  places  of  Scrip¬ 
tural  and  other  ancient  interest,  in  such  cases  offering  two  or  more 
names  by  which  such  sites  were  formerly  known.  In  other  instances, 
he  uses  only  the  one  name— Hebrew,  Greek,  Arabic,  Latin,  or  French 
— ^by  which  the  place  in  question  was  most  commonly  known  in  his  day. 

The  translation  of  these  names  into  modern  terminology,  however, 
presents  additional  difficulties,  because  the  region  has  since  undergone 
further  vicissitudes  and  extended  periods  of  alien  occupation  with 
consequent  modification  of  place  names.  Then,  too,  must  be  added 
the  complications  introduced  by  modern  scholarship.  French  and  Ger¬ 
man  scholars  have  contributed  the  bulk  of  research  on  this  region  and 
period,  using  names  peculiar  to  their  own  languages.  Until  very  re¬ 
cently  English  scholars  have  been  but  little  interested  in  any  of  the 
crusades  except  the  third.  Consequently  there  is  no  standard  English 
form  for  most  of  the  names  either  of  place  or  of  person.  The  lack  of 
such  a  standard  evidently  accounts  for  the  use  of  the  Old  French 
terminology  by  the  British  authorities  in  Palestine  under  the  mandate. 
Their  map  of  Palestine  in  Biblical  times — a  period  in  which  long  Eng¬ 
lish  usage  has  established  accepted  spellings — ^was  issued  in  English. 
For  the  period  of  the  crusades,  however,  the  British  authorities  appear 
to  have  been  baffled  and  finally  decided  to  issue  their  map  with  the 
Old  French  names.^^  Inasmuch  as  these  names  were  not  standardized 
originally,  are  relatively  cumbersome  in  spelling,  and  seldom  occur 
in  conventional  atlases,  this  solution  of  the  problem  has  not  been  very 
helpful. 

Palestine  of  the  Crusades y  compiled,  drawn,  and  printed  under  the  direction  of 
F.  J.  Salmon,  Commissioner  of  Lands  and  Surveys,  Palestine,  from  information  sup¬ 
plied  by  the  Department  of  Antiquities  and  Pere  Abel  of  the  Ecole  biblique  et  arche- 
ologique  frangaise. 


46 


INTRODUCTION 


The  choice  of  names  for  the  purposes  of  this  translation  has,  there¬ 
fore,  of  necessity  been  arbitrary.  The  example  set  by  the  editors  of 
the  Cambridge  Medieval  History  in  their  map  of  “Latin  States  in 
Syria’’  has  seemed  eminently  sensible.^^  In  general,  in  the  case  of  the 
older  and  better-known  places,  the  names  used  in  Biblical  times  have 
been  adopted.  In  some  instances,  as  in  the  case  of  the  town  known 
variously  as  Neapolis,  Naples,  Naplouse,  Nabulus,  the  modern  form, 
Nablus,  seems  simpler  and  less  confusing  and  is  therefore  preferred. 
In  the  case  of  the  more  obscure  and  minor  places  where  the  identifica¬ 
tion  of  a  place  is  uncertain,  William’s  name  for  it  has  been  retained. 
In  a  few  instances,  particularly  of  fortresses  and  castles  which  figure 
only  in  the  history  of  this  period,  the  Old  French  names  are  used.  It 
is  hoped  that  this  practice  will  not  unduly  tax  the  ingenuity  of  the 
reader  who  wishes  to  locate  these  places  in  the  atlases.^^ 

The  names  of  persons  offer  no  less  perplexing  problems.  Family 
names  were  quite  uncommon  in  Western  Europe  .at  the  beginning  of 
the  twelfth  century.  In  fact,  the  use  of  these  cognomens  was  partly 
the  outgrowth  of  the  confusion  created  by  the  occurrence  of  so  many 
similar  or  identical  given  names  in  the  armies  of  the  crusades  or  among 
the  throngs  of  pilgrims  who  flocked  to  the  Holy  Land.  In  many  in¬ 
stances  the  surname  was  derived  from  the  place  of  origin  in  Europe, 
but  many  other  devices  for  specific  identification  occur.  Difficult  as 
was  the  problem  in  the  case  of  the  Latins  who  came  from  various  parts 
of  Western  Europe,  the  unfamiliar  names  of  the  Eastern  peoples  added 
greatly  to  the  difficulties  of  the  Latin  writers  who  tried  to  record  them. 
Most  of  these  chroniclers  learned  those  names  only  by  hearsay,  filtered 
through  a  variety  of  speech  and  accent,  and  did  the  best  they  could 
to  transliterate  the  resultant  impression.  Little  wonder,  then,  that  some 
of  these  names  appear  in  no  less  than  ten  different  forms  in  various 
accounts  or  even  that  the  same  chronicler  may  write  the  same  name  in 
several  different  ways  in  the  course  of  one  account.  T.  E.  Lawrence, 
the  almost  legendary  hero  of  the  World  War,  who  was  faced  with  the 

Cambridge  Medieval  History ^  vol.  V,  map  51. 

The  standard  historical  atlases  (e.g.,  W.  R.  Shepherd)  contain  the  more  im¬ 
portant  places  mentioned  as  pivotal  points  in  William’s  detailed  geographical  de¬ 
scriptions.  The  most  complete  and  accurate  maps  of  Syria  now  available  are  those 
of  R.  Dussaudj  Tofografhie  historique  de  la  Syrie  antique  et  medievale.  The  sketch 
maps  prepared  for  Grousset’s  history  are  based  upon  those  of  Dussaud  and  are  es¬ 
pecially  adapted  to  the  history  of  the  crusades.  The  map  of  the  Palestine  Survey  is 
useful  only  for  Palestine. 


INTRODUCTION 


47 

same  problem  in  chronicling  his  adventures  in  Arabia  and  Palestine, 
remained  quite  unabashed  when  his  publishers  found  him  guilty  of 
the  same  error. William,  who  derived  his  material  from  so  many 
different  sources,  written  and  oral,  Latin,  French,  Arabic,  and  Greek, 
and  whose  history  was  written  at  intervals  over  a  period  of  nearly 
twenty  years,  was  peculiarly  liable  to  such  errors.  Under  the  circum¬ 
stances  it  is  truly  remarkable  that  he  did  not  commit  many  more  than 
he  did.  La  Monte,  whose  researches  in  genealogy  of  crusading  leaders 
have  involved  extended  study  of  this  history,  has  paid  high  tribute 
^to  the  general  accuracy  of  William^s  information. 

For  the  reader’s  benefit,  the  editors  have  sought  to  use  the  same 
name  for  the  same  individual  throughout.  Very  few  of  the  persons 
mentioned  by  William  have  attained  a  standard  English  name.  Where 
they  have,  e.g.,  Godfrey  of  Bouillon  and  Saladin,  these  are  used  by 
preference.  The  largest  proportion  of  Western  names  in  William’s  ac¬ 
count  were  of  French  origin.  The  men  came  from  the  regions  of 
France  or  adjacent  to  it,  and  many  of  those  who  came  from  England 
or  the  Norman  states  of  Southern  Italy  still  bore  French  names.  Where 
the  individual  is  identified  by  the  place  of  his  origin  in  France,  the 
modern  French  form  of  the  place  and  the  French  preposition  have 
been  used  even  though  the  given  name,  if  common  in  the  English- 
speaking  world,  appears  in  English.  In  other  cases  the  French  form  is 
used  in  full.  The  English  preposition  is  arbitrarily  used  where  the 
individual  is  Identified  by  the  fief  which  he  holds  In  the  East.  Persons 
from  other  parts  of  Europe,  whose  places  of  origin  have  been  clearly 
identified,  are  cited  by  the  name  now  assigned  to  their  respective 
regions.  Latin  names  have  been  used  where  the  identification  of  the 
individual  is  uncertain  and  most  frequently  in  the  case  of  the  clergy. 
Occasionally  even  more  arbitrary  decisions  have  been  made  In  order 
to  avoid  confusion.  For  example,  Amalricus  is  a  name  borne  simul¬ 
taneously  by  a  king  of  Jerusalem  and  by  the  patriarch  of  Jerusalem, 
while  the  contemporary  patriarch  of  Antioch  has  the  closely  similar 
name  of  Aimericus.  All  of  these  are  mentioned  frequently.  The  king, 
therefore,  appears  as  Amaury,  the  patriarch  of  Antioch  as  Aimery,  and 
the  patriarch  of  Jerusalem  as  Amalrich. 

More  help  is  now  available  in  the  case  of  Eastern  names,  which 
proved  so  troublesome  to  twelfth-century  chroniclers.  Thanks  to  the 

T.  E.  Lawrence,  Revolt  in  the  Desert^  publisher’s  note,  pp.  xv-xvi. 


INTRODUCTION 


48 

efforts  of  Lane-Poole  and  to  the  editors  of  the  Encyclopedia  of  Islaniy 
a  high  degree  of  standardization  has  been  attained  in  the  transliteration 
of  Arabic,  Turkish,  Persian,  and  Egyptian  names.  Some  of  these  names, 
however,  appear  here  in  their  more  familiar  English  form,  as,  for 
example,  Saladin,  Nureddin.  The  sensibilities  of  the  Arabists  have 
been  respected  in  the  use  of  their  preferred  “Muhammad,”  which  is 
spelled  in  six  different  ways  in  the  Latin  text  of  William,  but  in  most 
cases  the  editors  have  had  to  content  themselves  with  an  approximation 
rather  than  an  attainment  of  the  desired  standard.  Fortunately,  the 
History  of  the  Arabs  by  Hitti,  which  contains  most  of  these  Eastern 
names  in  their  standardized  form,  is  now  generally  available. 

Terms  describing  institutions,  customs,  practices,  and  devices  no 
longer  used  or  peculiar  to  certain  localities  and  times  have  been  a 
source  of  perplexity*  Some  of  these — as,  for  example,  many  feudal 
terms — do  have  modern  equivalents  or  have  become  expressed  in 
distinctive  English  terminology.  Others,  such  as  the  honorific  titles 
used  by  the  Greeks  and  other  Eastern  peoples,  have  no  exact  English 
equivalents.  In  these  cases  it  has  seemed  best  to  adopt  the  term  used 
in  the  Latin  text. 

The  editors  have  sought  to  reproduce  the  text  of  William^s  history 
as  faithfully  as  the  process  of  translation  has  permitted.  His  divisions 
of  the  work,  which  he  appears  to  have  made  in  1184,  have  been  re¬ 
tained.  It  has,  however,  been  necessary  to  supply  captions  for  the 
books,  for  which  he  devised  no  titles.  The  captions  for  the  chapters 
have  been  retained  as  he  wrote  them.  Where  names  of  persons  or  places 
have  been  standardized  for  the  sake  of  clearness,  William’s  original 
spelling  of  them  has  usually  been  reproduced  at  the  first  mention.  At 
other  times,  his  form  has  been  indicated  in  the  notes.  His  revisions, 
repetitions,  and  occasional  inconsistencies  have  been  retained  as  they 
appear  in  the  text.  The  editorial  comment  offering  corrections  has  been 
reserved  for  the  notes.  His  errors,  chiefly  chronological,  have  likewise 
been  retained,  and  corrections  have  been  made  in  the  notes.  His  quota¬ 
tions  from  antecedent  literature.  Scriptural,  classical,  and  medieval, 
where  these  have  been  identified,  are  likewise  cited  in  the  notes.  Wil¬ 
liam’s  great  familiarity  with  Scripture  led  him  frequently  to  combine 
phrases  from  several  verses  as  suited  his  needs.  At  times,  too,  he  has 
paraphrased  verses.  These  instances,  when  identified,  have  been  men- 

S.  Lane-Poole,  tAohammedan  Dynasties y  'passim. 


INTRODUCTION 


49 

tioned  in  the  notes.  The  King  James  version,  more  familiar  to  most 
English  readers,  has  been  used  as  the  guide  in  this  translation.  In 
some  instances,  however,  where  William’s  quotation  is  either  missing 
from  the  King  James  version  or  translated  in  a  different  sense,  the 
Douay  version  has  been  followed.  These  exceptions  are  indicated  in 
the  notes.  It  has  been  the  aim  of  the  editors  to  keep  the  notes  down  to 
a  minimum  while  at  the  same  time  supplying  the  reader  with  sufficient 
information  to  clarify  the  text.  Doubtless  they  have  erred  on  one  side 
or  the  other  more  often  than  they  have  known.  For  the  help  of  the 
reader  who  desires  more  information,  however,  the  notes  include 
references  to  works  of  modern  scholarship  which  deal  with  the  various 
matters  more  fully.  Many  of  these  works  are  cited  in  abbreviated  form 
after  the  first  mention  in  each  book.  A  complete  list  of  works  cited  with 
their  full  titles  is  included  in  the  bibliography. 


A  History  of 

DEEDS  DONE  BEYOND 

THE  SEA 


PROLOGUE 


William^  hy  the  grace  of  God  unworthy  minister  of  the  Holy 
C hurch  at  Tyrey  to  the  venerable  brethren  in  Christ  to  whom 
the  f  resent  work  may  come:  Eternal  salvation  in  the  Lord?- 

That  it  is  an  arduous  task,  fraught  with  many  risks  and  perils,  to  write 
of  the  deeds  of  kings  no  wise  man  can  doubt.  To  say  nothing  of  the 
toil,  the  never-ending  application,  and  the  constant  vigilance  which 
works  of  this  nature  always  demand,  a  double  abyss  inevitably  yawns 
before  the  writer  of  history.  It  is  only  with  the  greatest  difficulty  that 
he  avoids  one  or  the  other,  for,  while  he  is  trying  to  escape  Charybdis, 
he  usually  falls  into  the  clutches  of  Scylla,  who,  surrounded  by  her 
dogs,  understands  equally  well  how  to  bring  about  disaster.  For  either 
he  will  kindle  the  anger  of  many  persons  against  him  while  he  is  in 
pursuit  of  the  actual  facts  of  achievements  j  or,  in  the  hope  of  rousing 
less  resentment,  he  will  be  silent  about  the  course  of  events,  wherein, 
obviously,  he  is  not  without  fault.  For  to  pass  over  the  actual  truth 
of  events  and  conceal  the  facts  intentionally  is  well  recognized  as  con¬ 
trary  to  the  duty  of  a  historian.  But  to  fail  in  one’s  duty  is  unques¬ 
tionably  a  fault,  if  indeed  duty  is  truly  defined  as  ^^the  fitting  con¬ 
duct  of  each  individual,  in  accordance  with  the  customs  and  institutions 
of  his.  country.”  On  the  other  hand,  to  trace  out  a  succession  of  events 
without  changing  them  or  deviating  from  the  rule  of  truth  is  a  course 
which  always  excites  wrath  j  for,  as  says  the  old  proverb,  “Compliance 
wins  friends  5  truth,  hatred.”  ^  As  a  result,  historians  either  fall  short 
of  the  duty  of  their  profession  by  showing  undue  deference,  or,  while 
eagerly  seeking  the  truth  of  a  matter,  they  must  needs  endure  hatred, 
of  which  truth  herself  is  the  mother.  Thus  all  too  commonly,  these 
two  courses  are  wont  to  be  opposed  to  one  another  and  to  become 
equally  troublesome  by  the  insistent  demands  which  they  make. 

In  the  words  of  our  Cicero,  “Truth  is  troublesome,  since  verily  from 
it  springs  hatred  which  is  poisonous  to  friendships  but  compliance  is 
even  more  disastrous,  for,  by  dealing  leniently  with  a  friend,  it  permits 

^  In  this,  his  final  revision,  William  is  addressing-  himself  clearly  to  a  reading  audi¬ 
ence.  Originally  he  addressed  his  work  to  King  Amaury  and  later  probably  to  King 
Baldwin  IV,  both  of  whom  preferred  to  listen  to  his  reading  of  it. 

^  Terence  Andria  i.  i.  41. 


PROLOGUE 


54 

him  to  rush  headlong  to  ruin”  ^ — a  sentiment  which  seems  to  reflect 
on  the  man  who,  in  defiance  of  the  obligations  of  duty,  suppresses  the 
real  facts  for  the  sake  of  being  obliging. 

As  for  those  who,  in  the  desire  to  flatter,  deliberately  weave  un¬ 
truths  into  their  record  of  history,  the  conduct  of  such  writers  is  looked 
upon  as  so  detestable  that  they  ought  not  to  be  regarded  as  belonging 
to  the  rank  of  historians.  For,  if  to  conceal  the  true  facts  about  achieve¬ 
ments  is  wrong  and  falls  far  short  of  a  writer’s  duty,  it  will  certainly 
be  regarded  as  a  much  more  serious  sin  to  mingle  untruth  with  truth 
and  to  hand  to  a  trusting  posterity  as  verity  that  which  is  essentially 
untrue. 

In  addition  to  these  risks,  the  writer  of  history  usually  meets  with 
an  equal  or  even  more  formidable  difficulty,  which  he  should  endeavor 
to  avoid  in  so  far  as  in  him  lies.  It  is,  namely,  that  the  lofty  dignity 
of  historical  events  may  suffer  loss  through  feeble  presentation  and 
lack  of  eloquence.  For  the  style  of  his  discourse  ought  to  be  on  the 
same  high  plane  as  are  the  deeds  which  he  is  relating.  Nor  should  the 
language  and  spirit  of  the  writer  fall  below  the  nobility  of  his  subject. 

It  is  greatly  to  be  feared,  therefore,  that  the  grandeur  of  the  theme 
may  be  impaired  by  faulty  handling  and  that  deeds  which  are  of  in¬ 
trinsic  value  and  importance  in  themselves  may  appear  insignificant 
and  trivial  through  fault  in  the  narration.  For,  as  the  distinguished 
orator  remarks  in  the  first  Tusculan  Disfutatioriy  “To  commit  one’s 
thoughts  to  writing  without  being  able  to  arrange  them  well,  present 
them  clearly,  or  attract  the  reader  by  any  charm  is  the  act  of  a  man 
who  foolishly  abuses  literature  and  his  own  leisure.”  ^ 

In  the  present  work  we  seem  to  have  fallen  into  manifold  dangers 
and  perplexities.  For,  as  the  series  of  events  seemed  to  require,  we 
have  included  in  this  study  on  which  we  are  now  engaged  many  details 
about  the  characters,  lives,  and  personal  traits  of  kings,  regardless  of 
whether  these  facts  were  commendable  or  open  to  criticism.  Possibly 
descendants  of  these  monarchs,  while  perusing  this  work,  may  find 
this  treatment  difficult  to  brook  and  be  angry  with  the  chronicler  beyond 
his  just  deserts.  They  will  regard  him  as  either  mendacious  or  jealous 
— ^both  of  which  charges,  as  God  lives,  we  have  endeavored  to  avoid 
as  we  would  a  pestilence. 

As  for  the  rest,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  we  have  rashly  under- 

®  Cicero  De  amic,  xxiv.  89.  ^  Cicero  Tusc.  disfut.  i.  iii.  6. 


PROLOGUE 


55 

taken  a  work  far  beyond  our  powers,  in  the  accomplishment  of  which 
our  language  is  entirely  inadequate  to  the  grandeur  of  the  subject. 
Nevertheless,  we  have  accomplished  something.  For  just  as  those 
who  are  inexperienced  in  painting  and  not  yet  admitted  to  the  secrets 
of  the  art  are  allowed  usually  mer.ely  to  trace  out  the  first  design 
of  a  picture  and  apply  the  rough  colors,  while  later  the  hand  of  a 
more  skilled  artist  adds,  with  nobler  colors,  the  finishing  touches  of 
beauty,  so  we,  ever  adhering  strictly  to  the  truth  from  which  we  have 
in  no  wise  departed,  have  laid,  at  the  expense  of  much  effort,  the 
foundations  upon  which  a  wiser  builder  by  his  excellent  treatment  may 
erect  a  more  finished  structure.''" 

In  view  of  the  many  dangerous  complications  and  pitfalls  attend¬ 
ing  this  task,  it  would  have  been  far  safer  if  I  had  remained  silent.  I 
ought  to  have  held  my  peace  and  forced  my  pen  to  rest.  But  an  insistent 
love  of  my  country  urges  me  on,  and  for  her,  if  the  needs  of  the 
time  demand,  a  man  of  loyal  instincts  is  bound  to  lay  down  his  life. 
She  spurs  me  on,  I  repeat,  and  with  that  authority  which  belongs  to 
her  imperiously  commands  that  those  things  which  have  been  accom¬ 
plished  by  her  during  the  course  of  almost  a  century  be  not  buried  in 
silence  and  allowed  to  fall  into  undeserved  oblivion.  On  the  contrary, 
she  bids  me  preserve  them  for  the  benefit  of  posterity  by  the  diligent 
use  of  my  pen.^ 

Accordingly  we  have  obeyed  her  behest  and  have  put  our  hand  to 
a  task  which  we  can  not  with  honor  refuse.  We  care  but  little  what 
the  criticism  of  posterity  concerning  us  may  be,  or  what  verdict  may 
be  given  as  to  our  feeble  style  of  writing  while  dealing  with  a  subject 
so  noble. 

We  have,  forsooth,  obeyed.  Would  that  the  result  might  prove  to 
be  as  effective  as  the  zeal  with  which  it  has  been  done!  Would  that 
it  might  be  as  worthy  of  praise  as  it  is  devoted!  Drawn  by  the  charm 

^  This  figure  of  speech  suggests  William’s  acquaintance  with  large-scale  painting, 
which  may  seem  strange  to  those  who  associate  such  painting  only  with  a  later  period 
in  European  history.  William,  however,  alludes  elsewhere  to  paintings,  notably  at 
Antioch  and  at  Constantinople,  and  Vasiliev  notes  an  instance  of  such  painting  by 
Byzantine  artists  in  Palestine  during  William’s  time  (A.  A.  Vasiliev,  A  History  of 
the  Byzantine  Empirey  II,  179). 

^  Such  an  expression  of  devotion  to  the  abstract  ideal  of  a  “nation”  is  very  unusual 
in  the  twelfth  century,  when  feudal  loyalty  to  person  still  prevailed  almost  every¬ 
where.  Only  the  church  had  commanded  such  abstract  loyalty.  This  passage,  there¬ 
fore,  marks  one  of  the  earliest  and  clearest  instances  of  the  expression  of  nationalism. 


PROLOGUE 


56 

of  our  native  soil,  disregarding  the  inadequacy  of  our  powers  and  the 
labor  involved,  not  relying  on  the  aid  of  genius  but  moved  by  genuine 
affection  and  sincere  love,  we  have  entered  upon  this  task. 

To  these  incentives  there  was  added  the  command  of  King  Amaury  I, 
of  illustrious  memory  and  distinguished  record  in  the  Lord  (may  his 
hallowed  soul  enjoy  rest! ).  This  command,  together  with  many  other 
urgent  reasons,  induced  me  to  undertake  this  work.  Moreover,  at  the 
order  of  the  king,  who  himself  furnished  the  necessary  Arabic  docu¬ 
ments,  we  have  also  written  another  history.'^  As  the  principal  source 
for  this  we  have  used  the  work  of  the  venerable  patriarch  of  Alexandria,, 
Seith,^  son  of  Patricius.  This  history  begins  from  the  time  of  the  false 
prophet  ^  Muhammad  and  extends  through  five  hundred  and  seventy 
years  even  to  the  present  year,  which  is  the  1 184th  of  the  Incarnation 
of  the  Lord.^^ 

For  the  present  work,  however,  we  have  no  written  source,  either 
in  Greek  or  Arabic,  to  guide  us.  Except  in  the  case  of  a  few  events 
which  we  ourselves  witnessed,  we  have  depended  upon  tradition  alone.^^ 
We  have  followed  the  order  of  events.  It  begins  with  the  departure 

^  For  the  fate  of  this  work  see  Introduction,  p.  26. 

®  Said  ibn-Batrick  in  the  Arabic  but  better  known  to  the  West  under  the  Latinized 
form  of  the  Greek  translation  of  the  name,  Eutychius,  son  of  Patricius.  He  was  born 
in  Egypt  in  879  and  became  famous  as  a  physician.  He  was  for  many  years  Greek 
patriarch  of  Alexandria.  His  history  of  the  Arabs,  which  extended  from  the  time  of 
Muhammad  up  to  937,  was  published  with  a  Latin  translation  by  Edward  Pocock 
{Cdontextio  gemmarumy  sive  Eutychii  annales), 

®  Literally,  ‘‘Seducer.’’ 

This  number  is  derived  from  the  Arabic  count  of  years.  That  William  should 
here  use  it  as  though  it  were  the  equivalent  of  the  Christian  year  1184  is  strange. 
As  a  round  number  580  would  have  been  better,  for  570  A.H.  extended  from  August  i, 
1174,  to  July  21,  1175,  whereas  580  A.H.  reached  from  April  13,  1184,  to  April  3, 
1185.  Elsewhere — several  times  in  fact — he  uses  570  as  equivalent  to  1182,  though 
on  one  occasion  (Book  XIX,  chap.  21)  he  employs  the  exact  equivalent  577  A.H. 
The  persistence  of  the  figure  570  in  his  mind,  therefore,  would  seem  to  indicate 
some  special  significance.  The  year  570  A.H.  was  the  year  of  the  death  of  King  Amaury 
at  whose  insistence  he  had  written  the  work.  It  is  possible  that  he  had  originally 
closed  his  history  of  the  Princes  of  the  Orient  at  that  date  and  thereafter  thought  of 
it  as  covering  a  span  of  five  hundred  and  seventy  years.  If,  as  there  is  every  reason 
to  believe,  he  worked  in  great  haste  toward  the  end  of  the  present  work,  this  habitual 
thought  might  have  recurred,  even  though  he  had  actually  added  to  the  other  work. 

This  is  the  last  date  mentioned  in  the  book.  It  is  cited  again  toward  the  end 
of  the  preface  to  Book  XXIII  where  the  phrase  “if  life  be  granted  to  us”  {vita  comite) 
also  occurs.  These  two  passages  were  proBably  the  last  which  he  wrote. 

This  statement  is  somewhat  misleading.  William  could  have  had  in  mind  only 
what  he  had  written  since  1180,  of  which  this  statement  was  entirely  true.  The  earlier 
portion  of  his  work,  written  before  1 1 74,  was  chiefly  derived  from  previous  chronicles, 
to  whose  use  he  several  times  refers. 


PROLOGUE 


57 

of  those  brave  men  and  leaders,  beloved  of  God,  who,  at  the  call  of 
the  Lord,  went  out  from  the  kingdoms  of  the  West  and  appropriated 
with  a  strong  hand  the  Land  of  Promise  and  practically  the  whole  of 
Syria.  Starting  from  that  point,  we  have  continued  the  history  with 
great  fidelity  over  a  period  of  eighty-four  years,  to  the  reign  of  Baldwin 
IV,  who  holds  the  seventh  place  in  the  list  of  kings,  if  Lord  Godfrey 
who  first  ruled  there  as  duke  be  included. In  order  that  anyone 
who  is  interested  may  be  more  fully  informed  about  the  condition  of 
the  oriental  lands,  we  have  set  down  first,^**  briefly  and  concisely,  at 
what  time  they  lay  under  the  yoke  of  servitude  and  how  intense  were 
the  sufferings  endured.  We  have  also  described  the  condition  of  the 
faithful,  who,  in  this  intermediary  period,  dwelt  among  the  infidels 
in  this  land,  and  then,  what  it  was  that,  after  so  long  a  period  of 
bondage,  roused  the  princes  of  the  kingdoms  of  the  West  to  assume 
the  responsibility  of  a  pilgrimage  for  the  purpose  of  liberating  their 
brethren. 

If  the  reader  will  consider  the  many  different  cares  which  rest  upon 
us,  he  will  realize  that  we  are  greatly  wearied  by  the  variety  of  these 
demands.  First,  we  have  great  responsibility  in  matters  relating  to 
the  famous  metropolis  of  Tyre,  which  rests  under  the  protection  of 
God,  and  over  which  we  have  been  chosen  to  preside,  not  because  of 
any  merit  of  our  own,  but  by  the  grace  of  God  alone.  Secondly,  we 
have  charge  also  of  the  business  of  the  lord  king,  in  whose  sacred 
palace  we  hold  the  dignity  of  chancellor.  Various  other  pressing  matters 
which  arise  from  time  to  time  also  demand  our  attention.^^  Taking 
these  facts  into  consideration,  the  reader  will  then  be  more  inclined 

The  practice  of  the  chancery  of  Jerusalem,  over  which  William  still  presided, 
was  to  reckon  the  years  of  the  kingdom  and  the  number  of  reigns  from  the  coronation 
of  Baldwin  I  in  iioo.  Godfrey,  who  was  the  first  ruler  of  Latin  Jerusalem  from 
August,  1099,  to  July,  1100,  had  refused  the  title  of  king,  preferring  the  more  pious 
title  of  “Defender  of  the  Holy  Sepulchre.”  This  is  an  excellent  illustration  of  the 
effect  of  William’s  belated  decision  to  correct  the  slight  upon  Godfrey’s  fame  in¬ 
volved  in  his  omission  from  the  list  of  kings.  The  habits  of  a  lifetime  of  reckoning 
otherwise  proved  too  stubborn  to  overcome  even  here.  After  correcting  the  place  of 
Baldwin  IV  in  the  list  of  the  kings  to  seventh  from  the  customary  sixth,  he  failed 
to  correct  the  years  of  the  kingdom,  which  should  then  have  been  eighty-five  instead 
of  the  customary  eighty-four.  See  Introduction  for  discussion  of  William’s  chronology. 

The  translation  does  not  bring,  out  the  full  meaning  of  William’s  fraemissimus 
which  indicates  that  the  inclusion  of  this  oriental  material  was  an  afterthought  and 
not  part  of  his  original  plan.  He  “prefaced”  or  “set  down  before”  what  he  had  al¬ 
ready  written,  the  summary  of  the  earlier  portion  of  his  Gesta  orientalium  'princtpum. 

For  the  account  of  his  life  and  activities  see  Introduction,  pp.  4—28. 


PROLOGUE 


58 

to  grant  us  indulgence  if  he  finds  in  the  present  work  anything  to  which 
he  may  only  too  justly  take  exception.  For  when  one  is  occupied  with 
many  varied  interests,  it  is  impossible  for  the  mind  to  respond  with 
the  same  vigor  and  give  careful  consideration  to  each  subject.  It  is  im¬ 
possible  to  devote  as  much  effort  to  each  individual  interest,  when 
the  attention  is  divided  in  this  way,  as  when  mental  energy  is  applied 
wholly  to  one  thing.  Under  such  circumstances  one  more  readily  de¬ 
serves  pardon. 

The  whole  work  has  been  divided  into  twenty-three  books  and 
each  of  these  into  a  certain  number  of  chapters,  that  the  reader  may 
more  easily  find  whatever  he  seeks  in  the  different  parts  of  the  narra¬ 
tive.  It  is  our  intention,  if  life  be  granted  us,  to  add  from  time  to  time 
to  what  has  already  been  written  those  events  of  our  own  era  which 
the  vicissitudes  of  the  future  may  bring  forth,  and  to  increase  the  num¬ 
ber  of  books  as  the  amount  of  subject  matter  may  warrant. 

We  are  convinced,  nor  are  we  wrong  in  the  belief,  that  this  work 
gives  plain  evidence  of  our  inexperience.  By  writing  it,  in  our  desire 
to  obey  the  dictates  of  affection,  we  have  betrayed  those  defects  which 
might  have  been  concealed  if  we  had  remained  silent.  Yet  we  prefer 
to  be  found  lacking  in  that  which  puffs  up  rather  than  in  that  which 
edifies.  For  many  who  have  come  to  the  wedding  feast  without  the 
former  have  been  deemed  worthy  to  sit  at  the  table  of  the  king,  but 
those  who  have  been  found  among  the  guests  without  the  latter  qualifi¬ 
cation  well  deserve  to  hear  the  words,  ^^How  earnest  thou  in  hither  not 
having  a  wedding  garment?’’  May  the  Lord,  who  alone  is  able  to 
avert  it,  in  His  gracious  mercy  prevent  this  fate  befalling  us! 

We  know  well,  however,  that  error  is  ever  wont  to  attend  a  multitude 
of  words,^®  and  that  the  tongue  of  a  poor  mortal  easily  incurs  guilt. 
In  a  spirit  of  brotherly  affection,  therefore,  we  invite  and  exhort  our 
reader  in  the  Lord,  that,  if  he  finds  a  real  point  to  criticize,  he  seize 
upon  it  without  hesitation,  with  true  kindness,  and,  by  correcting  our 
sin,  win  for  himself  the  reward  of  eternal  life.^^ 

^®This  was  written  in  1184.  The  first  part  of  the  preface  to  Book  XXIII  reveals 
a  different  state  of  mind  and  a  decision  to  end  his  writing  in  1182.  It  is  no,t  clear 
whether  he  made  the  division  into  books  then  or  at  the  later  date.  Possibly  some  of 
the  twenty-first  book,  certainly  all  thereafter,  were  written  after  1182. 

Mat.  22:12.  Prov.  10:  19. 

This  recognition  of  the  possibility — rather  the  certainty — of  error  in  his  work 
is  a  further  tribute  to  the  scholarly  quality  of  William’s  mind.  Not  infrequently 
medieval  writers,  like  Gregory  of  Tours,  invoked  anathema  on  anyone  who  should 
change  even  a  line  of  their  writing. 


PROLOGUE 


59 

May  he  also  remember  us  in  his  prayers  and  thereby  win  favor 
for  us  with  the  Lord,  that,  wherever  in  this  work  we  have  fallen  into 
error,  it  may  not  be  imputed  to  us  for  death.  May  the  Saviour  of  the 
world,  out  of  His  abounding  goodness  and  never-failing  mercy,  gra¬ 
ciously  pardon  us,  for  we,  wretched  and  unprofitable  servitor  in  His 
house,  are  accused  beyond  measure  by  our  own  conscience  and  with 
justice  dread  His  tribunal. 

THE  PROLOGUE  IS  ENDED 


/ 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  BEGINS 


CHRISTIANITY  AROUSED  FOR  THE  RELIEF 
OF  JERUSALEM:  PETER  THE  HERMIT  AND 

OTHER  BANDS  BEGIN  THE  MARCH 


I.  Relates  howy  in  the  time  of  the  Emferor  HeracliuSy  OmaVy 
son  of  Khattaby  the  third  leader  of  the  Arabs  after  Muham¬ 
mad  y  seized  all  Syria, 

In  the  time  of  the  Roman  Emperor  Heraclius/  according  to  ancient 
histories  and  Oriental  tradition,  the  pernicious  doctrines  of  Muham¬ 
mad  had  gained  a  firm  foothold  in  the  Orient.  This  first-born  son  of 
Satan  falsely  declared  that  he  was  a  prophet  sent  from  God  and  thereby 
led  astray  the  lands  of  the  East,  especially  Arabia.  The  poisonous  seed 
which  he  sowed  so  permeated  the  provinces  that  his  successors  •  em¬ 
ployed  sword  and  violence,  instead  of  preaching  and  exhortation,  to 
compel  the  people,  however  reluctant,  to  embrace  the  erroneous  tenets 
of  the  prophet. 

When  Heraclius  returned  in  triumph  from  Persia,  he  brought  back 
with  him  the  Cross  of  the  Lord.^  He  remained  for  a  time  in  Syria  and, 
while  there,  ordained  the  venerable  Modestus  bishop  of  Jerusalem. 
The  churches  in  the  Holy  City  had  been  overthrown  by  Chosroes,  the 
wicked  satrap  of  the  Persians.  Heraclius  authorized  Modestus  to  re¬ 
store  these  and  himself  arranged  for  the  necessary  expenditure. 

At  this  time,  Omar,^  son  of  Khattab,  the  third  in  succession  from 

^Heraclius,  emperor  6io— 640.  Muhammad  (571—632)  had  established  his  faith 
and  insured  its  success  when  he  returned  to  Mecca  in  a.d.  622.  This  year  was  later 
chosen  as  the  beginning  of  the  Muhammadan  era,  being  known  as  the  year  of  the 
Hejira,  or  in  its  abbreviated  form,  a.h.  Arabia  had  been  won  to  the  new  faith  before 
the  death  of  Muhammad,  and  the  expansion  of  Islam  beyond  its  borders  was  also 
foreshadowed. 

-  War  between  the  Byzantine  Empire  and  Persia  had  been  more  or  less  chronic. 
There  had  been  a  lull  in  the  war  when  Chosroes  II  (590—628)  came  to  the  throne. 
Maurice  befriended  the  young  king,  who  was  having  difficulty  with  rival  claim¬ 
ants.  William’s  account  of  the  renewal  of  war  is  substantially  correct.  During  the  early 
years  Chosroes  II  was  victorious.  He  took  Jerusalem  in  614.  The  relic  of  the  Cross 
was  returned  to  Heraclius  after  the  assassination  of  Chosroes  and  the  defeat  of  the 
Persians  in  628. 

®  Omar,  son  of  Catab  (Khattab)  was  the  second  of  the  so-called  orthodox  caliphs 
or  “successors”  who  followed  Muhammad.  These  were  Abu-bakr  632— 634,  Omar 
634—644,  Uthman  644—656,  and  Ali  656—661. 


PLANS  FOR  RELIEF  OF  JERUSALEM  6i 

Muhammad  and  the  heir  both  of  his  kingdom  and  his  false  doctrine, 
had  already  seized  Gaza,  a  famous  city  of  Palestine,  with  a  countless 
force  of  Arabs.  With  his  own  legions  and  a  vast  horde  whom  he  drew 
along  with  him,  he  then  invaded  the  territory  of  the  Damascenes  and 
seized  Damascus.  Heraclius  himself  was  at  this  time  in  Cilicia  awaiting 
the  turn  of  events. 

When  the  emperor  was  informed  that  the  Arabs,  swollen  with  pre¬ 
sumptuous  pride  because  of  their  vast  numbers,  were  invading  Roman 
territory  and  not  hesitating  to  claim  the  cities  thereof  as  their  own, 
he  realized  that  his  strength  was  not  sufficient  to  encounter  such  a 
host  and  to  curb  their  insolence.  He  preferred,  therefore,  to  retire  in 
safety  to  his  own  land  rather  than  to  trust  the  uncertain  vicissitudes  of 
war  with  unequal  forces.  But  the  afflicted  citizens  had  looked  to  him  for 
their  only  protection,  and,  on  his  departure,  the  violence  of  the  Arabs 
increased  to  such  an  extent  that  in  a  short  time  they  had  seized  all  the 
country  from  Laodicea  in  Syria  to  Egypt. 

In  another  work,^  we  have  explained  with  great  care  who  Muham¬ 
mad  was,  whence  he  sprang,  and  the  circumstances  which  led  him  to  the 
presumptuous  folly  of  claiming  to  be  a  prophet  sent  from  God.  His 
manner  of  life  and  conversation,  the  lands  over  which  he  ruled,  and 
the  duration  of  his  power  have  also  been  described.  Who  his  successors 
were  and  how  those  who  follow  him  in  the  same  error  spread  these 
wicked  doctrines  throughout  practically  the  whole  world  has  likewise 
been  set  forth,  as  will  appear  clearly  in  the  following  pages. 

2.  Of  the  circumstances  which  enabled  Omar  to  seize  the  East 
so  unexfectedly  ;  and  hoWy  when  he  came  to  J erusalemy  he 
ordered  the  Temple  of  the  Lord  to  be  rebuilt. 

Certain  circumstances  had  made  easy  this  conquest  of  the  Orient.  A 
few  years  before  it  took  place  the  Chosroes  just  mentioned  invaded 
Syria  by  force  of  arms.  Chosroes  destroyed  cities  and  burned  the  sur¬ 
rounding  places  3  he  wrecked  churches  and  imprisoned  the  people. 
Then  he  took  the  Holy  City,  put  to  the  sword  thirty-six  thousand  of 
its  citizens,  and  carried  away  with  him  to  Persia  the  Cross  of  the  Lord. 

^  His  Gesta  ortentalium  f?‘incifu7n  (see  Introduction,  pp.  26—27).  Pt*utz  conjec¬ 
tures  that  this  paragraph  contains  the  titles  of  early  chapters  of  that  work.  As  William 
himself  indicates  in  his  prolog'ue,  he  drew  from  this  other  work  to  provide  an  intro¬ 
duction  for  readers  of  his  present  work.  It  is  probable  that  the  first  seven  chapters 
of  this  book  were  taken,  in  abbreviated  form,  from  that  other  work. 


62  PLANS  FOR  RELIEF  OF  JERUSALEM 

He  likewise  led  away  with  him  as  captives  Zacharias,®  the  bishop  of 
Jerusalem,  and  the  surviving  inhabitants  of  the  city  and  the  surround¬ 
ing  country. 

This  powerful  Persian  potentate  had  married  Mary,  a  daughter  of 
the  Emperor  Maurice.  The  latter  was  closely  bound  in  the  ties  of 
friendship  to  the  blessed  Pope  Gregory,®  who  received  one  of  the 
emperor’s  children  at  the  sacred  font.  For  his  wife’s  sake,  Chosroes 
received  baptism  and  maintained  an  alliance  of  friendship  with  the 
Romans  as  long  as  Maurice  lived. 

At  length  the  emperor  was  treacherously  slain  by  Phocas  Caesar,'^ 
who  succeeded  him  on  the  throne.  Thereupon,  the  king  [Chosroes] 
invaded  the  empire  with  an  armed  force  and  laid  waste  the  lands  be¬ 
longing  to  it.  For  he  abhorred  the  perfidy  of  those  who  had  received 
as  ruler  a  wicked  man  even  yet  stained  with  the  blood  of  his  lord.  He 
looked  upon  them  as  sharers  in  a  secret  understanding  and  confederates 
in  the  same  guilt.  His  wife,  too,  spurred  him  on  in  his  desire  to  avenge 
her  father.  After  he  had  conquered  the  other  lands  which  were  under 
Roman  domination,  he  took  Syria  last  of  all,  as  has  been  stated,  and 
either  killed  the  people  or  led  them  away  with  him  to  Persia. 

Hence,  when  the  Arabs  entered  the  land,  they  found  it  abandoned 
and  immediately  took  advantage  of  the  unexpected  opportunity  to 
bring  it  under  their  power.  They  visited  the  same  fate  upon  Jerusalem,® 
the  city  beloved  of  God,  but  they  spared  the  few  inhabitants  who  still 
remained  there,  in  order  that  these  might  serve  them  by  paying  heavy 
tribute.  They  allowed  the  conquered  people,  however,  to  restore  the 
ruined  churches,  to  have  their  own  bishop,  and  to  follow  the  Christian 
religion  without  restraint. 

During  Omar’s  stay  in  Jerusalem,  he  made  careful  inquiries  of  the 
citizens  and  above  all  of  the  venerable  Bishop  Sophronius,  the  successor 


Zacharias,  the  predecessor  of  Modestus,  was  carried  off  captive  by  Chosroes  in 
614  and  held  until  628.  He  died  in  631.  It  is  not  certain  that  Modestus,  whom  he 
desig'nated  to  look  after  Jerusalem,  ever  held  the  title  of  patriarch.  Sophronius  suc¬ 
ceeded  in  634  (M.  Le  Quien,  Or'tens  ChristianuSy  III,  cols.  249—64). 

^  Gregory  the  Great,  who  was  pope  from  590  to  604.  Pope  Pelagius  II  (579-590) 
had  sent  Gregory  as  one  of  his  representatives  to  the  imperial  court  at  Constantinople. 
He  was  there  when  Maurice  became  emperor  in  582.  Maurice,  who  ruled  until  602, 
was  greatly  pleased  when  Gregory  was  chosen  pope  and  refused  Gregory’s  plea  not 
to  confirm  the  election. 

I 

^  Phocas,  emperor  602— 610. 

®  The  Arabs  occupied  Jerusalem  sometime  after  the  battle  of  Yarmuk  in  636, 
probably  in  637. 


PLANS  FOR  RELIEF  OF  JERUSALEM  63 

of  Modestus  of  pious  memory,  now  deceased,  about  the  site  of  the 
Temple  of  the  Lord.  Titus,  the  Roman  prince,  is  said  to  have  destroyed 
this  with  the  city  itself.  They  showed  him  the  place  and  pointed  out 
the  few  remaining  traces  of  the  ancient  pile.  Thereupon  he  directed 
that  it  be  rebuilt  and  set  aside  a  sum  sufficient  to  defray  the  costs.  He 
had  workmen  summoned  and  assembled  building  material  of  various 
kinds  of  marble  and  woods  as  suited  his  pleasure.  Within  a  short  time, 
the  building  was  successfully  finished  according  to  the  plan  which  he 
had  in  mind,  just  as  one  may  see  it  today  in  Jerusalem. 

He  then  endowed  it  with  numerous  rich  possessions.  The  revenues 
derived  from  this  source  were  to  furnish  the  means  for  keeping  it 
in  repair,  renewing  old  parts,  and  maintaining  ever-burning  lamps 
through  the  care  of  those  who  served  in  the  temple.  But  as  nearly 
everyone  is  familiar  with  the  form  and  exquisite  workmanship  of  this 
edifice,  it  is  not  within  the  province  of  the  present  work  to  consider 
them.  Both  within  and  without  this  building  there  are  monuments 
of  great  antiquity,  with  Arabic  inscriptions  in  mosaic  work  which  are 
believed  to  be  from  this  period.  On  these,  the  name  of  the  builder, 
the  cost,  and  the  dates,  both  of  the  beginning  and  the  completion  of 
the  structure,  are  plainly  set  forth.^ 

3.  Of  hotv  long  Syridy  under  various  masters y  endured  the  yoke 
of  servitude  1  and  of  how  useful  to  the  Christians  who  lived 
under  the  sway  of  the  infidels  was  the  friendship  which  the 
magnificent  Emperor  Charles  enjoyed  with  Harun-al- 
Rashid y  king  of  Persia?-^ 

Thus  the  Holy  City,  beloved  of  God,  was  subjected  to  the  domination 
of  unbelieving  enemies,  because  of  our  sins.  During  four  hundred  and 
ninety  years  it  endured  the  yoke  of  undeserved  bondage  and  con- 

®  The  reading’  of  this  inscription,  according  to  Hitti,  Is  itself  evidence  of  unusual 
knowledge  of  Arabic.  There  is  reason  for  William’s  doubt  about  the  date  of  the  in¬ 
scription.  The  mosque  itself  was  built  by  Abd-al-Malik  in  691,  and  the  inscription 
■was  retouched  by  the  Abbassid  Caliph,  Mahnun,  813—833,  who  substituted  his  own 
name  for  that  of  the  builder.  The  legend  that  this  dome  of  the  Rock  w'as  built  by 
Omar  is  evidently  of  early  origin  (P.  K.  Hitti,  History  of  the  ArabSy  p.  220). 

The  relations  of  Charlemagne  and  Harun-al-Rashid  rapidly  developed  into  a 
legend  of  Charlemagne’s  protectorate  of  the  Christians  in  the  Holy  Land  (see  E.  Joran- 
son,  “The  Alleged  Frankish  Protectorate  in  Palestine,”  American  Historical  Revie^Vj 
XXXII  [1927],  241-61). 

Another  instance  of  William’s  use  of  the  Arabic  calendar.  The  sum,  expressed 
in  round  numbers  for  490  A.H.,  is  equivalent  to  a.d.  1096  and  does  not  exactly  de¬ 
scribe  the  interval  between  A.D.  637  and  1099  or  even  that  between  614  and  1099. 


64  PLANS  FOR  RELIEF  OF  JERUSALEM 

tinual  hardship,  though  the  conditions  of  that  servitude  varied.  With 
the  frequent  shifting  of  events,  it  often  changed  masters,  and,  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  character  of  each  prince,  it  experienced  both  bright  and  cloudy 
intervals.  Its  condition,  like  that  of  a  sick  man,  grew  better  or  worse 
in  accordance  with  the  exigencies  of  the  times,  yet  full  recovery  was 
impossible  while  it  was  oppressed  by  the  despotic  power  of  infidel 
princes  and  of  a  nation  without  God.  Nevertheless,  peace  was  vouch¬ 
safed  to  the  people  of  God  in  the  days  of  that  rare  and  praiseworthy 
monarch,  Harun  surnamed  Raschid.  He  ruled  over  the  entire  East, 
and  even  to  this  day  his  liberality,  unusual  courtesy,  and  most  excellent 
character  are  the  subject  of  deep  admiration  and  undying  praise  in  the 
Orient. 

The  good  will  between  Harun  and  the  Christians  rested  on  an  ad¬ 
mirable  treaty  which  the  devout  Emperor  Charles,  of  immortal  mem¬ 
ory,  brought  about  through  the  work  of  frequent  envoys  who  went 
back  and  forth  between  them.  The  gracious  favor  of  that  potentate 
was  a  source  of  much  comfort  to  the  faithful,  so  that  they  seemed  to 
be  living  under  the  rule  of  the  Emperor  Charles  rather  than  under 
that  of  Harun.  In  the  life  of  that  famous  monarch,  we  read  as  follows: 
‘^With  Harun,  king  of  the  Persians,  who  ruled  over  almost  the  entire 
world  except  India,  his  relations  were  so  harmonious  that  the  prince 
preferred  his  favor  above  the  friendship  of  all  the  kings  and  potentates 
of  the  earth  and  felt  that  to  him  alone  honor  and  magnificence  were 
due.  When  the  ambassadors  sent  by  Charles  to  visit  the  Most  Holy 
Sepulchre  and  the  place  of  the  resurrection  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour 
came  to  him  with  gifts  and  made  known  their  master^s  wishes,  he  not 
only  granted  what  they  asked  but  gave  them  possession  of  that  sacred 
and  blessed  place,  that  it  might  be  regarded  as  placed  under  the  power 
of  Charles.  When  they  returned,  he  sent  his  own  ambassadors  with 
them  as  the  bearers  of  magnificent  gifts  for  the  king:  silken  stuffs, 
spices,  and  other  rich  products  of  Eastern  lands.  A  few  years  before 
this,  he  had  sent,  at  Charles’  request,  an  elephant,  the  only  one  which 
he  had  at  the  time.” 

Charles  sent  frequent  and  liberal  relief  to  the  faithful  who  were 
living  at  Jerusalem  under  the  power  of  the  infidels  and  likewise  ex¬ 
tended  the  work  of  piety  to  those  who  dwelt  in  Egypt  and  Africa  under 

Eginhard,  Vita  Caroli  Magnij  chap,  xvi  in  Monumenta  Germaniae  historica^ 
Serif toreSy  11,  451,  H,  Pertz,  ed.  Cf.  translations  by  S.  E.  Turner  or  A.  J.  Grant. 


PLANS  FOR  RELIEF  OF  JERUSALEM  65 

the  ungodly  Saracens.  In  the  account  of  his  life,  we  read  as  follows: 
^^Since  he  was  very  devout,  he  used  to  send  money  to  provide  for  the 
poor,  with  a  free  generosity  which  the  Greeks  call  eleemosyna;  for 
in  his  deep  sympathy  with  their  needs,  he  took  that  task  upon  him¬ 
self.  He  did  this,  not  only  in  his  own  kingdom,  but  wherever  he  found 
Christians  living  in  poverty,  even  across  the  sea,  in  Syria,  Egypt,  Africa, 
Jerusalem,  Alexandria,  and  Carthage.  The  particular  reason  why  he 
desired  the  friendship  of  kings  was  that  he  might  afford  relief  and 
assistance  to  the  Christians  living  under  their  power.’^ 

If  the  reader  desires  to  know  how  often  and  how  intensely  Jeru¬ 
salem,  worshipper  of  God,  and  the  surrounding  country  as  well,  suf¬ 
fered  under  the  frequent  changes  of  conditions,  circumstances,  and 
rulers,  which  she  experienced  during  this  time  of  transition,  let  him 
read  the  History  of  the  Deeds  of  the  Princes  of  the  Orient.  In  that 
work,  I  have  compiled  with  much  labor  the  chronological  record  of 
the  events  of  five  hundred  and  seventy  years,  from  the  time  of  the 
false  prophet  Muhammad  to  the  present,  which  is  for  us  the  year  1182 
of  the  Incarnation  of  the  Lord.^^ 

4.  How  the  Holy  City  came  into  the  fower  of  the  califh  of 
Egypt  and  howy  under  the  rule  of  the  wicked  Hakhuy  the 
yoke  of  servitude  became  even  more  intolerable  to  the  faith^ 
ful;  also  concerning  the  destruction  of  the  church  at  Jeru¬ 
salem. 

There  existed  at  this  time  a  persistent  strife  between  the  Egyptians 
and  the  Persians,  induced  by  bitter  rivalry  over  the  supremacy.  The 
fact  that  these  nations  held  diametrically  opposed  doctrines  contributed 
largely  to  the  feeling  of  hatred  between  them.  Even  at  the  present 
day,^^  this  difference  of  religious  views  is  the  subject  of  such  con¬ 
troversy  between  the  two  nations  that  they  hold  no  communication, 
for  each  looks  upon  the  other  as  sacrilegious.  This  feeling  is  carried  so 
far  that  they  wish  to  be  different  even  in  name.  Hence,  those  who 
follow  the  tenets  of  the  East  are  called  in  their  own  tongue  Sunnites, 

Ibid,y  chap,  xxvii. 

Arabic  reckoning"  in  round  numbers.  A.D.  1182  =  577  A.H. 

The  Fatimid  Caliphate  was  brought  to  an  end  by  Saladin  in  1171.  The  use  of 
this  expression  here  suggests  that  William  had  written  this  during  his  first  period  of 
composition,  before  1 1 74,  and  took  it  over  from  his  other  work  without  making  the 
necessary  correction.  William  does  describe  the  overthrow  of  the  Fatimid  Caliphate 
(Book  XX,  chap.  1 1 ) . 


66  PLANS  FOR  RELIEF  OF  JERUSALEM 

while  those  who  prefer  the  tradition  of  Egypt,  which  apparently  in¬ 
clines  more  toward  our  own  faith,  are  known  as  Shiites.  But  to  explain 
the  difference  of  error  between  them  does  not  lie  within  the  province 
of  this  work.^® 

As  the  kingdom  of  Egypt  gradually  became  more  powerful,  it  seized 
the  provinces  and  countries  as  far  as  Antioch  3  and  the  Holy  City, 
among  others,  fell  under  its  sway,  subject  to  the  same  laws.^"^  Under 
this  headship,  the  troubles  of  the  Christians  were  slightly  relieved, 
just  as  prisoners  are  ofttimes  allowed  to  enjoy  some  measure  of  relaxa¬ 
tion.  Finally,  however,  as  a  just  punishment  for  the  wickedness  of 
man,  Hakim  became  caliph  of  that  realm.  The  sins  of  this  ruler  so 
far  exceeded  those  of  his  predecessors  and  successors  alike  that  his 
name  has  become  proverbial  to  later  generations  who  read  of  his  mad¬ 
ness.  This  man  was  so  notorious  for  every  form  of  impiety  and  wicked¬ 
ness  that  his  life,  hateful  in  the  sight  of  both  God  and  man,  deserves 
a  special  treatise.^®  Conspicuous  among  the  many  other  impious  acts 
for  which  he  was  responsible  was  that  of  the  total  demolition  of  the 
church  of  the  Lord’s  Resurrection.  This  church  was  originally  built 
by  the  venerable  Maximus,  bishop  of  Jerusalem,  at  the  command  of 
the  Emperor  Constantine,  and  it  was  later  restored  by  the  revered 
Modestus,  in  the  time  of  Heraclius. 

Yaruk,  the  governor  of  Ramlah,  one  of  Hakim’s  officers,  took  it 
upon  himself  to  carry  out  the  imperial  command  and  immediately 
razed  the  edifice  to  the  very  ground. The  head  of  that  church  at 
the  time  was  the  venerable  Orestus,  a  maternal  uncle  of  that  same 
wicked  ruler.  Report  says  that  the  caliph  used  this  extreme  measure 
to  prove  to  the  infidels  that  he  was  loyal  to  them.  For  the  name  of 
Christian  was  used  as  a  reproach  against  him,  because  he  was  born 
of  a  Christian  mother.-*^  Hence,  desiring  to  clear  himself  of  that  charge. 

For  a  brief  discussion  of  these  sects  see  Hitti,  Arabs,  pp.  439—449  ei  fasshn. 

The  Fatimid  Caliphate  became  established  at  Cairo,  which  was  built  to  serve 
as  its  capital  in  973.  The  expansion  into  Syria  began  shortly  thereafter. 

Modern  historians  find  some  good  mingled  with  much  malice  in  the  record  of 
this  strange  creature  who  was  caliph  from  996  to  1021  (see  Gaston  Wiet,  U^gypte 
arabe  de  la  conquete  arahe  d  la  conquete  ottofnane,  6^  2—1  ^  i  y  de  Vere  clirHienne, 
IV,  198—214). 

The  destruction  of  the  church  of  the  Holy  Sepulchre  was  begun  in  1009  and 
became  the  signal  for  the  destruction  not  only  of  Christian  churches,  but  also  of 
Jewish  synagogues  throughout  Syria. 

The  practice  of  polygamy,  sanctioned  by  Islam,  included  not  only  legitimate 
wives  but  concubines  of  slave  status  as  well.  Children  born  of  either  were  regarded 


PLANS  FOR  RELIEF  OF  JERUSALEM  67 

he  ventured  to  perpetrate  that  crime.  In  the  belief  that  thereafter  no 
reproaches  could  be  cast  against  his  person  and  that  his  rivals  would 
have  opportunity  for  no  further  malicious  attacks,  he  had  overthrown 
the  cradle  of  the  Catholic  faith,  the  fount  from  which  the  Christian 
religion  flows. 

5.  Concerning  the  conditions  which  f revailed  at  that  time 
among  the  true  believers  living  in  the  midst  of  the  infidels. 

From  that  time  the  condition  of  the  Christians  in  Jerusalem  became 
far  worse,  not  alone  because  of  the  righteous  sorrow  which  they  felt 
over  the  destruction  of  the  church  of  the  Holy  Resurrection,  but  also 
on  account  of  the  increased  burdens  arising  from  manifold  services. 
Enormous  tribute  and  taxes  were  demanded  from  them,  contrary  to 
custom  and  to  the  privileges  granted  by  their  former  lords.  In  addition, 
they  were  forbidden  to  observe  the  religious  rites  which,  under  their 
various  masters,  they  had  been  free  to  practice,  both  openly  and  in 
secret.  The  more  solemn  the  day,  the  more  strictly  were  they  forced 
to  remain  within  their  own  houses.  They  dared  not  come  forth  in 
public.  Even  home,  however,  proved  no  safe  refuge  for  them.  The 
enemy  threw  stones  and  filth  and  made  fierce  attacks  upon  them.  On 
their  solemn  feast  days,  especially,  they  were  annoyed  beyond  measure. 
For  the  slightest  trivial  word,  at  the  demand  of  any  chance  accuser, 
they  were  dragged  away  to  punishment  and  torture,  without  due 
process  of  law.  Their  goods  were  confiscated,  their  possessions  stolen. 
Their  sons  and  daughters  were  snatched  away  from  home  and  forced, 
either  by  the  lash  or  by  soft  words  and  promises,  to  forswear  their 
faith  or  to  suffer  on  the  gibbet. 

He  who  was  at  the  time  their  patriarch  at  first  bore  these  injuries 
and  insults,  then  exhorted  his  people  both  secretly  and  openly  to  show 
forbearance  j  he  promised  that,  in  return  for  the  temporal  evils  which 
they  were  suffering,  they  should  have  crowns  in  the  life  hereafter. 
Inspired  by  his  words  and  example,  they  comforted  one  another  with 
mutual  affection  and,  for  Christ’s  sake,  scorned  temporary  evils. 

It  would  take  far  too  long  to  speak  of  individual  cases  or  to  tell  of 
the  bodily  tortures  which  these  servants  of  God  endured  that  they 


as  legitimate,  for  genealogy  was  regularly  traced  through  the  father.  Not  infre¬ 
quently,  therefore,  children  of  slave  mothers,  of  Christian,  Jewish,  or  other  faiths, 
attained  to  high  position,  often  with  consequences  of  the  kind  here  mentioned. 


68  PLANS  FOR  RELIEF  OF  JERUSALEM 

might  become  heirs  in  the  house  of  the  Lord  and  emulate  the  laws 
of  their  Father.  I  will  give  one  example  out  of  many,  however,  that 
your  grace  may  understand  for  what  trifling  reasons  they  were 
hurried  off  to  death. 

There  was  a  certain  infidel  living  in  the  city,  a  treacherous  and 
wicked  man,  who  persecuted  our  people  with  insatiable  hatred.  This 
man  was  determined  to  devise  some  scheme  that  would  bring  about 
their  destruction.  One  day,  he  stealthily  threw  the  carcass  of  a  dog 
into  the  temple  court,  a  place  which  the  custodians — and  indeed  the 
whole  city  as  well — were  most  careful  to  keep  scrupulously  clean. 
Worshippers  who  came  to  the  temple  to  pray  the  next  morning  found 
the  mouldering  body  of  the  unclean  animal.  Almost  frantic,  they  at 
once  roused  the  whole  city  with  their  cries.  The  populace  quickly  ran 
to  the  temple,  and  all  agreed  that  without  question  the  Christians  were 
responsible  for  the  act.  Need  more  be  said?  Death  was  decreed  for  all 
Christians,  since  it  was  judged  that  by  death  alone  could  they  atone 
for  such  an  act  of  sacrilege.  The  faithful,  in  full  assurance  of  their 
innocence,  prepared  to  suffer  death  for  Christ’s  sake.  As  the  execu¬ 
tioners,  with  swords  unsheathed,  were  about  to  carry  out  their  orders, 
however,  a  young  man,  filled  with  the  spirit,  came  forward  and  offered 
himself  as  the  sacrifice.  ^Tt  would  be  most  disastrous,  O  brethren,”  he 
said,  ^^that  the  entire  church  should  die  in  this  way.  Far  better  were 
it  that  one  man  should  give  his  life  for  the  people,  that  the  whole 
Christian  race  may  not  perish.  Promise  me  that  annually  you  will 
reverently  honor  my  memory  and  that  the  respect  and  honor  due  to 
my  family  shall  be  maintained  forever.  On  these  terms,  at  the  com¬ 
mand  of  God,  I  will  deliver  you  from  this  massacre.”  The  Christians 
heard  his  words  with  great  joy  and  readily  granted  what  he  asked. 
They  promised  that,  on  the  day  of  palm  branches,  in  perpetual  mem¬ 
ory  of  him,  those  of  his  lineage  should  bear  into  the  city,  in  solemn 
procession,  the  olive  which  signifies  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

The  young  man  then  gave  himself  up  to  the  chief  men  of  Jerusalem 
and  declared  that  he  was  the  criminal.  In  this  way  he  established  the 
innocence  of  the  other  Christians,  for,  when  the  judges  heard  his 

vestra  dilectioy  “your  grace,”  a  term  of  direct  address  used  in  speech  or  letter. 
The  use  of  this  expression  has  been  interpreted  as  a  direct  reference  to  King  Amaury 
and  therefore  written  before  the  latter^s  death  in  1174.  It  was  probably  here  taken 
from  the  Gesta  orientalmm  frincifum  and,  if  so,  helps  to  indicate  how  far  William 
had  progressed  in  this  work  before  the  death  of  Amaury. 


PLANS  FOR  RELIEF  OF  JERUSALEM  69 

Story,  they  absolved  the  rest  and  put  him  to  the  sword.  Thus  he  laid 
down  his  life  for  the  brethren  and,  with  pious  resignation,  met  death, 
that  most  blessed  sleep,  confident  that  he  had  acquired  grace  in  the 
sight  of  the  Lord. 

6.  How  the  excellent  Daher  succeeded  his  wicked  jather  as 
ruler  of  the  realm;  and  hoWy  at  the  entreaty  of  RomanuSy 
the  emferor  of  C onstantinofle y  the  church  was  rebuilt y  by 
the  efforts  of  John  Carianisy  Constantine  Monomachus  fur¬ 
nishing  the  necessary  means. 

At  length,  divine  mercy  and  compassion  visited  the  afflicted  people 
and  brought  no  slight  assistance  for  their  desperate  situation.  For  when 
that  wicked  prince  [Hakim]  was  removed  from  earthly  affairs  and 
his  son,  Daher  [Zahir],^^  succeeded  to  the  royal  power,  persecution 
from  that  source  ceased.  Zahir  renewed  the  treaty  which  his  father 
had  broken,  and  entered  into  an  alliance  of  friendship  with  Romanus,-^ 
the  emperor  of  Constantinople,  surnamed  of  Heliopolis.  At  the  re¬ 
quest  of  the  latter,  Zahir  granted  the  Christians  the  privilege  of  re¬ 
storing  the  church.^^  Yet  although  they  had  received  this  permission, 
the  faithful  at  Jerusalem  well  knew  that  their  own  means  alone  were 
not  adequate  for  the  restoration  of  so  important  an  edifice.  They  there¬ 
fore  sent  an  embassy  to  Constantine  Monomachus,^®  the  successor  of 
Romanus,  who  was  wielding  the  scepter  at  that  time.  With  many 
humble  entreaties,  the  envoys  described  the  deep  sorrow  and  desola¬ 
tion  in  which  the  people  had  lived  since  the  destruction  of  their 
church.  Most  lovingly  they  besought  him  that  he  would  extend  the 
generous  hand  of  imperial  munificence  toward  the  rebuilding  of  the 
church. 

In  charge  of  this  embassy  was  a  certain  John,  surnamed  Carianis. 
He  was  a  native  of  Constantinople,  noble  according  to  the  flesh  but 
still  more  noble  in  character.  He  had  laid  aside  the  honors  of  the  world 
to  follow  Christ  and  put  on  the  habit  of  religion  and  was  then  living 

22  2ahir,  caliph  1021-1036.  23  III,  emperor  1028-1034. 

William  has  simplified  this  account  somewhat.  Negotiations  for  the  rebuilding 
of  the  church  were  actually  begun  under  Zahir  but  not  concluded  until  the  time 
of  his  successor  in  1038.  It  was  one  of  the  provisions  of  a  treaty  between  Constantinople 
and  Cairo. 

Constantine  IX,  emperor  1042—1055,  not  the  immediate  successor  of  Romanus  III. 
The  rebuilding  of  the  church  was  completed  during  his  reign  and  with  his  help  in 
1048. 


70  PLANS  FOR  RELIEF  OF  JERUSALEM 

at  Jerusalem^  a  poor  man  for  Christ’s  sake.  He  was  sent  on  this  mission 
and,  with  all  due  persistence  and  energy,  faithfully  presented  the 
matter  to  the  lord  emperor,  beloved  of  God.  He  succeeded  in  obtain¬ 
ing  from  Constantine  the  promise  that  sufficient  money  to  carry  on  the 
work  of  restoration  should  be  taken  from  the  emperor’s  own  fiscal 
purse.  John  then  went  back  to  Jerusalem,  rejoicing  that  he  had  ob¬ 
tained  the  promise  which  the  faithful  so  eagerly  desired.  When  the 
news  was  received  that  his  journey  had  been  successful  and  his  petition 
granted,  the  spirits  of  the  clergy  and  people  revived^  they  were  like 
those  who  are  recovering  from  serious  illness.  At  this  time  the  Patri¬ 
arch  Nicephorus  was  presiding  over  that  church. 

Since  permission  had  been  granted  and  the  expenses  were  assured 
from  the  imperial  treasury,  they  built  the  church  of  the  Holy  Resur¬ 
rection,  the  same  which  is  now  at  Jerusalem.  This  was  in  the  year  1048 
of  the  Incarnation  of  the  Lord,  fifty-one  years  before  the  liberation  of 
the  city,  but  the  thirty-seventh  year  after  the  destruction  of  the  church. 
When  the  building  was  completed,  the  people  were  comforted  for  the 
many  deadly  perils  and  imminent  dangers  to  which  they  were  exposed. 

Y et  repeated  wrongs  and  tribulations  under  new  forms  did  not  cease 
to  afflict  that  faithful  people.  They  were  spit  upon  and  cuffed  j  they 
were  thrown  into  chains  and  prisons;  in  fact,  they  suffered  incessantly 
every  sort  of  punishment.  Not  only  upon  the  Christians  who  dwelt  in 
Jerusalem  was  this  persecution  practiced,  but  also  upon  the  true  be¬ 
lievers  who  lived  in  Bethlehem  and  Tekoah.  Whenever  a  new  governor 
came  or  the  caliph  sent  a  representative,  fresh  insults  were  devised  for 
God’s  people,  and  various  methods  of  extortion  invented.  When  their 
oppressors  desired  to  exact  anything  by  force  from  either  the  patriarch 
or  the  people,  any  delay  in  rendering  obedience  was  immediately  fol¬ 
lowed  by  the  threat  that  the  church  would  be  pulled  down.  Nearly  every 
year  they  endured  the  same  treatment.  The  overseers  pretended  that 
his  imperial  majesty  had  given  strict  orders  that,  if  they  ventured  to 
make  any  delay  in  the  payment  of  tribute  or  taxes,  their  churches  were 
to  be  razed  immediately.  Yet,  as  long  as  the  rule  of  the  Egyptians 
and  Persians  continued,  the  Christians  enjoyed  somewhat  better  con¬ 
ditions.  But  when,  in  turn,  the  power  of  the  Turks  began  to  flourish 

Nicephorus,  presumably  patriarch  in  1048.  Le  Quien  {Oriens,  Vol.  Ill,  col.  496) 
has  no  further  information. 

William  evidently  regards  loii  as  the  date  of  the  destruction  instead  of  1009 
when,  according  to  Wiet  (UEgyfte  arabey  IV,  21 1),  the  order  was  issued. 


PLANS  FOR  RELIEF  OF  JERUSALEM  71 

and  their  sway  was  extended  over  the  lands  of  the  Egyptians  and 
Persians,  matters  grew  worse  again*  The  Holy  City  came  under  their 
control  and,  during  the  thirty-eight  years  of  Turkish  domination,-® 
the  people  of  God  endured  far  greater  troubles,  so  that  they  came  to 
look  back  upon  as  light  the  woes  which  they  had  suffered  under  the 
yoke  of  the  Egyptians  and  Persians.-^ 

7.  Concerning  the  origin  and  ancesU'y  of  the  Turkish  race. 

We  shall  often  have  occasion  to  say  a  great  deal  about  the  Turks  in 
this  workj  to  tell  of  their  prowess  against  our  people  and  also  to  relate 
the  splendid  deeds  of  valor  which  we,  in  our  turn,  frequently  wrought 
against  them.  Since  even  to  the  present  day  they  persist  in  ruthlessly 
attacking  us,  it  does  not  seem  inconsistent  with  the  present  work  to 

This  must  be  a  slip  of  the  pen  intended  for  “twenty-eight,”  for  the  Turks  gained 
possession  in  1071.  Strictly,  the  length  of  their  domination  was  twenty-seven  years, 
for  the  Egyptians  recaptured  it  from  them  in  1098  while  the  crusaders  were  at  Antioch. 

The  connection  of  the  material  upon  the  Orient  which  William  decided  to  preface 
to  his  history  of  the  kingdom  with  that  history  proper  is  made  in  the  next  four  chap¬ 
ters.  This  involved  some  revision  of  the  material  already  written.  In  making  this 
revision  William  evidently  decided  that  his  readers  would  need  some  explanation 
of  the  origin  of  the  Turks  and  that  the  proper  place  to  insert  this  chapter  would  be 
in  connection  with  the  first  mention  of  them,  at  this  point.  It  is  evidence  of  the  haste 
with  which  he  was  making  this  final  revision  that  the  material  which  originally 
followed  here  became  scattered.  The  detailed  description  of  the  sufferings  of  the 
Christians  under  the  Turks,  which  logically  follows  next,  will  be  found  in  the  fourth 
paragraph  of  the  tenth  chapter.  Whether  the  present  ninth  chapter  followed  imme¬ 
diately  after  the  sixth,  and  the  present  eighth  chapter  held  some  other  place,  perhaps 
before  the  present  thirteenth  chapter,  is  difficult  to  determine.  The  present  title  of 
the  tenth  chapter  does  not  describe  its  contents.  The  last  half  of  the  chapter  could 
be  fitted  perfectly  to  the  end  of  the  present  sixth  chapter,  and  almost  as  well  to  the 
end  of  the  present  ninth  chapter,  and  serve  as  the  transition  to  the  first  half  of  the 
tenth  chapter  upon  which  the  eleventh  chapter  follows  naturally.  The  final  sentence 
of  the  tenth  chapter  indicates  that  it  once  served  as  the  transition  from  his  original 
introduction  or  preface  to  the  narrative  proper.  It  is  probable  that  the  mangling  of 
these  chapters  reflects  not  one  but  three  or  even  more  revisions  by  the  author. 

Chapter  8,  which  Hagenmeyer  regards  as  an  elaboration  of  some  statements  in 
the  opening  of  Fulcher’s  account,  may  well  have  been  the  original  introduction  to 
the  Gesta  Hierosolymitanoricm  regum.  Chapter  9,  drawn  from  his  general  knowledge 
of  eastern  affairs,  completed  the  preliminary  survey  of  affairs  in  the  East.  The  last 
part  of  chapter  10  follows  naturally,  whereas  the  first  part  of  the  chapter  belongs 
rather  to  the  story  of  Peter  the  Hermit,  chapters  ii  and  12,  with  which  Albert  of  Aix 
began  his  account.  Material  from  Fulcher  and  Albert  are  combined  in  the  next,  the 
thirteenth  chapter.  These  chapters,  except  for  their  rearrangement  and  connecting 
sentences,  are  probably  as  he  wrote  them  about  1170.  The  first  six  chapters  may  have 
been  “premitted”  when  he  resumed  writing  at  the  end  of  1180  or  even  when  he 
decided  to  end  his  writing  in  1182.  The  insertion  of  chapter  7,  a  well-rounded  essay 
on  the  origin  of  the  Saljuqs,  was  clearly  a  later  decision,  perhaps  a  part  of  his  final 
W3:itin'fir.  in  ii8'4.  Hasty  revisions  prevented  any  effective  harmonizing  of  the  materials. 


72  PLANS  FOR  RELIEF  OF  JERUSALEM 

insert  some  account  of  the  rise  and  early  history  of  this  race  and  to 
tell  of  their  progress  toward  that  stage  of  excellence  which,  according 
to  accounts,  they  have  for  many  years  maintained.  ^ 

The  race  of  Turks  or  Turkomans  (for  they  are  of  the  same  stock) 
came  originally  from  the  north.  They  were  a  very  rude  people  with 
no  fixed  place  of  habitation.  They  were  constantly  roaming  about  here 
and  there  in  search  of  the  best  pasture  for  their  flocks.  They  had  no 
cities  or  towns  or  permanent  place  of  abode  anywhere.  When  they 
wished  to  change  their  location,  the  people  of  the  same  tribe  went  to¬ 
gether,  some  elder  man  of  their  tribe  acting  as  chief.  All  questions 
which  arose  in  the  tribe  were  referred  to  him,  and  his  word  was  obeyed 
by  both  disputants,  for  no  one  was  allowed  with  impunity  to  set  aside 
his  decision.  In  their  wanderings,  they  carried  along  with  them  all 
their  substance:  studs  of  horses,  flocks  and  herds,  servants  and  maid¬ 
servants;  for  in  these  lay  all  their  property. 

They  paid  no  attention  to  agriculture.  Buying  and  selling  were  un¬ 
known  to  them,  for  they  obtained  only  by  exchange  whatever  was  neces¬ 
sary  for  existence.  When  they  were  attracted  by  some  pleasant  grassy 
place  and  wished  to  remain  for  a  time  without  trouble,  they  used  to 
send  some  of  their  wiser  men  to  ask  permission  from  the  lord  of  the 
country  to  pitch  their  tents  there.  After  they  had  arrived  at  an  amicable 
agreement  to  pay  a  fixed  sum  as  tribute  to  the  chief  who  ruled  that 
land,  they  lived  there  in  the  woods  and  pastures,  according  to  the 
stipulations  made. 

It  happened  that  a  large  company  of  these  people  separated  from 
the  others  and  entered  the  land  of  Persia,  where  they  found  the  coun¬ 
try  particularly  adapted  to  their  needs.  They  paid  tribute  to  the  ruler, 
according  to  the  terms  agreed  upon  between  them  at  the  beginning, 
and  remained  there  for  some  years,  rather  longer  than  was  their  usual 
custom.  During  this  time,  their  numbers  increased  greatly;  indeed 
there  seemed  to  be  no  limit  to  their  multiplying.  Finally  the  king  [of 
Persia]  and  the  natives  began  to  regard  their  great  increase  with  a 
certain  foreboding  and,  after  some  deliberation,  decided  to  drive  the 
intruders  from  the  kingdom  by  force.  Later,  however,  it  seemed  ad¬ 
visable  to  alter  this  plan.  New  demands  were  added  to  the  already 
excessive  hardships,  while  the  usual  pressure  was  unrelaxed.  It  was 
hoped  that  this  treatment  would  so  exhaust  them  that  they  would 
depart  of  their  own  accord  without  compulsion.  They  continued,  how- 


PLANS  FOR  RELIEF  OF  JERUSALEM  73 

ever,  to  bear  the  heavy  burden  of  wrongs  and  the  enormous  tribute  for 
many  years,  but  at  last,  after  consulting  together,  they  decided  that 
they  could  endure  it  no  longer. 

When  the  king  learned  this,  he  ordered  the  herald  to  proclaim  that 
they  must  leave  the  kingdom  entirely  within  a  certain  fixed  period. 
Accordingly,  they  crossed  the  river  Cobar,  which  is  the  boundary  of 
the  kingdom  in  that  direction,  and  then  took  the  opportunity  to  survey 
their  vast  numbers  with  more  freedom  and  accuracy  than  usual.  For 
hitherto  they  had  lived  so  apart  from  one  another  that  they  had  realized 
neither  their  numbers  nor  their  power.  As  they  looked  at  that  mighty 
array  they  marvelled  that  such  a  countless  host  had  tolerated  the  ar¬ 
rogance  of  any  prince  and  had  endured  the  bitter  ignominy  of  service 
and  tribute.  Clearly  they  were  equal  both  in  numbers  and  strength  to 
the  Persians  or  any  other  people.  Apparently  the  only  obstacle  which 
prevented  them  from  seizing  the  neighboring  lands  by  force  was  the 
fact  that  they  had  no  king  like  other  peoples. 

They  determined  to  elect  a  king.  They  therefore  divided  off  the 
whole  people  and  found  one  hundred  families  of  more  distinction  than 
the  rest.  A  man  from  each  of  these  families  was  directed  to  bring  an 
arrow.  Thus  a  bundle  of  one  hundred  arrows  was  collected,  equal  to 
the  number  of  families.  They  then  called  a  little  boy,  opened  the 
bundle,  and  told  him  to  draw  out  an  arrow  from  under  the  covering. 
The  understanding  was  that  the  king  should  be  chosen  from  that  family 
indicated  by  the  arrow  drawn  in  the  lot.  It  chanced  that  the  boy  drew 
out  that  of  the  Saljuqs.  In  accordance  with  the  agreement  it  was  there¬ 
upon  decreed  that  the  future  ruler  should  be  chosen  from  that  family. 
It  was  then  ordered  that  one  hundred  members  of  the  Saljuqs  be 
chosen  who  in  age,  character,  and  valor  surpassed  the  rest  of  their 
fellow  tribesmen.  Each  of  these  men  was  to  present  an  arrow  Inscribed 
with  his  own  name.  A  bundle  was  again  made  and  carefully  covered. 
The  same  boy,  or  another  of  equal  innocence,  was  again  called  and  told 
to  draw  out  an  arrow  in  the  same  way.  He  produced  the  one  bearing 
the  name  of  Saljuq.  ' 

Now  this  man  was  of  fine  appearance,  of  noble  family,  and  dto 
tinguished  reputation  in  his  own  tribe.  Although  he  was  somewhat  ad¬ 
vanced  in  years,  his  bodily  vigor  was  unimpaired  and  he  had  had  much 
experience  in  military  affairs.  His  whole  bearing  was  that  of  a  great 
prince. 


74  PLANS  FOR  RELIEF  OF  JERUSALEM 

By  unanimous  consent  this  man  was  placed  in  authority  over  them 
and  raised  to  the  royal  power.  To  him  they  showed  the  reverence 
which  is  due  to  kings  and  bound  themselves  by  a  pledge  and  solemn 
oath  of  fealty  to  carry  out  his  commands.  The  king  at  once  employed 
the  power  which  had  been  conferred  upon  him  for  the  good  of  the 
kingdom.  He  ordered  the  herald  to  make  a  public  announcement  to 
the  assembled  people  that  they  were  to  recross  the  river  with  all  their 
legions  and  seize  by  force  the  land  of  Persia,  which  they  had  just 
left.  He  furthermore  commanded  them  to  occupy  the  neighboring 
kingdom  that,  in  the  future,  they  might  not  be  obliged  to  wander 
about  in  the  lands  of  others,  exposed  to  the  insufferable  arrogance  of 
alien  nations. 

Within  a  few  years  they  had  conquered,  not  only  the  land  of  Persia, 
but  all  the  oriental  kingdoms  and  had  subdued  the  power  of  Arabia 
and  those  other  nations  which  were  holding  the  supremacy.  It  was 
thus  that  this  lowly  and  abject  people  suddenly  rose  to  such  a  height 
that  they  possessed  the  entire  Orient.  This  occurred  barely  thirty  or 
forty  years  before  our  Western  princes  entered  upon  the  pilgrimage  of 
which  this  work  treats.®^ 

In  order  to  distinguish,  in  name  at  least,  between  those  tribes  which 
established  a  king  over  them  and  thereby  won  great  renown  and 
those  which  still  retained  their  rude  and  primitive  mode  of  life,  the 
former  are  now  called  Turks  while  the  latter  are  known  by  their 
original  name,  Turkomans. 

After  they  had  conquered  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  Orient,  they 
desired  to  invade  the  powerful  realm  of  Egypt  also.  They  went  down 
into  Syria,  subjugated  Jerusalem  by  force,  and  took  several  other 
cities  near  by.  They  greatly  increased  the  burdens  of  the  faithful  who 
dwelt  there  and  drove  them  to  the  point  of  exhaustion  with  manifold 
services,  as  we  have  related  already. 

William  here  describes  the  legal  procedure  customary  in  the  feudal  kingdom 
of  Jerusalem  but  probably  unknown  to  the  Saljuqs. 

^^This  interesting  legend  of  the  origin  of  the  Saljuqs  may  have  been  current  in 
William^s  day  among  the  Turks  themselves.  Modern  historians  accept  the  origin  of 
the  name  as  that  of  a  tribal  leader  from  Turkestan  who  flourished  in  the  second 
half  of  the  tenth  century,  but  the  expansion  of  their  power  took  a  longer  time.  It 
was  a  grandson  of  his  who  took  Bagdad  in  1055  3,nd  a  great-great-grandson  who 
extended  the  power  of  the  family  to  its  widest  extent.  For  a  brief  survey  of  the  Saljuqs 
see  the  chapter  by  Herbert  M.  J.  Loewe  in  Cambridge  Medieval  History ^  IV,  292- 
317. 


PLANS  FOR  RELIEF  OF  JERUSALEM 


75 


8.  Describes  the  many  forms  of  wickedness  to  which  the  world 
was  subject  at  that  time. 

It  was  not  in  the  Orient  alone  that  the  faithful  were  thus  oppressed 
by  the  wicked.^^  In  the  West  too,  and  in  nearly  all  the  circle  of  the 
earth,  belief  had  failed,  especially  among  those  who  were  called 
the  faithful,  and  the  fear  of  the  Lord  no  longer  prevailed  among  men. 
Justice  had  perished  from  the  world,  and,  since  equity  had  been 
vanquished,  violence  held  sway  among  the  nations.  Fraud,  treachery, 
and  chicanery  overshadowed  all  things.  All  virtue  had  departed  and 
had  ceased  to  exist  as  useless.  Evil  reigned  in  its  stead.  Verily  the 
world  seemed  to  be  declining  toward  eventide,  and  the  second  coming 
of  the  Son  of  Man  appeared  to  be  drawing  near.  For  the  charity  of 
many  had  grown  cold,  and  faith  was  no  longer  to  be  found  on  the 
earth.  Everywhere  was  confusion,  class  distinctions  were  disregarded, 
and  the  world  seemed  to  wish  to  return  to  its  primal  condition  of  chaos. 
Great  princes  who  were  bound  to  direct  their  subjects  toward  peace 
disregarded  their  treaties  of  peace  and  quarrelled  with  each  other 
for  the  most  trivial  reasons.  They  burned  and  plundered  lands,  seized 
booty  everywhere,  and  exposed  the  goods  of  the  poor  to  be  plundered 
by  their  wicked  followers.  Amid  so  many  pitfalls  no  property  was  safe. 
The  mere  suspicion  that  a  man  possessed  something  of  value  was 
deemed  sufficient  reason  for  binding  him  and  dragging  him  off  to 
prison,  where  he  was  forced  to  endure  undeserved  bodily  torture.  The 
goods  of  monasteries  and  churches  were  not  spared ;  nor  did  the  privi- 
leges  granted  by  pious  princes  confer  immunity  on  the  possessions 
of  holy  places.  In  fact,  the  exemption  which  their  high  position  of 
dignity  had  formerly  given  them  was  not  even  claimed.  The  sanctuary 
was  broken  open,  and  the  vessels  consecrated  to  divine  service  were 
carried  off  by  force.  The  hand  of  sacrilege  recognized  no  difference 
between  sacred  and  profane  objects.  There  was  no  discrimination. 
The  booty  revealed  altar  cloths,  sacerdotal  robes,  and  utensils  for  the 
service  of  the  Lord.  From  the  very  heart  of  the  divine  abode,  from 

This  chapter  is  probably  a  rhetorical  elaboration  of  several  sentences  at  the  be¬ 
ginning  of  the  history  of  Jerusalem  by  Fulcher  of  Chartres  and  was  written  early 
in  "William’s  career,  probably  about  1170.  It  affords  an  interesting  comparison  with 
William’s  more  mature  style  of  the  preceding  chapter,  which  he  wrote  near  the  end 
of  his  career, 

/ 


76  PLANS  FOR  RELIEF  OF  JERUSALEM 

the  inmost  shrines,  from  the  atria  of  basilicas,  fugitives  who  had  taken 
refuge  there  were  dragged  away  to  torture  and  death.  Evil  footpads, 
girt  with  the  sword,  beset  the  public  highways,  laying  traps  for  travel¬ 
lers.  Neither  the  pilgrim  nor  the  man  of  religion  was  spared. 

Nor  were  the  cities  and  towns  free  from  these  dangers,  for  the 
ever-lurking  assassin  made  all  the  streets  and  squares  places  of  sus¬ 
picion  to  the  innocent.  The  more  guileless  the  person,  the  more  liable 
he  was  to  fall  into  snares. 

Every  kind  of  fornication  was  practiced  openly  and  without  shame, 
as  though  it  were  legitimate.  Not  even  among  those  connected  by  blood 
or  marriage  were  the  ties  of  matrimony  safe.  Continence,  dear  to  the 
angels  and  to  God,  had  been  bidden  to  depart  like  a  worthless  thing. 
Where  luxury,  drunkenness,  and  night-long  games  of  chance  had 
already  seized  the  entrance  and  preempted  the  atrium,  there  was  no 
room  for  thrift  and  sobriety.  Nor  did  the  clergy  differ  from  the  peo¬ 
ple  by  leading  nobler  lives,  but,  as  we  read  in  the  prophets:  ^^Like 
people,  like  priest.”  For  bishops  had  become  remiss  in  their  duty, 
^yumb  dogs,  they  cannot  bark”j  they  received  anyone,  and  their 
heads  were  sleek  with  the  oil  of  the  sinner 5  like  hirelings,  they  left 
the  sheepfolds  committed  to  their  care  to  the  attacks  of  wolves.  Un¬ 
mindful  of  the  words  of  the  Lord  where  He  says,  “Freely  ye  have 
received,  freely  give,”  they  did  not  avoid  the  sin  of  simony,  being 
stained  with  the  filthy  taint  of  Gehazi.^^ 

Need  more  be  said?  In  a  word,  all  vice  stood  on  the  highest  pinnacle 
and  “all  flesh  had  corrupted  his  way.”  Nor  could  the  threats  of  God, 
shown  by  portents  in  the  heavens  above  and  signs  in  the  world  below, 
recall  those  prone  to  evil  ways.  There  were  famines  and  pestilences, 
terrors  in  the  sky,  and  great  earthquakes  in  divers  places,^®  and  other 
manifestations  such  as  the  Lord  carefully  enumerates  in  the  Evangel.^® 
Yet  they  persisted  in  dead  works  5  as  “the  sow  that  was  washed,  to 
her  wallowing  in  the  mire,”  ^  and  as  beasts  rotting  in  their  own  dung, 
they  abused  the  tender  long-suffering  of  God,  as  those  to  whom  the 
Lord  might  well  say,  “I  have  stricken  them,  but  they  have  not  grieved  3 
I  have  healed  them,  but  they  were  not  healed.” 

Ho.  4:  9 >  Is.  24:  2.  Is.  56:  10.  Ps.  141 :  5. 

Mat.  10:8.  II  Ki.  5 :  20— 27.  ®®Ge.  6:12. 

Mat.  24:7.  ^®Lu.  2i:ii.  ^^IlPe.  2:22. 

5:  35  51:9- 


PLANS  FOR  RELIEF  OF  JERUSALEM 


77 


9.  HoWy  because  of  man^ 5  sinsy  the  Persians  seized  all  the  coun¬ 
try  as  far  as  the  Hellesfont, 

Provoked  to  anger  by  these  conditions,  the  Lord  suffered  the  true 
believers  in  the  Land  of  Promise  to  bear  the  yoke  of  servitude  referred 
to  above  and  to  suffer  the  intolerable  burden  of  untold  tribulations. 

Moreover,  He  roused  the  adversary,  the  scourge  of  the  people,  the 
hammer  of  the  whole  earth,  against  others  who  seemed  as  yet  to  be 
rejoicing  in  freedom,  confident  that  all  was  prospering  according  to 
their  wishes.  For  while  Romanus,^^  surnamed  Diogenes,  was  ruling 
over  the  Greeks  and  successfully  administering  the  realm  at  Constanti¬ 
nople,  there  emerged  from  the  interior  of  the  Orient  a  powerful  satrap 
of  Persia  and  Assyria  named  Belfeth  [Alp  Arslan]  who  drew  after 
him  a  countless  host  of  infidel  peoples.  So  vast  were  their  numbers, 
according  to  report,  that  the  whole  surface  of  the  globe  was  covered 
with  them.  Accompanied  by  chariots  and  horsemen,  and  followed  by 
flocks  and  herds  and  magnificent  equipment  of  every  sort,  Alp  Arslan 
moved  forward.  He  entered  the  land  of  the  empire  and  subjected  it 
entirely  to  his  power,  from  the  fields  without  the  cities  even  to  the 
walled  towns  and  strongly  fortified  castles.  There  was  no  one  who 
tried  to  resist  him^  no  one  who,  struggling  for  safety,  for  wife  and 
children,  and,  above  all,  for  liberty  itself,  opposed  his  progress. 

Meanwhile,  the  emperor  had  been  notified  that  a  mighty  hostile 
army,  like  an  overhanging  sword  ever  threatening  to  fall,  was  laying 
waste  the  Christian  empire.  Greatly  concerned  for  the  kingdom,  he 
called  together  his  cavalry  forces  and  assembled  all  the  infantry  that 
the  entire  nation  could  produce,  as  the  critical  situation  seemed  to 
demand.  Need  more  be  said.^  With  the  assembled  legions  and  a  large 
force  of  knights,  he  marched  against  the  enemy.  With  a  strong  force, 
indeed,  but  without  divine  favor,  he  met  the  foe,  who  had  already 

Romanus  IV  Diog*enes,  emperor  1067—1071. 

William  is  somewhat  uncertain  about  the  Saljuq  sultans  and  their  activities  in 
Asia  Minor  at  the  end  of  the  eleventh  century.  He  never  uses  the  name  of  Alp  Arslan, 
1063—1072,  or  of  his  son  Malik  Shah,  1072—1092,  by  whom  the  conquest  of  Asia 
Minor  was  achieved.  There  is  reason  to  believe  that  he  confused  the  two,  for  he  applies 
to  Alp  Arslan  the  name  “Belfeth, which  he  spells  in  several  ways  and  which  is  ap¬ 
parently  a  phonetic  spelling  of  Abu-l-fath,  an  honorific  title  usually  applied  to  Malik 
Shah  (S.  Lane-Poole,  Mohammedan  Dynasties j  p.  153).  Their  usual  names  have  been 
substituted  in  this  translation. 


78  PLANS  FOR  RELIEF  OF  JERUSALEM 

seized  the  very  heart  of  the  empire  and  was  now  advancing  still  farther 
into  the  interior. 

The  battle  which  followed  was  fiercely  contested  by  almost  equal 
forces,  and  was  actuated  by  the  fiercer  hatred  which  zealous  faith  and 
resentment  against  sacrilege  inspires.  What  more  need  be  said?  The 
Christian  army  perished,  the  ranks  of  the  faithful  were  laid  low,  the 
blood  redeemed  by  Christ’s  blood  was  poured  out  by  unbelievers,  and, 
worst  of  all  misfortunes,  the  emperor  was  taken  prisoner.  One  by  one 
the  survivors  of  the  army  returned  and  told  of  the  disaster  that  had 
befallen  them.  The  people  listened  to  this  news  in  consternation,  and, 
despairing  of  their  lives  and  their  safety,  gave  way  to  grievous  lamenta¬ 
tions.^^ 

Meanwhile,  the  foe,  magnificent  but  infidel,  elated  by  his  great 
success  and  rendered  still  more  arrogant  by  victory,  commanded  that 
the  emperor  be  brought  before  him.  Seated  upon  his  royal  throne,  he 
ordered  Romanus  to  be  thrown  beneath  his  feet,  and,  to  show  his  con¬ 
tempt  for  the  Christian  name  and  faith,  in  the  presence  of  the  attendant 
princes,  he  used  the  emperor’s  body  as  a  footstool,  mounting  and  dis¬ 
mounting  upon  it.  Finally,  satisfied  with  inflicting  such  extreme  hu¬ 
miliation,  he  released  the  emperor  with  several  of  his  principal  men 
who  had  been  captured  with  him  and  gave  them  permission  freely  to 

46 

When  the  news  of  this  insult  came  to  the  ears  of  the  princes  of  the 
realm,  they  elected  another  ruler  over  them,  for  they  felt  that  Roma¬ 
nus,  who  had  suffered  such  bodily  indignities,  was  unworthy  to  wield 
the  scepter  and  enjoy  the  honors  of  Augustus.  He  was  subjected  to  the 
utmost  ignominy,  being  deprived  of  sight,  and  was  barely  granted  the 
privilege  of  living  as  a  private  citizen.^ 

Solimannus  [Malik  Shah],^®  however,  successfully  carried  out  his 
intentions  without  hindrance.  He  seized  all  the  country  from  Laodicea 
in  Syria  to  the  Hellespont,  which  flows  by  Constantinople,  a  journey 
of  thirty  days  in  length  and  ten  or  fifteen  in  width,  and  captured  all 
the  people  therein  with  their  cities  and  towns.  The  Lord  “gave  them 

The  battle  of  Manzikart,  1071,  in  Armenia. 

Vasiliev  concludes,  on  the  contrary,  that  Alp  Arslan  treated  the  captured  emperor 
honorably  (A.  A.  Vasiliev,  A  History  of  the  Byzantine  Empire^  II,  24). 

Michael  VIII,  emperor  1071-1078,  had  already  usurped  the  throne  before  the 
return  of  Romanus.  He  seized  the  latter  and  mistreated  him  as  William  indicates. 

William  continues  as  though  the  victor  of  Manzikart  were  also  the  conqueror 
of  Asia  Minor.  Alp  Arslan,  however,  died  in  1072,  leaving  the  conquest  of  Asia 
Minor  to  his  son,  Malik  Shah,  sultan  1072—1092. 


PLANS  FOR  RELIEF  OF  JERUSALEM 


into  the  hand  of  the  heathen  3  and  they  that  hated  them  ruled  over 
them.’^ 

Last  of  all,  the  chief  city  [Antioch]  was  taken.  That  noble  and 
splendid  mistress  of  many  provinces,  the  first  seat  of  the  prince  of  the 
apostles,  became  a  tributary  of  the  infidels.  Thus,  within  a  compara¬ 
tively  short  time,  there  passed  under  the  sway  of  the  infidels,  Coele- 
syria,  both  of  the  Cilicias,  Isauria,  Pamphylia,  Lycia,  Pisidia,  Lycaonia, 
Cappadocia,  and  Galatia,  as  well  as  both  provinces  of  Pontus,  Bithynia, 
and  a  part  of  Asia  Minor,^*^  all  noble  provinces,  famed  for  resources  of 
all  kinds  and  full  of  Christian  people.  The  inhabitants  were  made 
prisoners.  The  churches  were  torn  down  and  the  Christian  religion 
relentlessly  pursued  with  the  intention  of  rooting  it  out.  If  Malik  Shah 
had  had  a  naval  force,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  he  would  have  con¬ 
quered  even  the  royal  city.  For  he  had  inspired  the  Greeks  with  such 
terror  that  they  scarcely  believed  themselves  safe  within  the  very 
walls  of  Constantinople  and  regarded  the  protection  of  the  intervening 
sea  as  quite  insufficient. 

These  events  and  others  of  a  similar  nature  brought  the  culminating 
point  of  misery  to  the  faithful  who  dwelt  in  Jerusalem  and  the  terri¬ 
tories  thereof.  They  were  plunged  into  an  abyss  of  despair.  For  during 
the  former  prosperous  days  of  the  empire,  as  has  been  said,  frequent 
solace  had  been  afforded  them  in  their  straits  from  the  imperial  palace. 
The  safe  and  sound  condition  of  the  empire  and  the  flourishing  state 
of  the  neighboring  cities — above  all,  of  Antioch — afforded  a  reasonable 
hope  of  liberty  some  time  in  the  future.  But  now,  anxious  for  them¬ 
selves  as  well  as  for  others,  they  were  harassed  to  the  last  degree  by 
sinister  rumors  3  they  longed  for  death  rather  than  life  and  languished 
away,  convinced  that  they  were  doomed  to  perpetual  bondage. 


10.  How  throngs  of  believers  went  to  the  Holy  City  together y 
and  of  the  treatment  they  received  both  within  and  without 
Jerusalem;  and  hoiv  the  city  was  delivered  for  a  second  time 
into  the  hand  of  the  TurkJ^ 

In  the  midst  of  the  insidious  perils  of  these  times,  it  happened  that 
a  numerous  company  of  Greeks  and  Latins,  after  risking  death  in  a 

Ps.  106:41. 

Asia  Minor,  as  here  used,  is  probably  intended  to  designate  the  ancient  province 
of  Mysia,  south  and  west  of  Bithynia.  William  does  not  use  the  term  in  the  modern 
sense  which  would  include  practically  all  the  provinces  here  listed. 

See  note  29. 


8o  PLANS  FOR  RELIEF  OF  JERUSALEM 

thousand  forms  in  hostile  lands,  arrived  at  the  city.  They  had  come 
for  the  purpose  of  worshipping  at  the  venerated  places,  but  the  keepers 
of  the  gates  refused  them  admittance  until  they  should  pay  the  gold 
piece  which  was  fixed  as  tribute  money.  Those  who  had  lost  their  all 
upon  the  way,  however,  and  had  with  extreme  difficulty  arrived  in 
physical  safety  at  their  longed-for  goal,  had  nothing  with  which  to 
pay  tribute. 

So  it  happened  that  more  than  a  thousand  pilgrims,  who  had 
gathered  before  the  city  to  await  the  privilege  of  entering,  died  of 
hunger  and  nakedness.  These  people,  whether  living  or  dead,  were 
an  intolerable  burden  to  the  wretched  citizens.  They  attempted  to  keep 
alive  those  who  survived  by  furnishing  them  with  such  food  as  they 
could.  They  also  made  an  effort  to  bury  the  dead,  although  their  own 
affairs  were  beyond  their  strength.  Those  pilgrims  who  paid  the  usual 
tribute  and  received  permission  to  enter  Jerusalem  brought  still  greater 
responsibility  upon  the  citizens.  For  there  was  danger,  as  they  wan¬ 
dered  about  incautiously  in  their  eagerness  to  visit  the  holy  places, 
that  they  would  be  spit  upon,  or  boxed  on  the  ears,  or,  worst  of  all, 
be  furtively  smothered  to  death.  Consequently,  as  the  pilgrims  hastened 
to  the  holy  places,  the  citizens  followed  them  in  brotherly  kindness. 
Anxious  for  their  life  and  safety  and  full  of  terror  lest  some  unlucky 
accident  befall  them,  they  hoped  in  this  way  to  prevent  such  mishaps. 

There  was  a  monastery  in  the  city,  belonging  to  the  people  of  Amalfi, 
which  was  called,  as  it  is  even  yet,  St.  Mary  of  the  Latins.  Close  by, 
also,  was  a  hospital  with  a  modest  chapel  in  honor  of  the  blessed  patri¬ 
arch  of  Alexandria,  John  the  Almoner.^^  This  was  under  the  charge 
of  the  abbot  of  the  monastery  just  mentioned.  Here  aid  was  given  at 
any  time  to  wretched  pilgrims  who  arrived  under  such  circumstances, 
the  expense  being  defrayed  either  by  the  monastery  or  from  the  offer¬ 
ings  of  the  faithful.  Scarcely  one  out  of  a  thousand  pilgrims  who  came 
was  able  to  provide  for  himself.  Many  had  lost  their  travelling  money 
and  were  so  exhausted  by  dreadful  hardships  that  they  were  barely  able 
to  reach  their  destination  in  safety.^^ 

John  the  Almoner  or  Almsgiver  was  patriarch  of  Alexandria  6 1 0-616.  He  was 
distinguished  for  his  extensive  charities  and  was  particularly  dear  to  Jerusalem  be¬ 
cause  of  his  help  to  the  Christians  there  after  the  sack  by  Chosroes  II  in  614.  He 
was  the  original  patron  saint  of  the  Hospitallers.  His  remains  are  believed  to  be  in 
the  cathedral  at  Pressburg. 

53  Pilgrimages  to  Jerusalem  had  continued  through  all  the  centuries  of  Muslim 
control,  of  many  of  which  records  have  survived  (see  C.  R.  Beazley,  Dawn  of  Mod- 


PLANS  FOR  RELIEF  OF  JERUSALEM  8i 

Thus  neither  at  home  nor  abroad  was  there  any  rest  for  the  citizens* 
Death  threatened  them  every  day  and,  what  was  worse  than  death, 
the  fear  of  servitude,  harsh  and  intolerable,  ever  lowered  before  them* 
Another  thing  caused  them  extreme  distress.  Even  while  they  were  in 
the  very  act  of  celebrating  the  holy  rites,  the  enemy  would  violently 
force  an  entrance  into  the  churches  which  had  been  restored  and  pre¬ 
served  with  such  infinite  difficulty.  Utterly  without  reverence  for  the 
consecrated  places,  they  sat  upon  the  very  altars  and  struck  terror  to 
the  hearts  of  the  worshippers  with  their  mad  cries  and  whistlings*  They 
overturned  the  chalices,  trod  underfoot  the  utensils  devoted  to  the  di¬ 
vine  offices,  broke  the  marble  statues,  and  showered  blows  and  insults 
upon  the  clergy.  The  lord  patriarch  then  in  office  was  dragged  from  his 
seat  by  his  hair  and  beard  and  thrown  to  the  ground  like  a  mean  and 
abject  person*  Again  and  again  he  was  seized  and  thrust  into  prison 
without  cause'.  Treatment  fit  only  for  the  lowest  slave  was  inflicted 
upon  him  in  order  to  torture  his  people,  who  suffered  with  him  as  with 
a  father. 

For  four  hundred  and  ninety  years,^^  as  has  been  stated,  this  de¬ 
voted  people  of  God  endured  cruel  bondage  with  pious  long-suffering. 
With  tearful  groans  and  sighs,  ever  constant  in  prayer,  they  cried  to 
God,  begging  that  He  would  spare  them  now  that  their  sins  were  cor¬ 
rected  and  that,  in  His  great  mercy.  He  would  turn  away  from  them 
the  scourge  of  His  wrath.  For  they  had  descended  into  the  abyss  of 
evil,  whence,  ^^deep  calleth  unto  deep,”  the  depth  of  misery  to  the 
depth  of  pity,  they  deserved  to  be  heard  by  Him,  who  is  the  God  of 
all  consolation.  Finally,  the  Lord  looked  with  pity  upon  them  from 
His  seat  of  glory,  and,  desiring  to  end  such  tribulation,  determined 
with  fatherly  care  to  comfort  them  as  they  desired.  In  the  present 
work,  it  is  our  intention  to  set  down,  as  a  perpetual  memorial  to  the 
faithful  in  Christ,  the  method  and  ordering  of  this  divine  plan  by 
which  He  purposed  to  relieve  the  long-continued  affliction  of  His 

» 


em  Geografhyy  I,  125—755  II,  112—27).  Joranson  has  shown  that  gross  mistreat¬ 
ment  of  the  pilgrims  also  occurred  before  the  conquest  by  the  Saljuqs  (see  E.  Joran¬ 
son,  “The  Great  German  Pilgrimage  of  1064—1065,’^  Munro -Crusades,  pp.  3—43). 

See  note  ii*  Ps*  42:  7. 


82  PLANS  FOR  RELIEF  OF  JERUSALEM 


II.  Concerning  the  coming  of  the  man  of  Gody  Peter  the 
Hermity  and  of  the  conference  between  him  and  the  revered 
Simeony  fatriarch  of  Jerusalem. 

At  the  very  time  when  that  city  beloved  of  God  was  undergoing  the 
troubles  which  we  have  been  describing,  there  was  among  the  many 
who  journeyed  to  the  venerated  places  for  the  sake  of  devotion  and 
prayer,  a  certain  priest,  Peter,  from  the  bishopric  of  Amiens  in  the 
kingdom  of  the  Franks.^®  He  was  known,  both  in  fact  and  in  name, 
as  the  Hermit,  and  he  was  drawn  to  Jerusalem  by  this  same  fervor  of 
spirit.  As  regards  the  outer  man,  he  was  small  of  stature  and  insignifi¬ 
cant  in  person  3  but,  ^fin  that  small  body,  a  greater  valor  reigned.” 
He  was  of  vivacious  disposition  and  keen  and  pleasing  eye,  and  he 
was  not  lacking  in  spontaneous  eloquence. 

After  he  had  paid  the  tribute  which,  by  common  custom,  was  im¬ 
posed  on  all  Christians  who  wished  to  enter  the  city,  he  was  received  as 
a  guest  by  a  certain  believer  who  was  himself  among  the  number  of 
Christ’s  confessors.  Peter  was  a  diligent  man,  and  he  asked  many  ques¬ 
tions  of  his  host  about  the  condition  of  the  Christians.  From  him  he 
learned  full  details,  not  only  about  the  dangers  of  the  present  time,  but 
also  about  the  persecution  which  their  forbears  had  endured  for  many 
years  previous.  Whatever  information  was  lacking  by  word  of  mouth 
he  afterwards  supplied  by  the  faithful  observation  of  his  own  eyes.  As 
he  went  about  to  the  churches  during  his  stay  in  the  city,  his  own  inves¬ 
tigations  showed  him  plainly  the  truth  of  that  which  he  had  heard  from 
others.  Hearing  that  the  patriarch  of  the  city  was  a  devout  and  God¬ 
fearing  man,  he  desired  to  confer  with  him  about  the  conditions  then 
existing  in  Jerusalem,  and  he  hoped  also  to  obtain  more  complete  in¬ 
formation  on  certain  other  matters.  Accordingly,  he  went  to  see  him 
and  was  admitted  to  his  presence.  Through  the  offices  of  a  faithful  in¬ 
terpreter,  the  two  men  enjoyed  an  agreeable  conversation.  Simeon, 

Peter  the  Hermit  was  a  picturesque  preacher  of  the  crusade  through  northern 
France  and  Rhineland  Germany.  The  legend  that  he  started  the  crusade  arose  natu¬ 
rally  in  that  region  where  he  was  the  first  to  preach  it.  Albert  of  Aix,  who  lived 
there,  introduced  the  legend  to  literature.  William  accepts  it  fully.  It  has  ever  since 
made  a  powerful  appeal  to  the  popular  fancy.  Modern  critical  scholarship,  how¬ 
ever,  has  separated  the  legend  from  the  facts  of  his  career  (see  H.  Hagenmeyer, 
Peter  der  Eremite^  fassim) . 

Statius  Theb.  i.  417, 


PLANS  FOR  RELIEF  OF  JERUSALEM  83 

the  patriarch,  perceived  from  Peter’s  words  that  he  was  a  discreet  man 
of  varied  experience  in  many  matters  and  of  convincing  power  both  in 
word  and  deed.  He  began  to  explain  to  him  intimately  the  many  woes 
which  were  so  cruelly  afflicting  the  people  of  God  who  dwelt  at  Jerusa¬ 
lem.  Peter’s  brotherly  sympathy  was  so  deeply  moved  by  this  recital 
that  he  could  not  restrain  his  tears.  He  began  to  inquire  even  more 
earnestly  whether  it  was  not  possible  to  find  some  way  out  of  the 
troubles  which  beset  them. 

The  good  man  replied,  “Peter,  the  Lord,  gracious  and  merciful,  re¬ 
fuses  to  heed  our  tearful  groans  and  sighs,  because  of  the  sins  which 
enchain  us.  For  not  yet  is  our  iniquity  purged,  and  therefore,  for  the 
present,  the  scourging  ceases  not.  But,  through  the  ever-abounding 
mercy  of  God,  the  strength  of  your  people,  true  worshippers  of  the 
Lord,  is  still  intact,  and  their  kingdom,  the  dread  of  our  enemies, 
flourishes  far  and  wide.  If  they,  in  brotherly  love,  would  sympathize 
with  us  in  our  present  situation  and  provide  a  remedy  for  the  calamities 
which  oppress  us  3  or  if  they  would,  at  least,  intercede  for  us  with  Christ, 
we  might  hope  that  our  affliction  would  soon  end.  We  have  no  hope 
henceforward  of  receiving  any  aid  from  the  empire  of  the  Greeks,  al¬ 
though  they  were  more  closely  connected  with  us  by  blood  and  prox¬ 
imity  and  have  far  greater  wealth.  They  are  barely  able  to  defend 
themselves,  and  their  strength  has  so  dwindled  away,  as  your  brotherly 
kindness  may  have  heard,  that  within  a  few  years,  they  have  lost  more 
than  half  their  empire.” 

Peter  replied,  “Know,  holy  father,  that  if  the  church  at  Rome  and 
the  princes  of  the  West  had  some  careful  instructor  worthy  of  confi¬ 
dence  to  tell  them  about  the  calamities  which  you  are  suffering,  without 
doubt  they  would  endeavor  to  provide  a  remedy  as  quickly  as  possible 
by  word  and  deed  for  these  troubles  of  yours.  Write,  then,  with  all 
diligence  to  the  lord  pope  and  the  church  at  Rome  and  also  to  the  kings 
and  princes  of  the  Occident  and  confirm  the  letter  with  the  seal  of  your 
authority.  In  fact,  I,  for  the  healing  of  my  soul,  do  not  shrink  from 
taking  this  work  upon  myself.  With  God  as  my  authority,  I  am  pre¬ 
pared  to  visit  all,  to  solicit  all,  to  bear  witness  to  your  exceeding  great 
affliction  with  all  diligence,  and  to  invite  earnestly  one  and  all  without 
delay  to  provide  a  remedy.” 

These  words  pleased  the  patriarch  and  seemed  good  in  his  eyes  as 


84  PLANS  FOR  RELIEF  OF  JERUSALEM 

well  as  in  those  of  the  Christians  about  him.  Accordingly,  with  many 
thanks  to  the  man  of  God  for  his  sympathy,  they  gave  him  the  writing 
for  which  he  had  asked. 

I 

12.  The  revelation  made  to  the  same  Peter  in  the  church  of  the 
Holy  Resurrection. 

Truly,  Thou  art  great,  O  God  our  Lord,  and  Thy  mercy  is  without 
limit.  Verily,  kind  Jesus,  those  that  trust  in  Thee  shall  never  be  dis¬ 
mayed.  For  whence  came  such  confidence  to  a  needy  and  helpless  pil¬ 
grim,  lacking  all  the  qualities  that  make  for  influence  and  far  away 
from  his  native  land,  that  he  dared  to  take  upon  himself  a  mission  far 
beyond  his  strength,  confident  that  his  desire  would  be  successfully 
accomplished?  The  only  explanation  is  that  he  had  directed  his  thoughts 
toward  Thee,  his  Protector  j  that,  glowing  with  ardent  love,  sympathiz¬ 
ing  with  his  brethren,  and  loving  his  neighbor  as  himself,  he  so  acted 
as  to  fulfil  the  law.  His  own  strength  was  not  sufficient,  yet  charity  per¬ 
suaded  him.  And  although  the  task  which  his  brethren  had  imposed 
upon  him  seemed  difficult  and  well-nigh  impossible,  nevertheless,  love 
toward  God  and  toward  his  neighbor  made  it  easy,  because  “love  is 
strong  as  death.”  It  is  “faith  which,  working  through  love,”  which 
availeth  in  you,  and  the  services  which  you  have  rendered  are  not  in 
vain.  Thou  didst  not  permit  Thy  servant  to  hesitate  long  but  didst 
manifest  Thyself  to  him  and  encouraged  him  by  a  vision  of  Thyself, 
that  he  might  not  waver  but  might  rise  strengthened  to  accomplish  the 
work  of  love. 

It  happened  one  day  that  this  servant  of  the  Lord  of  whom  I  am 
speaking  was  unusually  troubled  in  mind  at  the  thought  of  returning 
to  his  own  land  and  assuming  the  responsibility  of  this  mission.  He 
accordingly  entered  the  church  of  the  Resurrection  of  the  Lord  and 
turned  with  deep  devotion  to  the  fount  of  mercy.  He  passed  the  night 
in  prayers  and  vigils  and,  finally,  overcome  by  the  stress  of  emotion, 
sank  upon  the  pavement  and  gave  way  to  the  sleep  which  overpowered 
him.  Deep  slumber  came  upon  him,  as  it  is  wont  to  do,  and  he  seemed 
to  see  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  standing  before  him,  as  in  a  vision,  saying, 
“Rise,  Peter,  make  haste  and  do  without  fear  the  tasks  which  have  been 
entrusted  to  you,  for  I  shall  be  with  you.  It  is  time  that  the  holy  places 
were  purged  and  my  servants  aided.” 

Ca.  8 :  6, 


Gal.  5 :  6. 


PLANS  FOR  RELIEF  OF  JERUSALEM  85 

Peter  awoke,  comforted  in  the  Lord  by  the  vision  which  he  had  had 
and  rendered  more  inclined  to  obedience.  In  response  to  the  divine  ad¬ 
monition,  he  delayed  no  longer  but  at  once  energetically  prepared  to 
return.  After  offering  the  usual  prayers,  he  took  leave  of  the  lord 
patriarch,  who  gave  him  his  blessing,  and  then  went  down  to  the  sea. 
There  he  found  a  merchant  ship  which  was  about  to  sail  across  to 
Apulia.  He  embarked,  and  after  a  prosperous  voyage  arrived  at  Bari. 
As  he  was  about  to  set  out  thence  for  Rome,  he  learned  that  Pope  Ur¬ 
ban  was  in  those  parts.  Accordingly,  he  presented  to  him  the  letter  of 
the  patriarch  and  the  Christians  at  Jerusalem.  He  described  their  suf¬ 
ferings  and  the  abominations  committed  by  the  unclean  people  in  the 
holy  places  and  executed  with  diligence  and  wisdom  the  commission  en¬ 
trusted  to  him. 

13.  Of  the  controversy  between  the  Emferor  Henry  and  Pope' 
Gregory  VII ;  and  how  Urban  II y  the  successor  of  Gregory y 
kindly  received  Peter y  returned  from  J erusalem. 

Several  years  before  this  time,  a  serious  conflict  had  arisen  over  the 
question  of  the  ring  and  staff  of  deceased  bishops  between  Henry,  king 
of  the  Germans  and  emperor  of  the  Romans,^®  and  Pope  Gregory  VII, 
the  predecessor  of  Pope  Urban  II. A  custom  had  grown  up,  especially 
in  the  empire,  of  sending  the  ring  and  pastoral  staff  of  deceased  prelates 
of  the  church  to  the  emperor.  After  a  time,  the  emperor  would  send  to 
the  vacant  church  someone  chosen  from  his  own  retinue  or  one  of  his 
chaplains.  Without  waiting  for  the  election  by  the  clergy,  he  would 
then  invest  him  with  the  duties  of  pastor  in  that  place.  The  pope  [Greg¬ 
ory  VII]  felt  that  it  was  contrary  to  all  justice  that  ecclesiastical  rights 
should  be  trampled  underfoot  in  such  a  manner  and  had  thrice  warned 
the  emperor  to  cease  acting  with  such  abominable  presumption.  When 
he  found  that  he  could  not  influence  him  by  salutary  warnings,  he  re¬ 
strained  him  with  the  bonds  of  anathema. 

Thereupon,  the  emperor,  much  incensed  at  this  action,  began  to  per- 

Henry  IV  was  a  child  when  his  father  died  in  1056.  The  affairs  of  the  kingdom 
were  conducted  under  the  regency  of  his  mother  until  1072.  He  did  not  become  em¬ 
peror  until  1084,  being  crowned  at  that  time  by  the  antipope  Clement  III. 

Gregory  VII  was  pope  1073—1085.  His  vigorous  reform  policy  brought  on  the 
so-called  Investiture  Struggle  which  William  here  describes.  The  struggle  was  a 
bitter  one.  Gregory  died  in  exile  in  1085,  and  Henry  IV  died  excommunicate  in 
1106.  Their  respective  successors,  however,  continued  the  struggle  until  1122,  when 
a  compromise  was  reached  in  the  Concordat  of  Worms. 


86  PLANS  FOR  RELIEF  OF  JERUSALEM 

secute  the  church  at  Rome.  He  raised  up,  as  an  opponent  to  the  lord 
pope,  Guibert,  archbishop  of  Ravenna,  a  learned  man  of  great  wealth.^*^ 
The  latter,  presuming  on  the  emperor’s  power  and  his  own  vast  riches, 
forcibly  expelled  the  venerable  Gregory  and  seized  the  apostolic  see. 
So  foolish  was  he  and  so  lacking  in  sincerity  of  mind  that  he  really  be¬ 
lieved  himself  pope  because  he  was  falsely  so  called. 

The  unhappy  world,  lying  in  wickedness,  was,  ere  this,  already  fol¬ 
lowing  dangerous  and  unprofitable  paths,  as  we  have  said.  When  this 
schism  arose,  however,  the  world  sank  to  still  lower  depths.  Casting 
aside  all  reverence  for  God  and  man  alike,  it  pursued  sinful  things  and 
turned  away  from  those  that  were  wholesome.  Bishops  were  impris¬ 
oned  j  any  prelate  of  the  church  who  dared  to  disagree  with  the  em¬ 
peror  in  this  obstinacy  of  his  was  cast  into  prison  and  his  goods  confis¬ 
cated,  as  if  he  were  guilty  of  manslaughter.  They  not  merely  suffered 
temporary  wrongs,  but  were  permanently  removed  from  their  sees  and 
successors  appointed  in  their  places. 

Gregory  had  fled  before  the  wrath  of  the  emperor  into  Apulia. 
There  he  was  kindly  received  and  honorably  treated  by  Lord  Robert 
Guiscard,^^  duke  of  Apulia,  by  whose  assistance  he  had  escaped  the 
hand  of  the  emperor.  He  finally  went  to  Salerno  where  he  closed  his 
life  upon  earth  and  was  buried. 

He  was  succeeded  by  Pope  Victor,  who  held  the  see  only  two 
months,®^  and  who,  in  turn,  was  succeeded  by  Pope  Urban,  whom  we 
have  already  mentioned.  To  avoid  the  wrath  of  Henry,  successor  of 
the  Henry  named  above,  who  likewise  obstinately  persisted  in  the  same 
wickedness,  this  pope  took  refuge  in  the  castles  of  his  loyal  nobles,  but 
he  was  never  entirely  safe.  Although  in  adversity  himself,  he  received 
Peter  kindly.  The  venerable  man  had  now  returned  from  Jerusalem 
and  was  engaged  in  trying  to  carry  out  the  task  laid  upon  him.  Urban 

Guibert,  or  Wibert,  took  the  title  Clement  III.  He  held  Rome  until  driven  out 
by  crusaders  in  1097,  thoug^h  his  troops  held  the  castle  of  San  Angelo  until  1098. 
He  continued  to  claim  the  office  to  the  time  of  his  death  in  iioo. 

Robert  Guiscard,  one  of  the  younger  but  more  famous  sons  of  Tancred  of  Haute- 
ville,  who  came  from  Normandy  to  establish  themselves  in  southern  Italy.  Here  he 
became  duke  of  Apulia  and  sought  to  extend  his  power  over  the  Greek  peninsula 
also.  He  returned  from  Greece  to  rescue  Pope  Gregory  from  Rome  during  a  siege 
by  Henry  IV.  His  death  occurred  in  1085  (see  C.  H.  Haskins,  Normans  in  Eurofean 
History y  pp.  200—206). 

Victor  III  was  pope  1086-1087.  Urban  did  not  succeed  to  the  throne  until 
1088,  or  nearly  three  years  after  Gregory  VII  died.  Both,  however,  continued  the 
policy  of  their  great  predecessor  and  spent  most  of  their  time  in  exile  from  Rome. 


PLANS  FOR  RELIEF  OF  JERUSALEM  87 

promised  on  the  word  of  Him  whose  servant  he  was  that  as  opportunity 
offered  he  would  assist  him  in  the  mission  on  which  he  had  come. 

Kindled  with  enthusiasm  from  on  high,  Peter  traversed  all  Italy, 
crossed  the  Alps,  and  went  about  to  each  of  the  princes  of  the  West, 
insisting,  rebuking,  and  censuring.  His  warning  words,  aided  by  divine 
grace,  persuaded  some  not  to  delay  going  to  the  aid  of  their  brethren 
who  were  in  such  adversity,  not  to  allow  the  holy  places  which  the  Lord 
had  deigned  to  glorify  with  His  own  presence  to  be  profaned  longer  by 
the  filth  of  the  infidels.  Nor  was  he  satisfied  to  sow  this  seed  among 
princes  alone,  but  he  longed  to  inspire  the  common  people  and  men  of 
the  lower  classes  by  his  pious  exhortations  to  undertake  the  same  duty. 
As  he  made  his  way  slowly  through  kingdoms  and  nations,  devoutly 
solicitous,  he  preached  the  same  message  to  the  poorest  and  most  lowly 
in  the  faithful  execution  of  his  mission.  The  Lord  looked  upon  his 
faithful  service  and  granted  him  such  favor  that  rarely  did  he  call  the 
people  together  without  results.  His  preaching  made  him  very  neces¬ 
sary  to  the  pope,  who  had  decided  to  follow  him  beyond  the  mountains 
without  delay.  For  in  his  role  of  forerunner,  he  prepared  the  hearts  of 
his  hearers  to  obey,  so  that  the  pope,  who  wished  to  persuade  them  to 
the  same  course  of  action,  had  less  difficulty  in  attaining  his  purpose  and 
was  able  to  influence  them  more  readily. 

14.  The  coming  of  Pope  Urban  to  the  regions  beyond  the  moun¬ 
tains ;  and  concerning  the  synod  held  at  Clermont, 

It  was  the  year  1095  of  the  Incarnation  of  the  Lord,  in  the  fourth  in¬ 
diction.  Henry  IV  was  reigning  in  the  forty-third  year  as  king  of 
the  Germans  and  in  the, twelfth  as  emperor  of  the  Romans,  and 
Philip  I,  the  illustrious  king  of  the  Franks,  son  of  Henry  I,  was  ruling 
in  France.  Pope  Urban  saw  at  this  time  that  the  wickedness  of  mankind 
had  exceeded  all  bounds  and  that  everything,  as  if  prone  to  evil,  was 
tending  downward.  A  council  of  all  Italy  had  just  been  held  at  Piacenza, 
a  proceeding  greatly  needed  to  correct  the  excesses  of  the  people. 

Should  be  thirty-ninth  year  as  king,  since  his  father  died  in  1056.  William’s 
relative  inaccuracy  about  events  in  Germany  constitutes  one  of  the  chief  objections 
to  the  claim  that  his  parents  came  from  that  region. 

This  council,  held  in  a  region  which  contained  many  adherents  of  the  em¬ 
peror,  marks  a  distinct  advance  in  the  fortunes  of  the  papacy.  It  was  attended  by 
representatives  of  the  Eastern  emperor,  Alexius  Comnenus,  who  are  believed  to  have 
sought  the  aid  of  the  pope.  (See  D.  C.  Munro,  “Did  the  Emperor  Alexius  I  Ask  for 


88  PLANS  FOR  RELIEF  OF  JERUSALEM 

After  this  synod,  the  pope  left  Italy  to  escape  the  wrath  of  the  emperor, 
crossed  the  Alps,  and  entered  the  kingdom  of  France.  There  he  re¬ 
ceived  visible  confirmation  of  the  reports  he  had  already  heard.  Ad¬ 
monitions  from  on  high  were  everywhere  being  disregarded,  the  doc¬ 
trines  of  the  Gospels  were  despised,  faith  had  perished,  while  charity 
and  every  virtue  were  in  danger.  On  the  other  hand,  the  kingdom  of 
the  adversary,  the  Prince  of  Darkness,  was  open  far  and  wide. 

In  view  of  his  position.  Pope  Urban  was  extremely  anxious  as  to 
how  he  might  counteract  the  many  monstrous  vices  and  the  sins  which 
were  unfortunately  springing  up  and  involving  the  whole  earth.  He 
determined  to  call  a  general  council,  first  at  Vezelay,  then  at  Puy. 
Finally,  in  the  month  of  November,  divine  grace  attending  them,  a 
holy  assemblage  of  bishops  and  abbots  from  all  parts  of  the  provinces 
beyond  the  Alps  convened,  in  God’s  name,  at  Clermont,  a  city  of  Au¬ 
vergne.  Some  of  the  princes  of  the  same  provinces  were  also  present. 
Here,  by  the  advice  of  the  clergy  and  God-fearing  men,  regulations 
were  framed  which  might  tend  toward  relieving  the  unsatisfactory  con¬ 
dition  of  the  church.  Canons  were  also  promulgated  which,  it  was 
hoped,  would  assist  in  the  upbuilding  of  morals  and  the  correction  of 
grievous  faults.  Peter  the  Hermit,  who  felt  due  responsibility  for  the 
message  entrusted  to  him,  suggested  that  these  measures  might  restore 
the  peace  which  seemed  to  have  perished  from  the  world.  At  length. 
Urban  turned  his  attention  to  his  sermon,  as  follows.^"^ 

% 

15.  The  fofe^s  sermon  to  the  feofle  on  behalf  of  the  ftlgrtmage 
to  Jerusalem, 

^^You  know,  dearest  brethren,  and  it  is  right  that  you  should  know, 
how  the  Redeemer  of  the  human  race,  for  the  salvation  of  us  all,  put 
on  flesh  and  lived  as  a  man  among  men.  With  His  own  presence.  He 
made  glorious  the  Land  of  Promise  as  He  had  promised  aforetime  to 
the  fathers  j  and  by  the  works  of  dispensation  which  He  accomplished, 

Aid  at  the  Council  of  Piacenza,  1095?”  American  Historical  Revie^Oy  XXVII  [1921- 
22],  570.) 

This  version  of  Pope  Urban’s  speech  must  be  regarded  as  an  imaginary  re¬ 
construction  by  William.  It  is  not  exactly  like  any  of  the  reports  of  the  speech  re¬ 
corded  by  persons  who  were  present,  though  it  follows  the  main  points  (D.  C.  Munro, 
“The  Speech  of  Urban  II  at  Clermont,”  American  Historical  RevieWy  XI  [1905—6], 
231-42).  William  derived  much  of  the  language  of  the  speech  from  the  Scriptures, 
and  the  skill  with  which  he  wove  together  the  Biblical  phrases  caused  Hagenmeyer, 
himself  a  clergyman,  to  hail  it  as  a  masterpiece  of  Biblical  quotation. 


PLANS  FOR  RELIEF  OI;  JERUSALEM  89 

and  by  repeated  miracles  as  well,  He  rendered  it  famous.  This  the 
books  of  both  the  Old  and  the  New  Testament  teach  in  almost  every 
syllable.  It  is  indeed  evident  that  He  loved  that  land  with  a  very 
special  love,  since  He  deigned  to  call  that  part  of  the  earth,  or  rather, 
that  little  spot.  His  heritage,  although  the  whole  earth  and  the  fullness 
thereof  was  His.®®  Therefore,  He  says,  by  the  voice  of  Isaiah:  ‘and 
Israel  mine  inheritance’ j  and  again,  ‘For  the  vineyard  of  the  Lord 
of  hosts  is  the  house  of  Israel.’  And  although  from  the  beginning  He 
consecrated  to  Himself  the  whole  land,  yet  He  adopted  the  Holy  City 
as  peculiarly  His  own,  according  to  the  witness  of  the  prophet  who  says: 
‘The  Lord  loveth  the  gates  of  Zion  more  than  all  the  dwellings  of 
Jacob.’  Concerning  this  city,  glorious  things  are  spoken,  because,  for¬ 
sooth,  it  was  there  that  our  Saviour,  through.  His  teaching,  suffering, 
and  rising  again,  wrought  salvation  in  the  midst  of  the  earth.  For  this 
end  she  was  chosen  from  all  eternity  that  she  might  be  a  witness  of  these 
things  and  the  peculiar  shrine  of  mysteries.  Chosen,  in  very  truth,  for 
He  who  Himself  chose  her  testifies,  saying:  ‘And  out  of  Jerusalem,  the 
city  that  I  have  chosen,  shall  come  a  Saviour  for  you.’  But,  although 
because  of  the  sins  of  her  people,  God,  in  His  own  righteous  judgment, 
permitted  her  to  be  delivered  again  and  again  into  the  hands  of  the 
wicked,  and  suffered  her  to  endure  for  a  time  the  harsh  yoke  of  servi¬ 
tude,  it  should  not  be  thought  that  He  cast  her  off  as  if  rejected  by  Him. 
For  it  is  written:  God  ‘scourgeth  every  son  whom  he  receiveth.’  But 
He  stores  up  wrath  against  him  to  whom  He  says:  ‘My  jealousy  shall 
depart  from  thee,  and  I  will  be  quiet,  and  will  be  no  more  angry.’ 
Therefore,  He  loves  her,  nor  has  the  fervor  of  His  love  toward  her 
grown  cold  to  whom  He  says:  ‘Thou  shalt  also  be  a  crown  of  glory  in 
the  hand  of  the  Lord,  and  a  royal  diadem  in  the  hand  of  thy  God.  Thou 
shalt  no  more  be  termed  Forsaken  .  .  .  but  thou  shalt  be  called 
[Hephzibah]  ...  for  the  Lord  delighteth  in  thee.’ 

“The  cradle  of  our  faith,  the  native  land  of  our  Lord,  and  the 
mother  of  salvation,  is  now  forcibly  held  by  a  people  without  God,  the 
son  of  the  Egyptian  handmaiden.  Upon  the  captive  sons  of  the  free 
woman  he  imposes  desperate  conditions  under  which  he  himself,  the 

Cf.  Ps.  24 :  I  i  49  :  12;  I  Cor.  lo :  26.  Is.  19:25. 

Is.  5:7.  71  Ps  87:2. 

72  Cf.  I  Ki.  11:365  Zee.  9:9.  Here,  as  frequently,  William  has  combined  parts  of 
several  verses  for  his  own  purposes. 

72  He.  12:6.  74  £26.  16:42.  7i>  ig  52 :  3,  4. 


90  PLANS  FOR  RELIEF  OF  JERUSALEM 

relations  being  reversed,  should  by  right  have  served.  But  what  is 
written?  ^Cast  out  this  bondwoman  and  her  son.^  For  many  years 
past,  the  wicked  race  of  Saracens,  followers  of  unclean  superstitions, 
have  oppressed  with  tyrannical  violence  the  holy  places  where  the  feet 
of  our  Lord  rested.  The  faithful  are  made  subject  and  condemned  to 
bondage.  Dogs  have  entered  into  the  holy  places,  the  sanctuary  has 
been  profaned,  the  people,  worshippers  of  God,  have  been  humbled. 
The  chosen  race  is  now  enduring  undeserved  tribulations,  the  royal 
priesthood  slaves  in  mud  and  bricks.  The  city  of  God,  the  chief  over 
provinces,  has  been  rendered  tributary.  Whose  soul  is  not  softened, 
whose  heart  does  not  melt,  as  these  indignities  recur  to  his  mind?  Who, 
dearest  brethren,  can  listen  to  this  with  dry  eyes?  The  temple  of  the 
Lord,  whence  He,  in  His  zeal,  drove  those  who  bought  and  sold  that 
the  house  of  His  Father  might  not  become  a  den  of  thieves,'^'^  has  been 
made  the  home  of  demons.  It  was  this  that  roused  the  laudable  zeal 
of  Matthias  the  priest,  the  great  ancestor  of  the  holy  Maccabees,  as  he 
himself  testifies:  ‘Her  temple  is  become  as  a  man  without  honor,’  and 
‘her  glorious  vessels  are  carried  away  into  captivity.’ 

“The  city  of  the  King  of  all  Kings,  which  transmitted  to  others  the 
precepts  of  an  inviolable  faith,  is  forced  against  her  will  to  be  subject 
to  the  superstitions  of  the  Gentiles.  The  church  of  the  Holy  .Resurrec¬ 
tion,  the  last  resting  place  of  the  sleeping  Lord,  endures  their  rule  and 
is  desecrated  by  the  filth  of  those  who  have  no  part  in  the  resurrection, 
but  are  destined  to  burn  forever,  as  straw  for  everlasting  flames.  The 
revered  places,  consecrated  to  divine  mysteries,  places  which  received 
the  Lord  in  the  flesh  as  a  guest,  which  saw  His  signs  and  felt  His  bene¬ 
fits,  and,  in  full  faith,  showed  forth  in  themselves  the  proofs  of  all  this, 
have  been  made  sheepfolds  and  stables  for  cattle.  That  most  excellent 
people  whom  the  Lord  of  Hosts  blessed,  groans  aloud,  exhausted  be¬ 
neath  the  burden  of  forced  services  and  sordid  payments.  Its  sons, 
precious  pledges  of  Mother  Church,  are  seized  and  carried  off  j  they 
are  compelled  to  serve  the  uncleanness  of  the  Gentiles,  to  deny  the 
name  of  the  Living  God,  and  to  blaspheme  with  sacrilegious  lips.  If 
they  shrink  back  in  horror  from  the  impious  commands  of  the  infidels, 
they  are  slain  by  the  sword  like  beasts  of  sacrifice,  and  thus  become  com¬ 
panions  of  the  holy  martyrs.  To  the  eye  of  sacrilege,  there  is  no  distinc¬ 
tion  of  place  and  no  respect  for  persons.  Priests  and  Levites  are  slain 

Ge.  21 :  10.  Mat.  21 :  12,  13.  I  Macc.  2:8,  9. 


PLANS  FOR  RELIEF  OF  JERUSALEM  91 

in  the  sanctuaries  j  virgins  are  forced  to  choose  between  prostitution  and 
death  by  torture  j  nor  do  matrons  reap  any  advantage  from  their  more 
mature  years. 

^^Woe  to  us  who  are  now  descending  into  the  miseries  of  the  perilous 
time  which  faithful  King  David,  the  chosen  of  God,  foresaw  in  spirit 
and  deplored:  ^O  God,  the  heathen  are  come  into  thine  inheritance; 
thy  holy  temple  have  they  defiled’;  and  again:  ^They  break  in  pieces 
thy  people,  O  Lord,  and  afflict  thine  heritage.’  ^How  long,  Lord? 
wilt  thou  be  angry  forever?  Shall  thy  wrath  burn  like  fire?’ 

^ Where  are  thy  former  loving-kindnesses?’®^  Is  that  saying  true: 
^Hath  God  forgotten  to  be  gracious?  hath  he  in  anger  shut  up  his  tender 
mercies?’  ^Remember,  O  Lord,  what  is  come  upon  us;  consider,  and 
behold  our  reproach.’  ^Woe  is  me,  wherefore  was  I  born  to  see  this 
misery  of  my  people,  and  of  the  Holy  City,  and  to  dwell  there,  and  to 
see  it  delivered  into  the  hands  of  strangers.’ 

“Therefore,  beloved,  arm  yourselves  with  the  zeal  of  the  Lord.  ^Gird 
thy  sword  upon  thy  thigh,  O  most  Mighty.’  Gird  yourselves  and  be 
sons  of  the  Almighty,  for  it  is  better  to  die  in  battle  than  to  behold  the 
calamities  of  our  race  and  of  the  saints.®®  If  anyone  feels  zeal  for  God’s 
law,  let  him  join  us.  Let  us  go  to  the  aid  of  our  brethren.  ^Let  us  break 
their  bands  asunder,  and  cast  away  their  cords  from  us.’  ®^  Go,  and  God 
be  with  you.  Turn  the  weapons  which  you  have  stained  unlawfully  in 
the  slaughter  of  one  another  against  the  enemies  of  the  faith  and  the 
name  of  Christ.  Those  guilty  of  thefts,  arson,  rapine,  homicide,  and 
other  crimes  of  similar  nature  shall  not  possess  the  kingdom  of  God. 
Render  this  obedience,  well-pleasing  to  God,  that  these  works  of  piety 
and  the  intercession  of  the  saints  may  speedily  obtain  for  you  pardon  for 
the  sins  by  which  you  have  provoked  God  to  anger. 

“Accordingly,  we  warn  and  exhort  you  in  the  Lord,  and  we  enjoin 
upon  you,  for  the  remission  of  your  sins,  that  you  endure  affliction  and 
hardships  with  our  brethren  who  dwell  in  Jerusalem  and  in  the  bound¬ 
aries  thereof;  that,  as  joint  heirs  with  them  of  the  heavenly  kingdom 
(for  we  are  all  members  one  of  another,  ffleirs  of  God  and  joint  heirs 
with  Christ’), you  restrain  with  righteous  hatred  the  insolence  of  the 
infidels,  who  are  trying  to  subjugate  kingdoms,  principalities,  and  pow- 

79:1.  ®®Ps.  94:5.  ®^Ps.  79:5.  ®^Ps.  89:46. 

Ps.  89 :  49.  Ps.  77:9.  La.  5:1.  I  Macc.  2 :  7. 

®^Ps.  44:4.  I  Macc.  3  :  58,  59.  ®®Ps.  2:3.  Ro.  8:17. 


92  PLANS  FOR  RELIEF  OF  JERUSALEM 

ersj  and  that  you  attack  with  all  your  strength  those  who  are  deter¬ 
mined  to  destroy  the  Christian  name.  Otherwise,  it  will  happen  that 
the  Church  of  God,  which  is  now  suffering  the  yoke  of  undeserved 
bondage,  will  shortly  experience  loss  of  faith,  and  the  superstition  of 
the  heathen  will  prevail.  Some  of  you  have  seen  with  your  own  eyes 
these  things  of  which  we  are  now  speaking  and  know  in  what  tribula¬ 
tion  these  brethren  have  been  living,  and  their  letter,  brought  by  the 
hand  of  Peter,  that  venerable  man  who  is  here  with  us,  sets  forth  the 
same  message.®^ 

“Herewith  we,  trusting  in  the  mercy  of  God,  and  by  the  authority 
of  the  blessed  apostles  Peter  and  Paul,  do  grant  to  faithful  Christians 
who  take  up  arms  against  the  infidel  and  assume  the  burden  of  this 
pilgrimage,  remission  of  the  penance  imposed  upon  them  for  their  sins. 
Let  not  those  who  in  true  penitence  depart  thither  doubt  that  they  shall 
receive  indulgence  for  their  sins  and  the  fruit  of  eternal  reward.  Mean¬ 
while,  we  place  under  the  protection  of  the  church  and  of  the  blessed 
Peter  and  Paul,  those  who,  in  the  ardor  of  faith,  undertake  this  task 
of  fighting  the  infidel,  as  true  sons  of  obedience.  We  decree  that  they 
shall  be  free  from  all  worry  regarding  their  possessions  and  persons. 
If,  during  this  time,  anyone  shall  dare  rashly  to  molest  them,  let  him 
be  excommunicated  by  the  bishop  of  the  place  and  let  the  sentence  be 
observed  by  all  until  the  stolen  goods  be  returned  and  until  suitable 
satisfaction  be  rendered  for  the  losses  suffered.  Bishops  and  priests 
who  do  not  take  a  firm  stand  against  such  actions  shall  be  punished  by 
suspension  from  office  until  they  shall  obtain  mercy  from  the  apostolic 
see.” 

Thus  he  closed  his  sermon  and  bade  all  prelates  of  churches  who 
were  present  to  return  to  their  own  parishes,  there  to  devote  them¬ 
selves  with  all  due  perseverance  and  energy  to  the  task  of  persuading 
their  people  to  undertake  the  pilgrimage.  With  this  message  he  ceased 
speaking,  and  the  synod  broke  up.  Farewells  were  exchanged,  and 
each  returned  to  his  own.  Above  all,  according  to  the  directions  of  the 
synod,  they  labored  faithfully  to  induce  all  to  observe  unbroken  peace 
(which  in  common  parlance  is  called  a  truce)  that  those  who  intended 

Peter’s  presence  at  this  council  is  part  of  the  legend.  See  note  56. 

One  of  the  interesting  acts  of  this  council  was  the  requirement  that  every  ‘‘man” 
aged  twelve  years  or  more  was  to  take  oath  every  three  years  to  observe  the  Peace 
and  Truce  of  God  (see  J.  D.  Mansi,  Sacrorum  conciliortun  nova  et  amflissima 
collection  Vol.  XX,  col,  923). 


PLANS  FOR  RELIEF  OF  JERUSALEM  93 

to  go  might  not  be  hindered  while  they  were  making  the  necessary 
preparations  for  the  journey. 

1 6.  Of  the  leaders  f  resent  at  the  council  who  o'ffered  themselves 
for  the  filgrimage ;  and  of  the  sign  of  the  cross  which  those 
who  intended  to  go  fut  ufon  their  garments  in  token  of  their 
vows  and  their  future  filgrimage. 

Moreover,  because  of  his  great  service  to  the  faith,  God  gave  to  this 
loyal  servant,  preaching  with  great  power  in  lofty  and  glorious  strain, 
effective  eloquence  and  a  message  worthy  of  acceptance  in  the  eyes  of 
all.  His  words  seemed  to  proceed  from  God,  and  both  young  and  old 
eagerly  received  them  as  a  command  from  on  high,  however  arduous 
and  difficult  the  task  might  seem.  This  passionate  enthusiasm  for  the 
pilgrimage  not  only  animated  those  who  had  listened  to  his  actual 
words,  but,  as  his  sermon  was  carried  far  and  wide,  it  inspired  even  those 
who  had  not  been  present  with  a  yearning  desire  to  undertake  the  same 
journey.  Bishops  showed  loyal  cooperation,  as  they  had  been  com¬ 
manded.  They  invited  their  own  people  to  go  on  the  pilgrimage  and 
went  about  their  parishes  constantly  sowing  the  word  of  life  among  the 
people.  Nor  did  one  grain  fall  to  the  ground  without  fruitage.  Indeed, 
it  might  truly  be  said  that  the  word  of  the  Lord  was  being  fulfilled:  “I 
came  not  to  send  peace  but  a  sword.’^  For  husband  was  separated 
from  wife,  wife  from  husband;  fathers  from  sons,  sons  from  parents. 
No  bond  of  affection  was  proof  against  this  enthusiasm.  From  the 
cloisters  many  monks  went  forth,  and  recluses  likewise  left  the  cells 
where  they  had  voluntarily  secluded  themselves  for  the  love  of  God. 

Yet  the  Lord  was  not  with  all  in  this  cause,  and  discretion,  the  mother 
of  virtues,  was  not  always  the  actuating  motive  for  these  vows.  Some 
joined  the  others  that  they  might  not  leave  their  friends;  some  that 
they  might  not  be  regarded  as  idle;  others  for  frivolous  reasons  only, 
or  because  by  going  away  they  might  escape  their  creditors  (to  whom 
they  were  bound  by  a  load  of  debts) .  Thus,  for  divers  reasons,  all  were 
hastening  toward  the  same  goal.  No  one  in  the  lands  of  the  West  paid 
any  attention  to  age  or  sex,  to  status  or  condition.  No  one  could  be  pre¬ 
vented  from  undertaking  the  journey  by  any  words  of  persuasion,  but 
all,  without  distinction,  lent  a  hand;  all  as  with  one  accord  took  the 
vow  with  heart  and  soul.  It  seemed  the  literal  fulfillment  of  that  which 

Mat.  10 :  34. 


94  PLANS  FOR  RELIEF  OF  JERUSALEM 

is  written  in  [the  book  of]  Tobit:  Jerusalem,  the  holy  city,  many  na¬ 
tions  shall  come  from  far  .  .  .  with  gifts  in  their  hands  ...  j  all 
generations  shall  praise  thee  with  great  joy.”  They  shall  hold  your 
land  in  consecration,  invoking  in  you  a  great  name.®^ 

Of  those  who  were  present  at  the  council,  many  received  with  joy 
the  implanted  word.  Foremost  among  these  was  Adhemar,  bishop  of 
Puy,^^  that  man  of  revered  life  and  precious  memory.  He  later  held 
the  office  of  papal  legate  and  faithfully  and  wisely  commanded  the 
people  of  God  on  this  expedition.  William,  bishop  of  Orange,  a  man 
verily  religious  and  God-fearing,  was  also  among  this  number.®^ 
Princes  of  both  kingdoms  who  had  not  attended  the  council  were  also 
inspired  with  the  same  fervor.  They  too,  with  frequent  words  of  en¬ 
couragement  to  one  another,  girt  themselves  for  the  way.  They  set  a 
definite  time  for  departure,  when,  after  the  necessary  preparations  had 
been  made  and  their  companions  assembled,  they  should  start  on  the 
expedition.  Verily,  it  seems  as  if  the  undertaking  of  which  we  are  speak¬ 
ing  was  managed  by  divine  providence  and  that  commands  actually 
went  forth  from  the  Lord.  For  whenever  it  was  rumored  that  a  prince 
had  taken  the  vow  to  make  the  pilgrimage,  the  people  flocked  thither  in 
throngs  and  begged  permission  to  join  his  company.  They  invoked  his 
name  as  their  lord  for  the  entire  journey  and  promised  obedience  and 
loyalty.  And  since  the  proverb  says,  ^Tlague  take  the  hindermost,  it 
is  disgraceful  for  me  to  be  left  behind,”  they  made  haste  to  supply 
themselves  with  the  necessary  equipment,  each  desiring  to  get  the  start 
of  the  other.  Truly  it  was  divinely  ordained,  for  this  fire  of  purgatory 
was  indispensable  to  wash  away  the  sins  of  the  past — alas,  all  too  many 
— and  this  preoccupation  was  useful  in  preventing  future  misdeeds.  For 
reverence  toward  God  and  respect  for  fellow  man  no  longer  existed 
among  mortals. 

It  had  been  unanimously  agreed  and  enjoined  by  order  of  the  pope 
that  all  who  vowed  to  undertake  this  pilgrimage  should  stamp  upon 

Tob.  13:11,  14,  15. 

His  part  in  the  crusade  is  described  in  the  following  pages.  He  is  believed  to  have 
taken  part  in  an  earlier  pilgrimage  to  Palestine  in  1086  and  to  have  been  a  feudal 
knight  before  he  became  an  ecclesiastic  (see  C.  Kohler,  ^‘Ademar  de  Monteil,”  La 
Grande  Encyclofedte^  I,  555). 

William,  bishop  of  Orange,  who  figures  somewhat  prominently  on  the  crusade, 
attended  Urban  at  both  Piacenza  and  Clermont.  He  likewise  took  part  in  preaching 
the  crusade,  notably  at  Genoa,  and  joined  the  crusading  army  of  Raymond  of  Tou¬ 
louse. 

Horace  Ars  Poet.  417. 


PLANS  FOR  RELIEF  OF  JERUSALEM  95 

their  garments  the  saving  sign  of  the  vivifying  cross.  Thus  they  would 
bear  on  their  shoulders  the  memory  of  Him  whose  place  of  passion 
they  proposed  to  visit.  This  they  did  in  imitation  of  Him  who  hastened 
thither  for  our  redemption  j  for  “the  government  shall  be  upon  his 
shoulder.”  To  this  movement  the  following  passage  from  Isaiah 
seems  to  refer;  The  Lord  “shall  set  up  an  ensign  for  the  nations,  and 
shall  assemble  the  outcasts  of  Israel.” 

This  command  also  of  the  Lord  seemed  to  be  fulfilled  to  the  letter: 
“If  any  man  will  come  after  me,  let  him  deny  himself,  and  take  up  his 
cross,  and  follow  me.” 


17.  The  names  of  the  frinces  from  the  kingdoms  of  the  Franks 
and  Teutons  who  undertook  the  'pilgrimage. 


The  following  nobles  from  the  two  kingdoms  fortified  themselves 
with  the  sign  of  the  cross,  in  pledge  of  the  future  pilgrimage:  The  illus¬ 
trious  Lords  Hugh  the  Great,  brother  of  Philip  I,  king  of  the 
Franks;  Robert,  count  of  Flanders;  Robert,  count  of  Normandy,  son 
of  William  [I],  king  of  the  Angles;  Stephen,  count  of  Chartres  and 
Blois,  father  of  the  elder  Count  Theobald;  Adhemar,  bishop  of  Puy; 
William,  bishop  of  Orange;  Raymond,  count  of  Toulouse  and  St. 
Gilles;  with  many  other  notable  and  distinguished  men.  The  famous 
Lord  Godfrey,  duke  of  Lorraine,  a  valiant  warrior,  also  went  and,  with 
him,  his  brothers.  Lords  Baldwin  and  Eustace.  Also  among  the  number 
were  Baldwin,  surnamed  du  Bourg,  a  kinsman  of  the  three  brothers 
and  son  of  Lord  Hugh,  count  of  Rethel;  Gamier  de  Grey;  Baldwin, 
count  of  Hainault;  Isoard,  count  of  Die;  Rainbald,  count  of  Orange; 
William,  count  of  Forez;  Count  Stephen  d’Aumale;  Rotrou,  count  of 
Perche ;  and  Count  Hugh  of  St.  Pol. 

Among  other  men  of  distinction,  though  not  counts,  the  following 
illustrious  and  noble  men  voluntarily  offered  themselves  to  that  same 
obedience:  Henry  d’Esch;  Ralph  de  Beaugency;  Evrard  du  Puiset; 
Gaston  de  Bearn;  William  Amanjeu;  Gaston  de  Beziers;  William  de 


Is,  9 ;  6.  Is,  n  :  1 2.  Mat.  1 6 :  24. 

101  contemporary  chroniclers  of  the  First  Crusade  did  not  use  the  title  “dominus” 

as  does  William.  It  is  perhaps  evidence  of  the  great  change  in  social  manners  and 
customs  that  occurred  during  the  twelfth  century.  The  formality  of  chivalry  so  much 
respected  in  the  latter  part  of  the  century  was  almost  completely  absent  at  its  be¬ 
ginning.  Tliis  list  of  crusading  chieftains  is  more  inclusive  than  the  lists  of  either 
Fulcher  or  Albert  of  Aix.  William  apparently  intended  to  list  the  chief  leaders  of 
the  whole  crusade  at  this  point. 


96  PLANS  FOR  RELIEF  OF  JERUSALEM 

Montpellier  j  Gerard  de  Roussillon  5  Gerard  de  Cherisij  Roger  de 
Barneville  j  Guy  of  Possessa  and  Guy  of  Garland,  seneschal  of  the  king 
of  the  Franks 3  Thomas  de  La  Fere  3  and  Galen  of  Calvo  Monte.  Peter 
the  Hermit  also  followed  with  a  large  company  of  people  whom  he  had 
assembled  with  great  effort  from  both  the  kingdom  and  the  empire. 

From  this  side  the  Alps  came  Bohemond,  prince  of  Taranto,  the  son 
of  Robert  Guiscard,  duke  of  Apulia  3  Tancred,  his  sister’s  son  3  and 
many  others  whose  names  and  number  we  do  not  remember.  All  these, 
with  large  forces  of  military  men,  were  waiting  for  a  favorable  time  to 
join  the  Christian  soldiery,  ready  to  devote  themselves,  for  Christ’s 
sake,  to  the  hardships  of  so  great  a  pilgrimage. 

Accordingly,  when  the  winter  was  over  and  the  first  intimation  of 
spring  began  to  appear,  when  the  cold  had  been  driven  away  and  genial 
weather  returned  to  the  earth,  they  made  ready  their  horses,  prepared 
their  arms,  and  collected  their  baggage.  Those  who  were  to  set  out  to¬ 
gether  communicated  with  one  another  and  carefully  arranged  the 
time  when  it  was  necessary  to  start,  the  place  of  meeting,  and  the  route 
by  which  they  could  most  easily  and  rapidly  proceed.  For,  since  no  one 
region  could  supply  the  necessaries  of  life  for  so  many  thousands,  it 
was  carefully  arranged  that  each  of  the  more  important  leaders  should 
conduct  his  own  forces  separately  and  not  proceed  by  the  same  road  as 
the  others.  The  armies  were  not  to  meet  until  they  reached  the  city  of 
Nicaea.  For  as  will  be  explained  later,  the  duke  with  his  legions  went 
by  way  of  Hungary  3  the  count  of  Toulouse  and  the  bishop  of  Puy 
through  Dalmatia  3  while  the  other  chiefs  proceeded  through  Apulia. 
Thus  all  finally  came,  but  at  different  times,  to  Constantinople. 

In  the  meantime,  they  prepared  the  equipment  which  it  was  thought 
would  be  sufficient  for  so  long  a  journey,  and  each  tried  to  estimate 
the  amount  of  travelling  money  necessary,  in  accordance  with  the 
length  of  the  way,  ignorant  that  the  ways  of  the  Lord  are  not  in  the 
hand  of  man.  For  man  in  his  weakness  knows  not  what  the  morrow  may 
bring  forth. 

In  all  the  provinces  of  the  West,  there  was  not  a  single  home  idle  3 
for  each  man,  according  to  his  condition,  was  engaged  in  arranging  his 

private  affairs,  about  which  he  was  anxious.  Here  the  father  of  the 

* 

102  'pjjg  implication  of  these  statements  of  William  that  the  crusaders  were  operat¬ 
ing-  under  a  common  plan  is  confirmed  by  recent  study  (see  F.  Duncalf,  “The  Pope’s 
Plan  for  the  First  Crusade,”  Munro-CritsadeSy  pp.  44.-56). 


PLANS  FOR  RELIEF  OF  JERUSALEM  97 

family,  there  the  son,  and  there  the  entire  family  were  making  prepara¬ 
tions  to  set  forth. 

Many  letters  were  sent,  in  which  those  who  were  to  leave  at  the  same 
time  encouraged  one  another,  inveighed  against  delay,  and  advised  an 
early  departure.  When  those  who  had  been  named  as  leaders  of  the 
various  bands  summoned  the  rest,  these  tore  themselves  from  the  em¬ 
braces  of  their  dear  ones  with  sobs  and  sighs,  and,  after  exchanging  last 
farewells  and  kisses,  departed.  With  tears  and  wailing,  mothers  accom¬ 
panied  departing  sons,  daughters  fathers,  and  sisters  brothers,  while 
wives,  carrying  suckling  babes  in  their  arms,  attended  their  husbands. 
After  the  last  farewells  had  been  said,  they  followed  with  fixed  gaze 
those  whom  they  could  not  accompany  farther  in  reality. 

18.  Walter  the  Penniless y  the  first  to  defarty  reaches  Constanti-^ 
no  fie, 

Walter  the  Penniless,  a  man  of  noble  birth,  valiant  in  arms,  was  the 
first  to  set  out  on  the  pilgrimage.  He  started  on  the  eighth  day  of 
March,  in  the  year  of  the  Incarnation  of  the  Lord  1096.  He  had  with 
him  a  large  company  of  foot  soldiers  but  very  few  knights. After 
traversing  the  kingdom  of  the  Teutons,  he  went  down  into  Hungary. 
Now  the  kingdom  of  Hungary  is  difficult  of  access,  for  it  is  swampy  in 
many  places  and  is  also  encircled  by  great  rivers.  Thus,  except  in  certain 
places — and  those  extremely  narrow — it  affords  travellers  neither  ac¬ 
cess  to,  nor  exit  from,  the  realm. 

Hungary  was  ruled  at  this  time  by  that  most  Christian  king,  Colo- 
man.^^^  On  learning  of  Walter’s  approach,  the  king,  who  knew  of  his 
undertaking  and  thoroughly  approved  his  devout  purpose,  kindly  ad¬ 
mitted  him  to  his  kingdom  and  allowed  him  to  pass  through  Hungary 
with  his  expedition.  He  also  granted  him  the  privilege  of  a  public  mar- 

Statements  such  as  this  gave  rise  to  the  impression  that  these  first  bands  of 
crusaders  were  composed  chiefly  of  peasants  and  to  the  use  of  the  name  “Peasants 
Crusade”  to  cover  them  all.  This  view  has  been  corrected  by  Duncalf  (see  F.  Dun- 
calf,  “The  Peasants’  Crusade,”  American  Historical  Re’vie‘Wj  XXVI  [1920—21],  440— 

53)- 

Coloman,  king  of  Hungary  1095—1116,  who  succeeded  Ladislaus  I,  or  St.  Ladis- 
laus,  by  whom  Christianity  had  been  firmly  reestablished  in  Hungary.  Hungary  had 
become  Christian  under  Stephen  I,  or  St.  Stephen,  997—1038.  Disturbances  caused 
by  eastern  invaders  had  unsettled  some  of  that  work,  but  with  the  help  of  Pope 
Gregory  VII,  who  became  nominal  overlord  of  Hungary,  the  kings  of  Hungary, 
Ladislaus  especially,  fully  recovered  the  lost  ground. 


98  PLANS  FOR  RELIEF  OF  JERUSALEM 

ket.  Walter  passed  through  the  country  peacefully  and  arrived  in  safety 
at  the  river  Marosd^^  This  is  the  recognized  boundary  between  Hun¬ 
gary  and  the  Orient.  He  crossed  this  river  and  came  with  his  forces  to 
the  land  of  the  Bulgarians,  at  a  place  called  Belgrade. 

He  was  not  aware,  however,  that  some  of  his  company  had  stayed 
behind  on  the  other  side  of  the  river,  at  a  place  called  Malevilla  [Sem- 
lin],^^^  in  order  to  buy  food  and  other  necessities  for  the  journey.  The 
Hungarians  seized  these  men,  stripped  and  beat  them,  and  then  sent 
them  on  to  their  friends  despoiled  of  everything.  The  entire  company 
felt  deep  sympathy  for  their  companions  in  this  unlucky  disaster  and 
grieved  over  their  plight.  They  realized,  however,  that  it  would  be 
very  difEcult,  in  fact  almost  impossible,  to  defer  the  proposed  march 
and  recross  the  river  for  the  purpose  of  retaliation.  Under  the  circum¬ 
stances,  therefore,  they  decided  that  it  was  better  to  overlook  their 
present  wrongs,  rather  than  rashly  to  undertake  something  that  they 
could  not  carry  out.  Furthermore,  they  had  hope  in  Him  for  whose 
sake  they  had  undertaken  this  warfare  and  believed  that  no  injury  of¬ 
fered  to  the  servants  of  Christ  would  go  unavenged  but  would  receive 
its  fitting  punishment  from  Him  who  has  given  His  faithful  ones  this 
promise :  ‘^But  there  shall  not  a  hair  of  your  head  perish.  In  your  pa¬ 
tience  possess  ye  your  souls.” 

Accordingly,  they  proceeded  on  their  way  and  came,  as  we  have  said, 
to  Belgrade.  Here  Walter  asked  the  privilege  of  a  market  from  the 
ruling  duke  of  the  Bulgarians  and  was  refused.  He  therefore  encamped 
before  the  city,  and,  as  he  could  not  restrain  his  famished  army,  he  lost 
many  of  his  people.  For,  since  they  could  obtain  nothing  from  the  Bul¬ 
garians,  at  any  price,  his  army  went  out  to  seek  food  by  whatever  means, 
to  avoid  starving.  Coming  upon  flocks  and  herds  belonging  to  the  Bul¬ 
garians,  they  began  to  drive  them  off  by  force  to  the  camp.  As  soon  as 
the  Bulgarians  learned  of  this,  they  seized  their  weapons  and  sallied 
forth  with  hostile  intent.  Determined  to  regain  the  plunder,  they  fell 
upon  the  robbers  who  were  driving  off  their  cattle  and  routed  them.  A 
group  of  one  hundred  and  fifty  of  this  number  had  very  carelessly  be¬ 
come  separated  from  those  ahead  and  had  taken  refuge  in  a  certain 

The  modern  Morawa,  though  the  general  description  would  apply  rather  to 
the  Save  river,  which  separated  Belgrade  from  Semlin. 

Malevilla  has  been  identified  as  Semlin,  which  lies  across  the  Save  river  from 
Belgrade. 

Lu.  21:18,  19. 


PLANS  FOR  RELIEF  OF  JERUSALEM  99 

chapel.  The  enemy  set  this  on  fire,  and  the  Christians  within  were 
burned  to  death.  The  rest  of  the  band  were  forced  to  flee. 

Well  aware  that  he  was  leading  an  obstinate  and  reckless  throng, 
Walter  left  those  who  through  following  their  own  inclinations  had 
become  unmanageable,  and  passed  with  the  rest  of  his  army  in  a  wise 
and  circumspect  manner  through  the  extensive  forests  of  Bulgaria.  He 
came  at  last  to  Stralicia/®^  a  beautiful  city  of  Dacia  Mediterrania.  Here 
he  complained  to  the  governor  of  that  city  about  the  loss  and  injury 
unjustly  visited  upon  the  people  of  God  by  the  Bulgarians  and  obtained 
full  redress  for  all  that  had  occurred.  This  duke,  an  excellent,  God¬ 
fearing  man,  treated  him  kindly  and  agreed  to  furnish  a  market  where 
the  people  might  buy  the  goods  which  they  needed  at  a  fair  price  and 
with  just  measures.  Moreover,  that  nothing  might  be  lacking  which 
the  laws  of  humanity  require,  he  furnished  them  with  guides  for  the 
rest  of  the  way,  even  to  the  imperial  city. 

On  reaching  Constantinople,  Walter  was  introduced  into  the  pres¬ 
ence  of  the  emperor  and  succeeded  in  obtaining  permission  from  his 
imperial  majesty  to  lodge  his  army  near  the  city  with  the  privilege  of 
a  market.  This  the  emperor  granted  temporarily  until  Peter,  at  whose 
command  Walter  had  undertaken  the  march,  should  arrive. 

s 

19.  Peter  the  Hermit  follows.  While  marching  across  Hungary y 
he  learns  of  the  treachery  of  the  Hungarians , 

Not  very  long  after  the  events  just  related,  Peter  marched  through 
Lotharingia,  Franconia,  Bavaria,  and  that  region  which  is  called  Aus¬ 
tria.  He  led  with  him  a  great  host,  numbering  about  forty  thousand, 
which  he  had  gathered  from  every  people  and  tribe  and  language  and 
nation.  When  he  arrived  at  the  borders  of  Hungary  he  sent  a  message 
to  the  king  of  that  country  and  without  difficulty  obtained  permission  to 
enter,  on  condition  that  he  would  pass  through  the  kingdom  without 
causing  tumult  or  strife.  Peter  approved  of  the  condition,  took  advan¬ 
tage  of  the  permission,  and  entered  the  realm  with  his  forces.  An  abun¬ 
dant  supply  of  food  was  furnished  by  the  natives  at  a  reasonable  price 
and  under  good  conditions.  The  host  advanced  quietly  as  far  as  Semlin, 
the  place  mentioned  before.  Here,  however,  they  learned  of  the  out- 

108  Probably  modern  Sophia,  which  was  known  as  Triaditza  under  the  Byzantine 
rule.  The  Bulgarians  had  been  conquered  by  the  Byzantine  Empire  early  in  this  cen¬ 
tury,  and  they  remained  subject  until  1185. 


100 


PLANS  FOR  RELIEF  OF  JERUSALEM 

rages  which  their  comradeSj  who  had  preceded  them  under  Walter’s 
leadership,  had  suffered  from  the  inhabitants  of  this  place  and  of  the 
infamous  treatment  which  they  had  received.  When,  furthermore,  the 
troops  recognized  the  spoils  and  arms  of  their  friends  hanging  as  tro¬ 
phies  on  the  city  walls,  they  were  roused  to  righteous  wrath.  Shouting 
words  of  encouragement  to  one  another,  they  seized  their  arms  and 
broke  into  the  city  by  force.  Most  of  the  inhabitants  were  either  put  to 
the  sword  or  drowned  in  the  river  near  by.  In  the  riot  that  day  about 
four  thousand  Hungarians  are  said  to  have  perished,  a  punishment 
richly  deserved.  Report  says  that  Peter  lost  only  a  hundred  of  his  men. 
After  this  capture  of  the  city  by  force  of  arms,  the  pilgrims  remained 
there  for  five  consecutive  days,  because  of  the  great  abundance  of  food 
found  at  that  place. 

The  duke  of  the  Bulgarians,  Nichita  [Niketas]  by  name,  had 
been  responsible  for  refusing  a  market  to  Walter  and  his  army.  When 
he  learned  of  the  revenge  which  Peter’s  army  had  taken  upon  the  citi¬ 
zens  of  Semlin  for  the  treatment  which  had  been  accorded  Walter’s 
army,  he  feared  that  those  following  would  wish  to  visit  the  same  pun¬ 
ishment  upon  him,  for  he  had  not  been  free  from  guilt  in  that  matter. 
Since  he  felt  but  slight  confidence  in  the  defenses  of  Belgrade,  the  city 
over  which  he  ruled,  he  left  the  place.  The  inhabitants  and  their  fami¬ 
lies  also  deserted  it  and,  with  flocks  and  herds,  retreated  far  into  the 
dense  and  secret  recesses  of  the  forest. 

While  Peter  was  still  lingering  in  the  captured  city,  reports  reached 
him  that  the  king  of  Hungary,  greatly  incensed  over  the  massacre  of 
his  people,  had  summoned  his  military  forces  from  all  that  region  and 
was  vigorously  preparing  to  avenge  the  slain.  Peter  at  once  procured 
all  the  boats  to  be  found  on  both  banks  of  the  river  and  caused  his  army 
to  be  ferried  across  as  quickly  as  possible.  With  them  they  took  flocks 
and  herds  and  the  richest  of  spoils  from  the  ravaged  city,  even  to  an 
overabundant  supply.  When  all  had  been  transported  to  the  opposite 
shore,  they  pitched  camp  before  Belgrade,  which  was  found  aban¬ 
doned.  From  there,  Peter  led  his  forces  a  journey  of  eight  days  through 
dense  and  far-extending  forest  to  the  city  of  Nish.  The  entire  host  fol¬ 
lowed,  with  carts  and  wagons,  flocks  and  herds.  This  city  was  strongly 
fortified  with  a  wall  and  towers  and  was  garrisoned  by  a  large  force  of 
brave  men.  The  army  crossed  the  river  which  flows  past  the  city  by  a 

109  Niketas,  the  Byzantine  governor  of  the  region. 


PLANS  FOR  RELIEF  OF  JERUSALEM  loi 

stone  bridge  and  made  camp  near  by.  The  provisions  for  the  march 
were  now  beginning  to  give  out,  and  the  army  was  faced  with  a  shortage 
of  food.  A  message  was  accordingly  sent  to  the  ruler  of  the  city  with  the 
courteous  request  that  a  market,  especially  of  those  commodities  neces¬ 
sary  for  daily  existence,  be  provided  under  good  conditions  and  at  a 
just  price,  for  a  pilgrim  people  who  were  following  divine  commands. 
The  ruler  responded  that  this  could  not  be  granted  unless  the  army 
would  first  guarantee,  by  giving  hostages,  that  no  injury  or  even  greater 
violence  would  be  done  to  the  natives  who  served  the  market.  This 
condition  proved  acceptable  to  both  parties,  and  the  hostages  were 
given.  The  citizens  then  came  out  from  the  city,  bringing  their  mer¬ 
chandise  with  them. 


20.  At  Nishy  a  city  0/  Bulgaria y  a  dangerous  disturbance  arises 
between  the  filgrims  and  the  Bulgarians, 

A  GREATER  abundance  of  food  now  became  available  for  the  entire 
force,  and  the  transactions  of  buying  and  selling  on  both  sides  were 
conducted  with  mutual  forbearance.  The  night  passed  in  perfect  quiet 
with  interchange  of  friendly  converse,  and  in  the  early  morning  the 
hostages  were  returned  and  the  army  prepared  for  the  march.  They 
were  on  the  point  of  departing — ^in  fact  the  greater  part,  or  rather  prac¬ 
tically  the  entire  army,  had  already  started — when  a  few  troublemak¬ 
ers,  deserving  of  divine  censure,  bethought  them  of  a  trifling  quarrel 
which  had  occurred  the  night  before  while  they  were  trading  with  a 
certain  Bulgarian,  They  therefore  withdrew  a  little  from  the  lines  that 
had  already  marched  on  and  set  fire  to  seven  mills  which  were  revolv¬ 
ing  near  the  bridge  over  the  river  mentioned  above.  These  were 
quickly  reduced  to  ashes. 

These  sons  of  Belial,  about  a  hundred  in  number,  were  of  the  Teuton 
nation.  Even  this  evil  deed  did  not  completely  appease  their  mad  rage. 
They  therefore  set  fire  also  to  the  houses  of  certain  people  which  lay 
outside  the  walls  and  burned  these  also  with  equal  malevolence.  After 
committing  this  crime,  they  hastened  to  join  the  blameless  host,  as 
though  unconscious  of  having  done  any  wrong. 

The  ruler  of  the  city,  who  had  received  them  quite  kindly  on  the 
previous  night,  perceiving  that  they  had  not  fittingly  requited  his  fa¬ 
vors,  was  forced  to  accord  them  punishment  in  place  of  further  bene- 


102 


PLANS  FOR  RELIEF  OF  JERUSALEM 

fits.  Since,  with  unfair  judgment,  he  regarded  them  all  as  plunderers 
and  incendiaries,  he  visited  the  sins  of  a  few  on  the  whole  army.  He 
summoned  the  citizens  and  ordered  them  to  arm.  He  himself  led  the 
way  with  a  great  throng  and  by  word  and  example  encouraged  them  to 
pursue  the  Christians  as  if  in  revenge  for  sacrilege.  As  with  one  mind, 
the  townspeople  issued  forth  and  attacked  the  forces  that  had  already 
marched  on  ahead.  They  fell  savagely  upon  the  rear  guard  and  pressed 
them  hard  with  their  swords.  Somewhat  apart  from  the  press  of  the 
throng,  they  came  upon  those  malefactors  who  had  not  yet  joined  the 
main  army,  and,  with  righteous  wrath,  consigned  them  to  death.  But, 
either  by  chance  or  by  design,  they  inflicted  the  same  penalty  on  many 
innocent  persons,  thus  involving  the  good  with  the  guilty.  They  seized 
the  carts  and  wagons  on  which  food  and  every  kind  of  equipment  were 
being  carried  j  they  bound  and  led  away  with  them  the  old  men  and 
the  sick  as  well  as  the  women  and  boys  and  girls  who  could  not  keep 
up  with  the  pace  of  the  rest.  After  this  massacre,  satiated  with  the  blood 
of  the  slain,  they  returned  to  the  city,  loaded  with  spoils. 


2 1 .  Peter  recalls  his  fleeing  troofs  and  agam  seeks  to  come  to  a 
feace'jul  understanding  with  the  Bulgarians ;  but  a  fresh  dis¬ 
aster  ^  worse  than  the  former  oney  occurSy  and  his  legions  are 
scattered. 

Meanwhile,  Peter  had  proceeded  on  the  march  with  all  the  advance 
guard  and  the  principal  men  of  the  expedition,  entirely  ignorant  of  the 
catastrophe  which  had  befallen  his  comrades.  Suddenly,  a  messenger 
came  galloping  up  in  headlong  haste  with  news  of  the  disaster.  In 
graphic  detail,  he  related  the  story  of  the  seizure  and  massacre  of  his 
comrades.  On  hearing  this  news,  Peter  recalled  the  legions  and,  on  the 
advice  of  their  experienced  men,  retraced  the  road  over  which  they  had 
advanced  during  the  entire  day.  As  they  gazed  on  the  bodies  of  their 
murdered  brethren,  the  visible  proofs  of  the  massacre,  they  could  not 
refrain  from  tears  and  groans.  Finally,  they  stood  once  more  before  the 
city  on  the  spot  where  they  had  encamped  the  night  before. 

Peter  and  those  of  his  companions  who  had  better  control  over  their 
feelings  had  but  one  thought  and  purpose  in  regard  to  this  matter. 
They  had  returned  to  discover  the  reason  for  the  disaster  and  to  en¬ 
deavor  to  remove  the  motives  for  quarrelling.  They  hoped  that,  when 


PLANS  FOR  RELIEF  OF  JERUSALEM  103 

peace  had  been  completely  restored  between  the  two  people  and  the 
consciences  of  all  had  been  cleansed,  they  might  resume  their  pilgrim¬ 
age  in  greater  security.  In  accordance  with  this  desire,  they  sent  certain 
discreet  and  responsible  men  to  the  ruler  and  elders  of  the  city  to  in¬ 
vestigate  carefully  the  circumstances  which  had  led  to  the  sudden  riot 
and  the  shedding  of  so  much  innocent  blood. 

When  they  learned  the  reason,  the  envoys  perceived  that  the  citizens 
had  not  resorted  to  arms  without  entirely  adequate  cause  for  anger. 
Since  it  was  not  a  fitting  time  to  demand  revenge  for  their  wrongs, 
however,  the  messengers  endeavored  by  every  means  in  their  power  to 
bring  about  a  renewal  of  peace,  so  that  their  comrades  might  be  re¬ 
stored,  together  with  all  the  booty,  baggage,  and  everything  that  they 
had  lost.  They  were  trying  to  accomplish  this  end  and  had  almost 
reached  an  agreement  satisfactory  to  both  parties,  when  a  riot  broke 
out  in  the  camp.  This  disturbance  was  due  to  the  fiery  passions  and  au¬ 
dacity  of  certain  reckless  individuals  who  wished  to  avenge  by  force 
the  wrongs  which  they  had  sustained. 

In  the  hope  of  quieting  their  fury  and  removing  all  cause  for  further 
massacre,  Peter  dispatched  certain  responsible  men  of  great  influence 
to  try  to  prevent  the  mob  in  their  mad  rage  from  attacking  the  citizens. 
This  effort  proved  of  no  avail,  however,  for  they  refused  to  listen  to 
his  salutary  warning.  He  then  issued  strict  orders  to  the  army  by  the 
voice  of  the  herald,  that  no  one,  under  the  promise  of  obedience  owed 
to  him,  should  in  any  way  aid  or  minister  to  those  who,  by  their  heed¬ 
less  conduct,  had  dared  to  violate  the  peace  now  reestablished. 

The  army  accepted  this  order  as  that  of  an  arbiter.  Meanwhile,  all 
remained  quietly  awaiting  the  end  of  the  incipient  riot  and  the  result  of 
the  whole  affair.  The  envoys  who  had  been  sent  to  the  ruler  to  arrange 
the  treaty  saw,  however,  that  the  excitement  among  the  people  could 
not  be  quieted  but  was,  on  the  contrary,  becoming  more  and  more  vio¬ 
lent.  Realizing  that  their  errand  had  no  chance  of  success  as  proposed, 
they  gave  up  the  attempt  and  returned  to  the  camp  to  assist  Peter,  the 
man  of  God,  in  suppressing  the  riot.  But  this  was  impossible.  About  a 
thousand  people  had  broken  forth  in  this  mad  attempt.  These  encoun¬ 
tered  an  equal  number  of  townspeople  who  sallied  forth  from  the  city, 
and  the  result  was  a  mighty  battle  fought  before  the  city. 

The  people  inside  the  town  perceived  that  a  division  had  arisen 
among  those  outside.  Since  the  riot  had  occurred  contrary  to  the  wish 


104  PLANS  FOR  RELIEF  OF  JERUSALEM 

and  direct  command  of  Peter,  they  hoped  that  the  rest  of  the  army 
would  render  no  assistance.  Unbarring  the  gates,  they  issued  forth  en 
masse  and  killed  about  five  hundred  of  our  men  on  the  bridge.  Nearly 
all  the  rest,  being  unfamiliar  with  the  position  of  the  fords  and  the 
locality  in  general,  were  drowned  in  the  river.  At  this  sight  the  entire 
army  flew  to  arms,  unable  to  endure  the  wrongs  inflicted  upon  their 
comrades.  The  hostile  forces  met  in  furious  combat  and  wrought  such 
terrible  slaughter  that  this  latter  disaster  was  far  worse  than  the  former. 
The  common  people  and  the  unruly  mob  were  unable  to  stand  against 
the  pressure  exerted  by  the  Bulgarians.  They  gave  way  and  fled.  In¬ 
fluenced  by  their  mad  flight,  others  who  were  fighting  valiantly  fol¬ 
lowed  their  example. 

Thus  the  entire  army  fled,  and,  since  the  ranks  were  broken,  there 
was  no  one  to  offer  resistance.  In  the  confusion,  Peter  lost  the  entire 
treasure  which  he  had  collected  from  the  gifts  of  devout  princes,  money 
which  he  had  intended  to  use  in  ministering  to  the  necessities  of  the 
poor  and  needy  on  the  way.  For  the  wagon  which  carried  all  his  sub¬ 
stance  was  seized  and  he  lost  everything. 

The  Bulgarians  pursued  with  fury  y  they  killed  almost  ten  thousand 
Christians,^  seized  the  wagons  and  all  the  baggage,  and  carried  off 
as  prisoners  many  women  and  children.  Those  who  escaped  sought  hid¬ 
ing  places  in  the  depths  of  inaccessible  forests,  and  it  was  with  difficulty 
that  they  were  recalled  on  the  third  day  by  the  warning  sound  of 
trumpet  and  horn.  They  gathered  round  Peter  and  the  others  who  had 
escaped  with  him  and  had  retired  to  a  low  hill  rising  slightly  above 
the  plain. 

2  2 .  Peter  rallies  the  remnant  of  his  defeated  army  and  proceeds 
to  C onstantinofle ,  He  crosses  the  Bosfhorus  and  encamfs  in 
Bithynia, 

Finally,  on  the  fourth  day,  when  the  scattered  troops  had  rallied  and 
the  fugitives  had  emerged  from  the  secret  places  where  they  had  been 
lurking  for  three  days,  the  reunited  host,  now  numbering  about  thirty 
thousand,  again  prepared  to  resume  the  march.  Although  their  rash 

None  of  the  chroniclers  of  the  First  Crusade  were  expert  in  their  estimate  of 
numbers  of  persons.  Their  statement  of  numbers  must  be  reg-arded  rather  as  figures 
of  speech,  meaning,  as  in  this  case,  a  relatively  large  number,  amounting  perhaps 
to  a  few  hundred  at  most.  William  was  dependent  upon  the  chroniclers,  in  this  in¬ 
stance  upon  Albert  of  Aix,  for  his  information. 


PLANS  FOR  RELIEF  OF  JERUSALEM  105 

conduct  had  caused  them  the  loss  of  about  two  thousand  wagons  and 
carts,  yet  they  felt  that  it  would  be  disgraceful  to  abandon  their  pil¬ 
grimage  j  hence  they  pursued  their  journey,  albeit  under  great  diffi¬ 
culties.  They  were  about  to  start,  although  in  great  need  of  supplies, 
when  a  messenger  from  the  emperor  arrived  at  the  camp,  charged  with 
imperial  commands  for  Peter  and  the  other  leaders  of  his  army.  Ad¬ 
dressing  them  publicly,  he  said:  ^‘Noble  and  illustrious  men,  a  rumor 
has  reached  the  ears  of  the  emperor  which  brings  serious  charges  of  an 
unsavory  nature  against  you.  It  is  claimed  that  you  have  done  great 
violence  in  his  empire  to  the  inhabitants  of  the  land,  his  subjects,  and 
have  stirred  up  quarrels  and  disturbances.  Wherefore,  if  you  hope  at 
any  time  to  find  favor  in  the  sight  of  his  imperial  majesty,  we  enjoin 
upon  you,  by  his  authority,  that  you  do  not  presume  to  remain  in  any 
of  his  cities  longer  than  three  days,  but  lead  your  expedition  as  speedily 
as  possible  to  Constantinople  with  harmonious  but  steady  control.  We 
will  lead  the  way  for  the  army  and  will  cause  you  to  be  furnished  with 
the  necessary  food  at  a  just  price.” 

These  words  revived  the  spirits  of  the  people,  who  had  already  be¬ 
gun  to  waste  away  through  lack  of  foodj  and  the  kindness  of  the 
emperor  roused  them  to  a  more  hopeful  frame  of  mind.  They  explained 
to  the  imperial  messenger  some  of  the  circumstances  connected  with 
the  recent  trouble,  alleged  their  own  innocence,  and  spoke  of  the 
patience  with  which  they  had  endured  the  injuries  which  the  Bul¬ 
garians  had  so  unjustly  inflicted  upon  them.  Then,  refraining  from  all 
excesses,  they  followed  their  guide  and  reached  Constantinople  by 
forced  marches.  Here  they  found  Walter  and  his  troops,  who  were 
awaiting  their  coming.  The  two  armies  joined  forces  and  made  camp  in 
the  place  assigned  to  them. 

At  the  summons  of  the  emperor,  Peter  went  into  the  city  and  stood 
in  the  royal  presence.^^^  When  questioned  concerning  his  own  inten¬ 
tions  ancl  the  motive  of  so  great  an  undertaking,  he  discussed  the 
matter  at  length,  showing  himself  a  man  of  eloquence  and  high  spirit. 
He  explained  that  he  would  soon  be  followed  by  very  great  princes  of 
the  West,  men  worthy  of  God.  He  displayed  such  firmness  of  spirit 
and  eloquence  of  language  that  even  the  chief  men  of  the  palace  ad- 

m  Peter’s  arrival  at  Constantinople  is  dated  about  August  i,  1096,  less  than  two 
weeks  after  that  of  Walter  the  Penniless  (see  H.  Hagenmeyer,  ChronologiCy  nos,  56, 

59)- 


io6  PLANS  FOR  RELIEF  OF  JERUSALEM 

mired  his  wisdom  and  courage.  The  emperor  himself  was  well  dis¬ 
posed  toward  him  and  commended  his  purpose.  After  this  kind  re¬ 
ception,  he  was  given  bountiful  gifts  and  commanded  by  the  emperor 
to  return  to  his  troops. 

The  army  remained  at  this  place  for  several  days  to  allow  the  people 
a  chance  to  recuperate,  in  the  enjoyment  of  food  and  rest.  Then,  in 
ships  supplied  by  the  imperial  command,  they  crossed  the  Hellespont 
to  Bithynia,  the  first  province  of  the  diocese  of  Asia,  bounded  by  that 
same  sea.  At  a  place  called  Civitot,  situated  on  that  sea,  they  rested  and 
there  encamped. 

23.  In  Peter^s  absence ^  his  army  drives  off  the  cattle  jrom  the 
country  around  Nicaea  and  seizes  a  fortress  near  that  city. 

The  place  of  their  encampment  was  on  the  confines  of  the  enemy’s 
country.  There  the  army  settled  down  for  about  two  months  in  the 
full  enjoyment  of  abundant  supplies  of  all  kinds.  During  that  time, 
an  ample  store  of  goods  was  offered  for  sale  nearly  every  day,  and 
the  greatly  needed  opportunity  for  recuperation  was  granted  them. 
But  this  very  abundance  of  supplies,  together  with  unwonted  leisure, 
tended  to  render  this  wretched  and  stiff-necked  people  reckless.  Incited 
to  arrogance  by  their  well-being,  they  began  to  form  separate  groups 
and,  against  the  will  of  their  superiors,  overran  the  countryside  for  ten 
miles  or  more  and  drove  off  flocks  and  herds.  Frequent  admonitory 
letters  came  from  the  emperor.  He  bade  them  not  to  venture  far  afield 
or  to  provoke  the  enemy  against  them.  Until  the  arrival  of  the  greater 
leaders  who  were  said  to  be  following  them,  they  were  to  remain  in 
the  place  assigned  to  them  and  to  conduct  themselves  circumspectly. 

In  his  anxiety  for  the  people  entrusted  to  his  care,  Peter  had  gone 
to  the  imperial  city,  hoping,  if  possible,  to  obtain  a  reduction  in  the 
price  of  merchandise  and  better  conditions  of  trading.  The  perverse  and 
unruly  throng  seized  the  opportunity  afforded  by  his  absence  to  con¬ 
duct  themselves  in  a  still  more  senseless  manner.  A  group  of  seven 
thousand  foot  soldiers,  adherents  of  this  party,  separated  from  the 
army  proper  and  were  joined  to  three  hundred  knights.  Deaf  to  the 
remonstrances  of  the  others,  they  set  out  for  Nicaea  with  ranks  drawn 
up  in  battle  formation.  From  the  vicinity  of  the  city  they  drove  off  great 
numbers  of  flocks  and  herds  and  returned  in  safety  to  the  camp. 


PLANS  FOR  RELIEF  OF  JERUSALEM  107 

Perceiving  that  the  Latins  had  met  with  success  in  that  exploit,  some 
of  the  Teutons  and  others  who  spoke  their  tongue  were  seized  with  the 
desire  to  plunder.  They  decided  to  make  a  similar  attempt,  hoping 
thereby  to  win  glory  for  themselves  and  to  improve  the  condition  of 
their  own  private  affairs.  They  gathered  about  three  thousand  of  that 
nation  and  two  hundred  knights  and  with  that  force  marched  toward 
Nicaea. 

In  that  same  region,  about  four  miles  from  Nicaea,  there  was  a 
fortified  town  at  the  foot  of  a  hill.  They  drew  near  and  made  a  most 
violent  attack  upon  it  from  every  direction.  Although  the  inhabitants 
made  a  valiant  resistance,  the  Teutons  took  the  place  by  storm,  killed 
the  people,  and  seized  everything  therein.  Then,  charmed  by  the  beauty 
and  wealth  of  the  place,  they  fortified  it  strongly  and  determined  to 
remain  there  until  the  leaders  arrived. 

24.  Solimany  a  Turkish  frlncey  recovers  the  flace  just  mentioned 
and  futs  to  the  sword  all  jound  therein. 

Long  before  this  time,  Soliman  [Qilij  Arslan]  the  lord  and  ruler 
of  that  land,  had  learned  that  the  Christian  leaders  were  coming.  Ac¬ 
cordingly,  by  entreaties,  by  money,  and  by  every  conceivable  means, 
he  had  gathered  from  all  parts  of  the  East  a  countless  host  of  valiant 
men.  With  this  army  he  had  now  returned  to  those  parts  to  give  the 
desired  aid  to  the  people  of  the  region  against  the  onslaughts  of  the 
enemy.  When  he  learned  that  the  band  of  Teutons  just  mentioned  had 
seized  one  of  his  strongholds,  he  marched  swiftly  thither,  laid  violent 
siege  to  it,  and  put  to  the  sword  all  whom  he  found  within. 

Meanwhile,  news  of  the  disaster  reached  the  camp,  and  it  was  soon 
noised  abroad  that  the  company  of  Teutons  who  had  recently  left 
them  had  utterly  perished  at  the  hand  of  Qilij  Arslan.  Consternation 
overwhelmed  the  people  at  this  news.  Unable  to  restrain  their  anguish 
of  heart,  they  gave  vent  to  their  grief  with  tears  and  groans.  When  at 
last  the  truth  became  fully  known,  a  disturbance  broke  forth  among  the 

Actually  Qilij  Arslan,  sultan  of  Rum  1092—1106,  who  was  the  son  of  Sulayman 
ibn  Jutlumish.  The  Latin  chroniclers,  who  doubtless  heard  the  name  with  the  patro¬ 
nymic  ^^ibn  Sulayman,’^  found  the  latter  easier  to  say  and  write.  Nearly  all  of  them 
call  him  Soliman,  and  William  follows  their  example.  It  was,  however,  a  lieutenant 
of  his,  Elchanes,  who  conducted  the  operations  ag'ainst  the  troops  of  Peter.  The  de¬ 
struction  of  Peter’s  army  is  dated  end  of  September,  1096,  or  October  {H.  Chron, 
nos.  73—89). 


io8  PLANS  FOR  RELIEF  OF  JERUSALEM 

people  in  the  camp.  With  loud  cries  they  strenuously  demanded  that 
such  an  outrage  against  their  brethren  be  not  ignored.  Let  both  knights 
and  foot  soldiers  arm  and  go  forth  to  avenge  the  blood  of  their  mur¬ 
dered  comrades.  The  more  important  men  of  the  army  and  those  of 
greater  experience  in  such  matters  desired  to  obey  the  orders  of  the 
emperor.  When  they  would  have  checked  this  purpose  and  sought  to 
allay  the  indiscreet  fervor  of  the  infuriated  mob,  the  people  rose 
against  them  in  insubordination,  placed  themselves  under  the  patron¬ 
age  of  a  certain  Godfrey,  surnamed  Burel,  the  leader  of  that  faction, 
and  began  to  pour  forth  insults  on  those  of  higher  rank.  It  was  ascribed 
to  cowardice  rather  than  to  good  sense  that  the  assassins  of  their 
brethren  were  not  pursued  by  the  avenging  sword. 

25.  The  entire  army  is  roused  against  Qilij  Arslan^  because  of 
the  massacre  of  the  brethren;  in  the  fight  with  him^  however y 
the  Christian  host  is  destroyed. 

The  will  of  the  worst  element  finally  prevailed.  The  women  and  chil¬ 
dren,  the  feeble,  and  those  who  had  no  arms  were  left  behind,  while  all 
the  rest  seized  their  weapons  and  gathered  to  the  number  of  twenty- 
five  thousand  armed  infantry  and  five  hundred  knights  splendidly 
equipped  with  the  breastplate.  The  lines  were  arranged  and  drawn  up 
in  battle  formation,  and  they  marched  through  the  woods  mentioned 
above  toward  the  hill  country,  in  the  direction  of  Nicaea.  They  had 
advanced  barely  three  miles,  when  Qilij  Arslan,  with  a  great  host  of 
his  people,  likewise  entered  the  same  forest.  He  was  hastening  toward 
our  camp,  which  was  located  as  described  above,  with  the  intention  of 
making  a  sudden  attack  upon  it.  The  unusual  noises  proceeding  from 
the  wood  informed  him  that  the  Christians  had  left  the  camp  and  were 
on  their  way  to  attack  him.  He  at  once  left  the  forest  and  hills  and 
betook  himself  to  the  open  plains.  Our  army  also  made  their  way 
thither,  entirely  unaware  of  the  enemy^s  proximity.  When  they  dis¬ 
covered  that  the  infidels  were  so  near,  they  rushed  upon  them.  With 
shouts  of  encouragement  to  one  another,  they  pressed  the  enemy  hard 
with  their  swords  and  demanded  the  blood  of  their  brethren  at  their 
hands.  But  as  our  men  dashed  forward,  full  of  ardent  zeal,  they  were 
received  by  the  swords  of  the  enemy  ^  for  the  Turks,  convinced  that 
this  was  a  struggle  to  the  death,  resisted  vigorously,  inspired  by  just 


PLANS  FOR  RELIEF  OF  JERUSALEM  109 

wrath  and  the  consciousness  of  their  great  numbers.  Both  armies  fought 
valiantly  and  stoutly,  but  the  Christians  were  finally  overcome  by  the 
multitude  of  the  foe.  Unable  longer  to  endure  the  stress  of  battle,  they 
broke  ranks  and  fled.  The  Turks  fell  upon  them  with  drawn  swords, 
pursued  them  as  far  as  the  camp,  and  wrought  great  slaughter. 

In  this  engagement,  several  men  of  high  rank,  who  were  following 
the  camp  of  Peter,  were  slain.  Among  them  were  Walter  the  Penniless, 
Renier  de  Brus,  Fulcher  of  Orleans,  and  many  others.  Of  the  twenty- 
five  thousand  foot  soldiers  and  five  hundred  knights  who  had  gone 
forth  from  the  camp,  there  remained  scarcely  one  who  escaped  either 
death  or  capture. 

26.  Qilij  Arslariy  thus  victorious  over  our  feoflcy  destroys  the 
camf.  The  remnant  surviving  are  either  slain  or  carried 
away  as  caf  fives,  Qilij  Arslan  lays  siege  to  the  town  of 
Civitoty  buty  on  hearing  the  emferoAs  message y  he  retires. 

Greatly  elated  over  his  success  in  winning  this  victory,  Qilij  Arslan 
made  a  furious  attack  upon  the  camp.  Since  there  was  no  longer  anyone 
able  to  resist,  all  those  surviving  were  put  to  the  sword.  The  sick  and 
the  aged,  both  men  and  women,  monks  and  all  clergy,  perished.  The 
only  exception  made  was  in  the  case  of  boys  and  girls  not  yet  full  grown, 
whose  age  and  appearance  interceded  for  them.  These  Qilij  Arslan 
spared  that  he  might  carry  them  away  into  servitude. 

On  the  shore  near  the  camp  was  an  old,  half-ruined  fortress,  without 
doors  or  bars,  where  no  one  lived.  Here  a  group  of  about  three  thou¬ 
sand  pilgrims,  driven  by  necessity,  took  refuge,  believing  it  to  be  a 
place  of  safety.  They  attempted  to  defend  themselves  in  their  critical 
situation  by  placing  their  shields  against  the  entrances  and  by  rolling 
up  huge  stones  to  obstruct  the  approach.  The  Turks  pressed  them  hard, 
but  the  besieged  fought  valiantly  and,  in  the  desperate  hope  of  saving 
life  and  liberty,  drove  back  the  foe.  In  the  meantime,  a  messenger  was 
sent  off  in  haste  to  inform  Peter  that  his  people  had  been  massacred 
and  that  the  few  who  survived  were  closely  besieged  in  a  half-ruined 
fortress,  where  they  were  suffering  from  a  lack  of  food  and  weapons. 
Peter  at  once  went  to  the  emperor  and,  by  his  humble  entreaties,  in¬ 
duced  him  to  dispatch  troops  thither  immediately  with  orders  that  the 
survivors  be  relieved  from  the  dangers  that  beset  them.  This  was  ac- 


1 10 


PLANS  FOR  RELIEF  OF  JERUSALEM 

complished,  for  as  soon  as  the  Turks  heard  the  emperor^s  command, 
they  at  once  abandoned  the  attack  on  the  place.  Dragging  their  captives 
along  with  them,  they  returned  to  Nicaea.  In  addition,  they  carried  off 
the  best  of  spoils,  tents  and  pavilions,  horses  and  mules,  and  all  kinds  of 
equipment  taken  from  the  Christians. 

Thus  this  stiff-necked  and  unruly  people,  unwilling  to  heed  the 
counsels  of  those  wiser  than  themselves,  were  swept  along  by  their  own 
rash  impetus  down  to  utter  destruction.  And  because  they  did  not  know 
how  to  wear  the  yoke  of  salutary  discipline,  they  reaped  the  worthless 
harvest  of  their  ways  and  were  given  over  to  the  sword  of  the  enemy. 

27.  Gotts chalky  a  Teuton  fAesty  arrives  in  Hungary y  leading  a 
second  army.  He  does  not  hesitate  to  commit  shamejul  actSy 
unfit  to  he  related y  against  the  Hungarians. 

Not  long  after  Peter  had  passed  over  into  Bithynia,  a  certain  Teuton 
priest,  Gottschalk  by  name,  following  in  Peter’s  footsteps,  was  kindled 
with  a  longing  for  the  same  pilgrimage.  Since  he  had  the  gift  of  exhor¬ 
tation,  he  had  persuaded  many  Teutons  from  all  parts  of  that  kingdom 
to  undertake  the  same  task.  With  about  fifteen  thousand  pilgrims 
whom  he  had  gathered  for  the  march,  he  entered  Hungary  where  he 
was  admitted  without  difficulty.  By  the  orders  of  the  king,  the  Hun¬ 
garians  offered  merchandise  at  reasonable  rates  to  his  army.  The  latter 
abused  the  abundance  of  food,  however,  and  gave  themselves  over  to 
idleness  and  drunkenness.  They  inflicted  many  wrongs  upon  the  na¬ 
tives.  They  plundered,  they  laid  violent  hands  on  the  wares  offered 
for  sale  in  the  public  markets,  and  they  slew  the  people  in  utter  disre¬ 
gard  of  the  laws  of  hospitality. 

When  the  news  of  these  outrages  reached  the  king,  he  was  roused 
to  anger.  He  ordered  the  whole  realm  to  be  called  out  and  directed 
that  the  people  as  well  as  the  greater  men  of  the  land  take  arms  to 
avenge  wrongs  so  great.  Grave  excesses  had  been  committed  in  many 
places,  shameful  beyond  measure  and  unfit  to  be  told.  It  was  impossi¬ 
ble  for  the  king  to  pass  over  such  crimes  without  bringing  on  himself 
the  implication  of  cowardice  and  incurring  the  hatred  of  his  people. 
Hence,  the  entire  military  forces  of  the  realm  were  mustered.  With 
one  accord,  they  rushed  furiously  forth  against  the  Christians  as  ene¬ 
mies  deserving  extreme  chastisement,  determined  to  slay  them  in  re¬ 
taliation  for  the  outrages  committed. 


Ill 


PLANS  FOR  RELIEF  OF  JERUSALEM 

Finally,  at  a  place  called  Belgrade, which  lies  in  the  very  center 
of  that  kingdom,  the  king’s  forces  came  upon  a  disorderly  crowd  of 
these  madmen.  They  had  already  learned  of  the  king’s  advance  and 
were  well  aware  that  he  would  be  wroth;  they  feared  also  their  own 
guilty  consciences.  Consequently  they  had  snatched  their  arms  and 
were  prepared  to  repel  force  by  force  and  to  ward  off  danger  from 
themselves.  When  the  Hungarians  saw  them  rush  to  arms,  bent  on  a 
vigorous  resistance,  they  reflected  that  it  would  be  impossible  to  engage 
them  without  great  loss  of  their  own  men.  For  the  Christians  were  in¬ 
deed  brave  men,  experienced  in  the  use  of  arms,  who  would  not,  with¬ 
out  a  struggle,  give  up  their  lives  in  vain.  According  to  their  custom, 
therefore,  they  endeavored  to  effect  by  strategy  what  they  could  not 
accomplish  by  force ;  they  sent  a  delegation  to  Gottschalk  and  the  chiefs 
of  his  army,  who  craftily  addressed  them  with  pacific  words. 

28.  The  letter  of  the  king  of  Hungary  to  the  aforesaid  Gott¬ 
schalk  and  his  army ;  and  the  fitiful  destruction  of  that  same 
host. 

\ 

^^Grave  complaint  about  your  army  has  come  to  the  king.  It  is  said 
that  you  have  visited  many  serious  injuries  and  untold  troubles  upon 
the  people  subject  to  him  and  that  you  have  most  unfairly  repaid  the 
kind  treatment  of  your  hosts.  Yet  the  king  in  his  wisdom  is  fully  con¬ 
vinced  that  not  all  of  you  are  guilty  of  these  crimes.  He  regards  it  as 
certain  that  there  are  among  you  discreet  and  God-fearing  men,  whom 
the  outrages  of  others  displease  and  that  those  crimes  which  have  justly 
aroused  the  royal  anger  have  been  committed  against  the  wishes  and 
remonstrances  of  these  men.  Lest  the  sins  of  individuals  be  charged 
against  all  and  the  innocent  be  involved  with  the  guilty,  he  has  de¬ 
termined  to  restrain  the  measure  of  his  wrath  and,  for  the  present,  to 
spare  his  brethren  of  the  Christian  faith.  Accordingly,  that  his  wrath 
may  be  wholly  appeased,  we  counsel  you  to  surrender  yourselves  and 
all  the  substance  that  you  have  here,  including  your  arms,  without  any 
condition,  into  the  hands  of  the  king.  Otherwise,  not  one  of  you  can 
escape  death,  for,  situated  as  you  are  in  the  center  of  his  realm,  you  are 

113  'pjjjs  appears  to  be  a  mistake  which  William  took  over  from  Albert  of  Aix 
(Albertus  Aquensis,  “Historia  Hierosolymitana,”  Recueil  des  historiens  des  croisadesj 
Historians  occidentauXj  IV,  290).  Duncalf  has  identified  the  place  of  these  events  as 
Martinsburg.  Belgrade,  of  course,  is  in  Serbia. 


1 12 


PLANS  FOR  RELIEF  OF  JERUSALEM 


unequal  to  us  in  military  strength  and  you  have  no  power  of  escap- 


114 


mg, 

From  the  very  outset,  Gottschalk  and  the  captains  of  his  army  had 
been  displeased  at  the  mad  conduct  of  the  stubborn  people.  Now,  in 
the  simplicity  of  their  hearts,  they  took  the  king’s  kindness  for  granted. 
Almost  by  force  they  drew  the  people  into  consenting  to  the  idea  that 
they  should  surrender  themselves  with  their  arms  and  all  their  posses¬ 
sions  into  the  power  of  the  king  and  thus  make  reparation  for  all  those 
sins  whereby  they  had  offended  him.  Though  protesting  vigorously 
and  eager  to  fight  for  their  lives,  the  entire  people  finally  consented. 
But,  after  they  had  given  up  their  arms  and  all  their  goods  to  the  cap¬ 
tains  and  emissaries  of  the  king,  they  found  death  where  they  had 
expected  favor.  For  the  Hungarians  fell  upon  that  unsuspecting  peo¬ 
ple,  who,  though  deprived  of  their  arms,  were  relying  not  unreason¬ 
ably  upon  the  king’s  clemency.  Without  discriminating  between  the 
good  and  the  bad,  they  wrought  a  most  inhuman  slaughter.  So  thor¬ 
oughly  was  this  done  that  the  whole  place  was  polluted  by  the  blood 
and  corpses  of  the  slain  and  scarcely  a  trace  of  that  great  multitude  re¬ 
mained.  There  were  some,  however,  who  escaped  the  common  de¬ 
struction,  and  these,  led  by  the  mercy  of  God,  avoided  the  swords  of 
the  Hungarians  and  returned  to  their  own  land.  By  recounting  the 
story  of  the  massacre  and  the  sinister  fate  which  had  overtaken  their 
comrades,  they  instructed  those  who,  bound  by  their  vows,  were  about 
to  start  on  the  same  pilgrimage.  They  admonished  these  new  pilgrims 
that,  with  the  treachery  of  that  wicked  people  ever  in  mind,  they  should 
proceed  more  wisely  and  learn  to  act  with  more  caution. 


29.  How  a  vast  horde  of  Infatuated  feofle  followed  the  first 
comfames  that  defarted^  kdling  Jews  and  marching  without 
discifltne. 

About  this  same  time,  but  a  little  later,  innumerable  bands  of  people 
on  foot,  in  number  beyond  counting,  had  assembled  from  the  lands 
of  the  West.  They  were  all  moved  by  the  same  desire.  Without  leader 
or  guide,  they  marched  along  at  random,  without  foresight  or  wisdom. 
There  were  among  them,  indeed,  some  men  of  noble  birth,  as  Thomas 
de  La  Fere,  Clarebold  de  Vendeuil,  William  Carpenter,  Count  Her- 

114  William,  who  has  abbreviated  the  fuller  account  of  Albert  of  Aix  about  these 
earlier  expeditions,  here  expands  the  letter  of  King-  Coloman  in  more  courtly  style. 


PLANS  FOR  RELIEF  OF  JERUSALEM  113 

mann  [Hartman] and  some  others,  but  the  people,  impatient  of 
restraint,  did  not  acknowledge  their  control  in  any  way.  Disregarding 
the  counsel  of  the  wiser  and  better  affected,  they  ran  to  and  fro  promis¬ 
cuously,  committing  all  kinds  of  lawless  deeds  at  their  own  sweet  will. 
So  it  happened  that  when,  in  the  fear  of  God,  they  should  have 
proceeded  on  the  journey  which  they  had  undertaken  and,  in  obedience 
to  divine  commands,  should  have  advanced  with  strict  discipline  on 
the  pilgrimage  which  they  were  making  for  Christ’s  sake,  they  turned 
aside  to  mad  excesses.  They  cruelly  massacred  the  Jewish  people  in 
the  cities  and  towns  through  which  they  passed,  for  the  latter,  having 
no  reason  to  fear  anything  of  the  kind,  took  no  precautions.^^® 

These  outrages  occurred  especially  in  the  cities  of  Cologne  and 
Mainz,  where  Count  Emicho,  a  powerful  nobleman,  well  known  in 
that  country,  joined  the  pilgrim  bands  with  a  large  following.  He  was 
not  a  censor  of  morals,  as  beseemed  his  high  rank,  nor  was  he  one  who 
reproved  excesses,  but,  on  the  countrary,  he  himself  shared  in  the  evil 
deeds  of  his  followers  and  urged  them  on  to  crime.  All  these  people 
passed  through  Franconia  and  Bavaria  and  came  to  a  place  called  Mese- 
burg  [ Wieselburg] ,  on  the  frontiers  of  Hungary.  They  supposed  that 
they  would  be  allowed  to  enter  freely  without  difficulty,  but  as  they 
found  the  approach  closed,  they  stopped  on  this  side  of  the  bridge. 
The  place  was  a  fortress  strongly  defended  by  the  mighty  rivers,  the 
Danube  and  the  Leitha,  and  by  the  deep  swamps  which  surrounded 
it.  Consequently,  it  would  not  have  been  easy  even  for  a  larger  force 

to  exercise  violence  against  the  will  of  those  who  were  guarding  the 

* 

approach.  The  number  of  the  advancing  army  was  reported  to  be 
about  two  hundred  thousand  foot  soldiers  and  nearly  three  thousand 
knights. 

Furthermore,  the  king  of  Hungary  had  given  orders  that  the  army 
desiring  to  cross  his  country  should  be  refused  permission  to  enter. 
For  he  remembered  the  wrongs  which  he  had  inflicted  upon  the  forces 
of  Gottschalk  and  feared  that  these  people,  if  introduced,  might  be 
moved  to  fight  for  the  sake  of  revenge.  The  tale  of  the  recent  bloody 

115  leaders  of  this  band  have  been  identified  as  Count  Emicho  of  Leiningen  j 
William,  viscount  of  Melun,  surnamed  the  Carpenter  j  Thomas  de  La  Ferej  Clare- 
bold  de  Vendeuilj  Count  Hartman  (not  Herman)  of  Dyllingen  and  Kyburg;  and 
Drogo  de  Nesle  (cf.  Duncalf,  “The  Peasants’  Crusade,”  American  Historical  Review^ 

XXVI  [1920-1921],  440-53). 

116  Xhese  persecutions  occurred  not  only  at  Cologne  and  Mainz  but  also  at  Speyer, 
Worms,  and  Trier. 


II4  PLANS  FOR  RELIEF  OF  JERUSALEM 

massacre  had  spread  far  and  wide,  and  the  enormity  of  the  deed  was 
causing  the  king  to  fear.  The  pilgrims  succeeded,  however,  in  obtain¬ 
ing  permission  from  those  guarding  the  city  and  from  the  captains 
of  the  legions  who  were  protecting  that  part  of  the  country  to  send 
messengers  as  suppliants  to  the  king  for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  a  truce 
and  permission  to  traverse  that  land.  During  the  interval,  the  soldiers 
encamped  on  this  side  the  marsh  in  a  pasture  to  await  the  result  of 
their  deputation. 

30.  How  they  besieged  the  fortress  Wieselburg  and  killed  seven 
hundred  Hungarians ;  and  howy  finally y  being  routed  by  di~ 
vine  willy  they  were  nearly  all  killed  by  the  enemy. 

After  a  few  days  had  elapsed,  the  envoys  who  had  been  sent  to  the 
king  returned  and  reported  that  their  mission  had  been  utterly  with¬ 
out  success.  Thereupon,  the  leaders  of  the  army,  convinced  by  this 
report  that  no  favor  was  to  be  found  with  the  king,  decided  to  lay 
waste  his  lands  on  that  side  of  the  river  and  also  to  burn  the  suburban 
places,  thus  acting  as  enemies  toward  the  king’s  possessions.  One  day, 
while  they  were  zealously  carrying  on  this  work,  a  force  of  seven  hun¬ 
dred  of  the  king’s  men,  who  had  crossed  the  river  to  protect  the  land 
from  the  hostile  devastation,  chanced  to  come  unexpectedly  upon  the 
pilgrims.  Since  they  could  not  avoid  them  and  were  prevented  by  the 
river  from  returning  home,  they  were  nearly  all  killed.  The  few  who 
escaped  with  the  loss  of  their  horses  took  counsel  for  life  and  safety  in 
Ihe  sedges  of  the  marsh. 

Encouraged  by  this  success,  the  pilgrims  resolved  to  build  bridges 
and  attack  the  fortress  3  then,  when  the  way  had  been  opened  by  the 
sword,  they  would  force  an  entrance  into  the  kingdom.  In  pursuance  of 
this  plan,  they  called  out  the  cohorts,  crossed  the  bridges  which  they 
had  just  constructed,  and  reached  the  fortifications.  Under  the  pro¬ 
tection  of  their  shields  they  boldly  prepared  to  undermine  the  walls 
and  force  their  way  in.  By  diligent  efforts,  the  walls  were  breached 
in  many  places,  and  the  work  had  reached  a  point  where  entrance  would 
soon  be  opened  for  the  pilgrims.  The  people  inside  the  city,  reduced 
to  utter  despair,  now  scarcely  dared  hope  for  their  lives,  when,  sud¬ 
denly  a  panic,  inspired  from  on  high,  seized  the  Christians.  They 
abandoned  the  attack  and  left  the  greater  part  of  their  baggage.  Al¬ 
though  they  were  apparently  the  victors  and  knew  of  no  reason  for 


PLANS  FOR  RELIEF  OF  JERUSALEM  115 

flight,  yet  they  turned  and  fled.  It  is  said  that  no  real  cause  existed  ex¬ 
cept  that  by  their  many  sins  they  had  provoked  the  Lord  to  wrath. 
For  they  had  followed  ungodliness,  which  is  ever  wont  to  strike  terror 
to  the  hearts  of  its  devotees,  and,  according  to  the  words  of  the  wise 
man,  the  wicked  “flee  when  none  pursueth.^’ 

The  condition  of  the  Hungarians  was  now  changed  for  the  better. 
When  they  perceived  that  the  Christian  forces  were  in  flight,  they 
pursued,  as  victors,  the  same  troops  who  had  caused  them  such  terror 
shortly  before.  That  same  foe  whom  they  had  barely  been  able  to  with¬ 
stand,  even  when  within  the  walls  and  defended  by  the  swamps,  they 
now  followed  of  their  own  accord  and,  in  their  turn,  caused  not  merely 
fear  but  even  death. 

Of  this  number.  Count  Emicho  fled  with  the  greater  part  of  his 
discomfited  troops  and  returned  to  his  own  country.  The  other  nobles, 
whom  I  mentioned  above,  turned  aside  through  Carinthia  and  reached 
Italy 3  they  crossed  this  country  and  arrived  at  the  borders  of  Apulia. 
From  there  they  went  to  Greece  in  the  train  of  those  leaders  who  were 
likewise  making  the  same  journey  and  who  had  proposed  to  sail  across 
to  Durazzo.^^® 

Thus  virtually  the  entire  West  was  being  agitated  by  this  movement 
and  others  of  the  same  nature,  and  almost  every  nation  was  sending 
forth  its  own  bands  separately.  Some  set  forth  on  the  pilgrimage  under 
leaders,  others  without  a  head.  But  it  is  plain  that  the  shortest  way  was 
found  by  those  who  went  through  Hungary,  and  this  was  entirely 
closed  because  of  the  insolence  and  outrageous  excesses  which  those 
pilgrims  who  had  gone  on  ahead  so  often  and  undeservedly  perpetrated 
upon  .the  inhabitants  of  that  region.  For  this  reason  those  who  followed 
them  were  put  to  great  trouble  to  conciliate  the  favor  of  the  king  of 
Hungary. 

Le.  26:  17, 

118  William,  Drog'o,  Thomas,  and  Clarebold  with  Hugh  the  Great  and  Hartman 
with  Godfrey  (cf.  Duncalf,  ‘‘The  Peasants’  Crusade,”  American  Historical  Review, 

XXVI  [1920-21],  440-53)* 


HERE  ENDS  THE  FIRST  BOOK 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  BEGINS 


THE  ARMIES  OF  THE  FIRST  CRUSADE 
PROCEED  TO  CONSTANTINOPLE 


I.  The  time  of  Godfrey's  defarture  and  the  nobles  who  went 
with  him;  and  how  they  froceeded  as  far  as  Hungary » 

In  that  same  year,  1096  of  the  Incarnation  of  the  Lord,  on  the  fifteenth 
day  of  the  month  of  August,  the  illustrious  and  magnificent  Lord  God¬ 
frey,^  duke  of  Lotharingia,  called  together  his  comrades  of  the  pil¬ 
grimage,  arranged  his  baggage  in  the  usual  way,  and  started  out  on 
the  march.  This  was  after  the  departure  of  Peter  the  Hermit  and  the 
terrible  disaster  to  his  army,  already  related,  after  the  massacre  of 
Gottschalk’s  legions  also  mentioned,  and  after  the  further  catastrophe 
on  the  frontiers  of  Hungary,  described  above,  which  is  said  to  have 
befallen  the  host  that  came  after  him. 

Distinguished  men  of  high  rank,  worthy  of  remembrance  forever, 
attached  themselves  to  Godfrey’s  camp:  Lord  Baldwin,  his  brother, 
born  of  the  same  mother  5  Lord  Baldwin  of  Mons,  count  of  Hainault^ 
Lord  Hugh,  count  of  St.  Pol,  and  Enguerrand  his  son,  a  youth  of  ex¬ 
cellent  natural  ability  5  Count  Gamier,  surnamed  de  Grey  3  Lord  Rei- 
nard,  count  of  Toul,  and  Peter  his  brother  3  Lord  Baldwin  du  Bourg, 
a  kinsman  of  the  duke  3  Lord  Henry  d’Esch  and  Godfrey  his  brother  3 
Dodo  de  Conti  3  Conon  de  Montague  3  and  many  others  whose  names 
and  number  we  do  not  remember.^  All  these  marched  along  peace- 

^  Godfrey  of  Bouillon  was  born  about  1060,  probably  at  Boulogne-sur-Mer.  His 
father  was  Eustace  II,  count  of  Boulogne  j  his  mother,  Ida,  daughter  of  Godfrey 
the  Bearded,  duke  of  Lower  Lorraine.  Her  brother,  Godfrey  the  Hunchback,  suc¬ 
ceeded  to  the  duchy.  Having  no  son,  he  designated  his  nephew  as  his  successor.  Henry  IV, 
however,  withheld  the  investiture  of  Godfrey  until  1089.  Meanwhile  Godfrey  had 
fought  in  Henry’s  service,  taking  some  part  in  the  latter’s  campaign  in  Italy,  1081— 
1084.  By  the  time  that  William  wrote,  the  reputation  of  Godfrey,  who  was  made 
first  Latin  ruler  of  Jerusalem,  had  become  so  heavily  encrusted  with  legend  that 
the  actual  historical  character  became  obscured.  There  is  no  satisfactory  biography 
of  Godfrey  in  English, 

^  Godfrey’s  forces  were  drawn  chiefly  from  the  regions  of  modern  Belgium,  Luxem¬ 
burg,  adjacent  northern  France,  and  the  lower  Rhine  country  which  were  then  in¬ 
cluded  in  the  duchy  of  Lower  Lorraine.  William  has  added  Baldwin  de  Mons,  Hugh 
of  St.  Pol,  Enguerrand,  and  Conon  to  the  list  furnished  by  Albert  of  Aix.  Neither 
mentions  Eustace,  another  brother  of  Godfrey,  at  this  point. 


ARMIES  PROCEED  TO  CONSTANTINOPLE  117 

fully  in  one  united  band  and  arrived  safe  and  sound,  on  September  20, 
at  a  place  in  the  province  of  Austria  called  Tollenburg.^  Here  the  river 
Leitha  forms  the  dividing  line  between  the  territories  of  the  empire 
and  those  of  the  kingdom  of  Hungary. 

When  they  arrived  at  this  town,  they  were  greatly  distressed  over 
the  reports  of  the  disaster  which  was  said  to  have  befallen  Gottschalk 
and  his  army.  They  took  counsel  with  one  another  as  to  how  they 
might  proceed  with  safety  on  the  work  they  had  undertaken.  Finally, 
by  general  consent,  they  resolved  to  send  a  deputation  to  the  king  of 
Hungary  to  ascertain  more  fully  why  the  army  of  their  brethren  who 
had  preceded  them  had  perished  in  such  a  way  in  this  land.  Further¬ 
more,  the  envoys  were  to  find  an  opportunity  to  treat  with  the  king 
concerning  peace  and,  laying  aside  complaints  of  former  quarrels,  to 
arrange  that  a  free  passage  through  Hungary  might  be  granted  them. 
For  to  undertake  to  find  another  route,  now  that  they  had  already 
begun  their  march,  would  cause  them  much  loss  and  inconvenience. 
Accordingly,  the  noble  Godfrey  d’Esch,  brother  of  Henry,  was  sent 
with  certain  other  honorable  men  of  high  rank  to  undertake  this  mis¬ 
sion,  for,  many  years  before,  he  had  enjoyed  the  friendship  of  the  king. 
As  he  entered  the  presence  of  the  monarch,  Godfrey  saluted  him  as 
was  due  and  then,  faithfully  carrying  out  the  duty  that  had  been  en¬ 
joined  upon  him,  began  as  follows. 

2.  The  message  of  the  duke  to  Colomariy  king  of  Hungary y  by 
Godfrey  d^  Esch;  and  the  ansvoer  of  the  king  to  the  duke, 

“The  noble  and  distinguished  Godfrey,  duke  of  Lotharingia,  and  the 
other  leaders,  worshippers  of  God  who  are  accompanying  him  in  de¬ 
voted  obedience  to  the  divine  will,  have  sent  us  to  your  excellency. 
They  desire  to  know  through  us  why  a  Christian  people,  remnants  of 
whom  we  have  found  all  along  the  way,  have  met  with  such  inhuman 
treatment  from  you,  a  nation  reputed  to  be  among  the  number  of  the 
faithful.  They  might  with  greater  safety  have  turned  aside  to  pass 
through  an  enemy^s  country.  If  the  offenses  of  those  people  were  such 
that  they  deserved  to  be  visited  with  the  extreme  penalty,  those  who 
sent  me  are  prepared  to  endure  their  loss  with  resignation.  For  any 

^  William  does  not  follow  Albert  in  calling  the  Leitha  a  boundary  of  “GauP^  but 
corrects  it  as  the  boundary  of  the  empire.  There  is  doubt  about  the  location  of  this 
stopping  point.  Hagenmeyer  prefers  Tulina  (H.  Hagenmeyer,  ChronologiSy  no.  70). 


ii8  ARMIES  PROCEED  TO  CONSTANTINOPLE 


punishment,  if  inflicted  for  a  just  reason,  provokes  less  anger  and 
ought  to  be  suffered  with  patience.  But  if  it  is  otherwise,  and  without 
cause  you  have  attacked  the  innocent  and  given  them  over  to  death, 
our  leaders  cannot  pass  over  the  wrongs  inflicted  on  the  servants  of 
God  but  are  prepared  to  avenge  the  blood  of  their  brethren.  Hence, 
they  await  from  us  your  response  on  these  matters  and  will  make  their 
decision  in  accordance  with  the  tenor  of  that  answer.”  With  these 
words  he  ended  his  speech. 

The  king,  surrounded  by  his  satellites,  answered  him  as  follows: 
‘^It  pleases  us,  beloved  Godfrey,  to  whom  long  ago  we  extended  the 
favor  which  your  merit  deserves,  that  you  have  come  to  us,  not  only 
that  we  may  renew  our  friendship  of  olden  times,  but  also  that  we  may 
assert  our  innocence  before  so  wise  a  judge.  We  are,  indeed,  as  you  say, 
of  the  number  of  the  faithful,  and  would  that  by  our  deeds  we  might 
be  able  to  exemplify  the  virtue  of  that  name.  But  those  who  have  pre¬ 
ceded  you,  the  followers  of  Peter  the  Hermit  and  the  adherents  of 
Gottschalk,  as  well  as  those  who  tried  to  take  by  assault  one  of  our 
fortresses  on  the  frontiers  of  the  kingdom  and  to  enter  our  realm  by 
force,  were,  neither  in  act  nor  name,  followers  of  Christ.  We  received 
Peter  and  his  army  in  the  beginning  with  hospitality  and  offered  them 
the  goods  which  we  had,  freely  or  at  a  just  price.  They,  however,  like 
a  snake  in  the  bosom  or  a  mouse  in  a  wardrobe,  poorly  requited  their 
hosts."*  For  when  they  ought  to  have  poured  forth  thanks  for  the  bene¬ 
fits  bestowed  upon  them,  they  broke  into  one  of  our  cities  on  the  ex¬ 
treme  frontiers  of  the  kingdom,  utterly  destroyed  the  population,  and, 
with  the  violence  of  robbers,  departed,  driving  off  flocks  and  herds,  the 
spoils  of  the  place.  Notwithstanding  this  outrage,  as  if  we  had  suffered 
no  wrongs  from  former  expeditions,  we  admitted  the  host  of  Gotts¬ 
chalk  without  difficulty  or  trouble.  They,  in  return,  did  not  hesitate  to 
plunder,  to  work  violence,  to  burn,  and  even,  on  the  most  trivial  pre¬ 
texts,  to  massacre.  Thus,  by  the  enormity  of  their  crimes  they  provoked 
the  Lord  to  wrath. 

^^Unable  to  endure  longer  the  wrongs  inflicted  upon  our  subjects, 
we  turned  our  attention  to  providing  some  remedy  for  these  dangerous 
conditions.  In  view  of  our  former  experiences,  we  have  deemed  it  pru¬ 
dent  to  bar  from  our  realm  these  companies  of  impious  men,  plainly 

^  A  favorite  adag-e  of  William.  Here  again  William  has  expanded  with  more 
courtly  language  the  diplomatic  interchange  reported  by  Albert. 


ARMIES  PROCEED  TO  CONSTANTINOPLE  119 

hateful  to  God,  lest  for  a  third  time  we  should  suffer  injuries  at  their 
hands.  Far  better  is  it  to  do  this  than  to  undergo  the  insults  and  enor¬ 
mous  losses  which  they  visit  upon  us,  or  to  fight  them  as  enemies.  Let 
it  suffice,  then,  that  we  have  offered  these  details  as  our  excuse  to  you, 
a  wise  and  careful  man.  For  as  God  lives,  we  have  stated  the  actual 
truth  just  as  it  is.” 

With  these  words,  he  ordered  the  envoys  to  be  treated  with  hospi¬ 
tality  and  great  respect,  until,  after  conferring  with  his  people,  he 
could  send  messengers  to  the  leaders  with  a  suitable  answer.  At  length, 
he  sent  to  the  duke  and  the  leaders  some  of  his  own  household  with 
the  envoys.  They  were  charged  with  this  message. 

^^We  have  heard,  and  indeed  have  long  known  by  report,  that  you 
are  rightly  regarded  as  a  great  prince,  illustrious  and  greatly  esteemed 
among  your  people,  and  that  wise  men,  even  though  afar  off,  admire 
the  sincerity  of  your  faith  and  the  commendable  constancy  of  your 
heart.  We  too,  attracted  by  the  good  odor  of  your  name  and  the  fervor 
of  your  works,  have  purposed  to  cherish  you,  even  in  your  absence,  and 
to  honor  you  with  greater  favor.  We  believe  that  the  noble  men  of 
your  train,  who  are  likewise  fired  with  zeal  for  the  Christian  faith,  have 
undertaken  a  pious  work.  Since  we  do  not  desire  that  those  virtues  by 
which  friends  are  usually  gained  should  become  torpid  among  us  by 
disuse,  we  are  ready  to  render  due  affection  to  all  and  to  abound  toward 
them  in  works  of  brotherly  affection. 

^^Accordingly,  since  the  opportunity  presents  itself  thus,  we  beg  that 
you  will  consent  to  come  to  our  castle  Ciperon,^  that  we  may  hold  with 
you  a  long-desired  conference  and  be  able  to  bring  about  an  agreement 
that  will  conform  to  your  wishes.” 

3.  The  king  and  our  leaders  hold  a  conference y  and  BaldwtUy 
the  duke^s  brother y  is  given  as  a  hostage.  After  they  have 
fassed  through  Hungary y  Baldwin  is  restoredy  and  the  king 
honors  the  duke  with  many  gifts. 

After  the  duke  had  heard  the  king’s  deputies  and  had  held  a  consulta¬ 
tion  with  his  friends,  he  went  on  the  day  appointed  to  the  place  desig¬ 
nated,  accompanied  by  three  hundred  knights  chosen  from  his  entire 
following.  After  crossing  the  bridge,  he  found  the  king  there.  The 

®  This  is  identified  as  Odenburg  (Sopron)  by  H.  Hefele,  Albert  von  Aachen^ 
Geschichte  des  ersten  Kreuzzugs. 


120  ARMIES  PROCEED  TO  CONSTANTINOPLE 


latter  received  him  most  kindly  and  with  much  honor.  Great  friendli¬ 
ness  was  shown  on  both  sides,  and  it  was  finally  agreed  that  hostages 
chosen  from  among  the  nobles  should  be  given,  that  all  ill-feeling 
should  be  laid  aside,  and  peace  reestablished.  On  these  conditions,  the 
king  granted  the  duke  permission  to  enter  the  kingdom  with  his  forces. 

That  he  might  have  more  reliable  security  for  admitting  so  numer¬ 
ous  a  host,  which,  perchance,  relying  on  their  number  and  valor,  might 
seize  on  some  pretext  to  disturb  the  kingdom,  the  king  requested  that 
Baldwin,  the  duke’s  brother,  with  his  wife  ®  and  household,  be  given 
as  the  hostages.  To  this  the  duke  gave  a  willing  assent,  surrendered  his 
brother  as  hostage  under  the  terms  stipulated,  and  led  his  troops  into 
the  kingdom.  Thereupon,  in  faithful  fulfillment  of  his  promise,  the 
king  issued  an  edict  that  throughout  the  entire  country  where  the 
troops  were  about  to  pass  the  necessary  food  for  the  legions  should  be 
offered  at  a  fair  price  and  with  just  weight,  and  that,  furthermore,  a 
market  of  articles  for  sale  should  accompany  the  army. 

The  duke,  on  his  part,  ordered  a  proclamation  to  be  made  by  the 
voice  of  the  herald,  throughout  the  camp,  that  no  one,  under  penalty 
of  death  and  confiscation  of  all  goods,  should  dare  to  plunder  or  use 
force  or  violence  on  those  coming  to  the  army,  but  that,  in  the  bonds 
of  peace,  with  fraternal  affection,  they  should  engage  in  the  transac¬ 
tions  of  trade. 

Thus  it  happened  that,  led  by  the  grace  of  God,  they  crossed  the 
whole  of  Hungary  without  offense  on  either  side  through  the  slightest 
word.  The  king  conducted  the  hostages  with  him  and  accompanied  the 
advancing  army  on  the  left  with  a  large  force  of  his  own  troops,  ready, 
if  any  disturbance  should  arise,  to  quiet  it  at  once  by  his  own  presence.* 

When  at  last  they  arrived  at  Semlin,  so  often  mentioned,  they 
halted  on  the  banks  of  the  river  Save  until  a  passage  could  be  arranged 
for  the  troops.  Since  only  a  few  boats  were  found  there,  quite  insuffi¬ 
cient  to  transport  so  many  people,  rafts  were  built  for  this  purpose. 
One  thousand  knights  fully  armed  were  put  across  first  to  guard  the 
farther  bank  against  any  chance  of  ambush  on  the  enemy’s  part,  so  that 
the  host,  when  it  had  crossed,  might  find  a  quiet  resting  place.  Then 
the  pilgrims  eagerly  passed  to  the  other  side. 

®  Baldwin,  one  of  the  real  heroes  of  the  crusade,  had  renounced  ecclesiastical  studies 
for  a  military  career.  His  wife,  who  accompanied  him,  was  to  become  one  of  the 
martyrs  of  the  crusade.  See  Book  III,  note  20.  There  is  no  adequate  biography  of  him 
in  English. 


I 


ARMIES  PROCEED  TO  CONSTANTINOPLE  121 

Scarcely  had  the  people  and  some  of  their  leaders  sailed  across,  when 
the,  king  quickly  advanced,  accompanied  by  a  large  escort,  and  surren¬ 
dered  Baldwin  with  his  wife  and  all  the  other  hostages  into  the  hands 
of  the  duke,  as  had  been  agreed  upon  in  the  beginning.  He  then  hon¬ 
ored  the  duke  and  the  other  leaders  with  rich  gifts  and  returned  to  his 
home.  With  the  other  leaders  and  the  rest  of  the  people,  the  duke  then 
immediately  followed  the  legions  which  had  already  crossed  to  the 
farther  shore.  On  reaching  Belgrade,  a  city  of  Bulgaria  which  has  been 
alluded  to  before,  he  made  his  camp  there.  Then,  after  the  baggage 
had  been  arranged  and  the  legions  prepared  for  the  march,  they  passed 
through  the  extensive  woods  and  forests  of  Bulgaria  and  came  first  to 
Nish  and  then  to  Stralicia. 

4.  Our  legions  advance  into  the  lands  of  the  emfire.  The  en-- 
trance  is  described  and  the  wretched  conditions  of  the  Greeks 
noted* 

The  extreme  wretchedness  of  the  Greeks  and  the  weakness  of  their 
empire  is  easily  conjectured  from  the  state  of  these  places,  which  were 

once  rich  provinces  filled  with  all  kinds  of  desirable  commodities. 

¥ 

When  the  rule  of  the  Latin  princes  of  Constantinople  ceased,  the  em¬ 
pire,  because  of  its  sins,  fell  into  the  power  of  the  Greeks  under  Ni- 
cephorus  1.“^  The  barbarous  people  of  the  locality  immediately  took 
advantage  of  the  weakness  of  that  power.  They  descended  upon  the 
lands  subject  to  it  and  began  to  treat  the  inhabitants  as  they  would.  Of 
these  invaders,  the  uncivilized  race  of  Bulgarians,  descending  from 
the  north,  had  seized  all  the  countries  from  the  Danube  even  to  the 
royal  city  and,  again,  from  that  same  river  to  the  Adriatic  sea.  As  a  re¬ 
sult,  the  names  and  boundaries  of  the  provinces  became  so  confused 
that  the  entire  tract,  which  is  said  to  be  a  journey  of  thirty  days  in 
length  and  ten  or  more  in  width,  is  called  Bulgaria,  the  wretched 
Greeks  themselves  being  ignorant  that  the  very  name  testifies  to  their 
disgrace.  For  formerly,  on  the  Adriatic  sea  lay  the  two  provinces  of 
Epirus.  The  nletropolis  of  one  of  these  was  Durazzo.  It  was  once  the 

Nicephorus,  emperor  802—811.  The  change  from  Latin  to  Greek  at  Constantinople 
had  occurred  much  earlier.  Even  the  dynasty  of  Justinian  in  the  sixth  century  was 
scarcely  Latin  in  blood,  and  Greek  became  the  language  of  the  court  very  soon  after 
the  death  of  Justinian.  William  has  injected  this  discussion  of  Balkan  history  from 
his  independent  study  of  ancient  and  Byzantine  history.  He  himself  had  journeyed 
through  a  part  of  the  Balkans  on  his  mission  of  1168  (Book  XX,  chap.  4). 


122  ARMIES  PROCEED  TO  CONSTANTINOPLE 

capital  of  Pyrrhus,  king  of  the  Epirotes,  a  valiant  and  admirable 
man.  The  country  through  which  the  duke,  at  the  head  of  his  army, 
was  about  to  pass  had  been  the  two  Dacias,  namely :  Dacia  Ripensis,  on 
their  left  as  they  crossed  the  Danube,  and  Dacia  Mediterrania,  through 
which,  with  its  once  splendid  cities  Nish  and  Stralicia,  they  marched 
on  their  course. 

There  were  other  provinces  also  in  the  same  district,  Arcadia,  Thes¬ 
saly,  Macedonia,  and  the  three  provinces  of  Thrace,  all  of  which  were 
involved  in  the  same  misfortune.  Nor  were  these  the  only  possessions 
which  the  Greeks  had  lost  by  their  weakness.  For,  even  later,  after  the 
Greek  Emperor  Basil  had  subjugated  that  same  Bulgarian  people,  no 
one  was  permitted  to  occupy  or  cultivate  the  land  in  the  more  remote 
provinces.  Especially  was  this  the  case  in  those  which  border  on  foreign 
kingdoms  and  through  which  their  own  lands  are  approached,  namely, 
the  two  Dacias.  The  same  condition  exists  today.  Consequently,  since 
the  whole  country  is  covered  with  woods  and  shrubby  growth,  no  one, 
however  desirous,  can  enter  there,  for  the  Greeks  place  greater  con¬ 
fidence  in  the  hindrances  afforded  by  difficult  roads  and  the  defenses 
of  thorny  brambles  than  in  their  own  forces.  Under  the  same  policy, 
they  leave  Epirus  Primus  a  wilderness,  bare  of  inhabitants,  that  de¬ 
serted  woods  and  pathless  wilds  wholly  without  food  supplies,  instead 
of  bolts  and  bars,  may  act  as  obstacles  to  those  wishing  to  enter  it.  This 
country,  through  which  all  the  other  leaders  had  to  pass,  begins  at 
Durazzo  and  extends  a  journey  of  four  days  to  the  mountains  called 
the  Balkans. 

The  duke  with  his  legions  marched  through  Dacia  Mediterrania, 
known  also  as  Moesia.  Then,  after  passing  through  the  defiles  com¬ 
monly  called  the  pass  of  St.  Basil,  he  descended  into  a  more  level  coun¬ 
try  which  afforded  a  good  food  supply,  and  came  to  the  noble  and 
populous  city  of  Philippopolis.  There  he  learned  that  Hugh  the 
Great,®  brother  of  Philip,  king  of  the  Franks,  with  some  other  nobles, 
was  being  detained  in  prison  by  the  emperor.  He  at  once  dispatched 
messengers  thither  in  haste  and  earnestly  besought  the  emperor,  both 
by  letters  and  the  living  voice,  to  let  those  men  go  free,  admonishing 

®  Hugh  de  Vermandois,  younger  brother  of  King  Philip  I,  seems  to  have  acquired 
the  appellation  of  “Great”  by  mistake.  Neither  his  acts  nor,  so  far  as  is  known,  his 
size  justified  such  a  designation.  Anna  Comnena  says  that  he  conducted  himself  in 
an  arrogant  manner  (Elizabeth  A.  S.  Dawes,  trans.,  The  Alexiad  of  the  Princess  Anna 
Comnenay  pp.  252—53,  261). 


ARMIES  PROCEED  TO  CONSTANTINOPLE  123 

him  that  they  were  vowed  to  the  same  pilgrimage  and  were  held  pris¬ 
oners  wholly  without  cause. 

This  illustrious  man  [Hugh],  who  was  the  first  of  all  the  leaders  to 
start,  had  crossed  the  Alps  into  Italy.  From  there  he  went  to  Apulia, 
crossed  the  sea  with  a  small  escort,  and  stopped  at  Durazzo  to  wait  for 
those  who  were  following.  He  was  entirely  without  apprehension  that 
anything  disastrous  could  happen  to  him  and  his  in  the  kingdom  of  the 
Greeks,  who  were  reckoned  as  belonging  to  the  Christian  faith.  But 
he  was  seized  by  the  governor  of  that  district  and  thrown  into  prison, 
that  he  might  be  handed  over  to  the  emperor  to  be  dealt  with  accord¬ 
ing  to  his  sovereign  will.  The  emperor  was  detaining  him  as  a  prisoner, 
like  a  robber  or  murderer.  He  was  awaiting  the  arrival  of  the  leaders 
who  were  said  to  be  on  the  way,  so  that,  if  they  should  succeed  in  reach¬ 
ing  there,  he  might  appear  to  have  released  him  as  a  favor  to  them  j 
but,  if  otherwise,  he  intended  to  keep  him  a  prisoner  for  life. 

5 .  The  duke  sends  envoys  to  the  emferor  to  demand  the  release 
of  Hugh  the  Great  and  the  other  nobles  who  are  held  as  fris-- 
oners.  The  entire  region  is  given  over  to  f  illage.  Our  forces 
finally  reach  C onstantinofle , 

At  this  time  a  wicked  and  crafty  man,  Alexius,  surnamed  Comnenus, 
was  ruling  over  the  Greek  empire.  He  had  formerly  lived  in  the  im¬ 
perial  palace,  where  he  enjoyed  the  dignity  and  fulfilled  the  duties  of 
majordomo,  which  we  call  grand  seneschal,  being  second  in  rank  only 
to  the  emperor.  As  such,  he  was  greatly  honored  by  Nicephorus,  sur¬ 
named  Botoniath,  who  at  that  time  was  wielding  the  scepter.  Five  or 
six  years  before  our  people  came,  however,  this  man  had  treacherously 
rebelled  against  his  benefactor^  he  had  driven  out  his  lord  and  seized 
the  empire  and  was  now  presuming  to  hold  it  by  force.^ 

The  duke’s  envoys  approached  the  emperor  and,  according  to  their 
instructions,  insistently  demanded  that  Hugh  and  his  companions  be 

^Should  be  fifteeen  or  sixteen  years.  Alexius  I,  emperor  1081-1118,  overthrew 
and  succeeded  Nicephorus  III  Botoniates  and  founded  the  dynasty  of  the  Comneni. 
His  daughter,  Anna,  wrote  an  extended  account  of  his  reign  under  the  title  Alexiad 
(see  translation  by  Elizabeth  A.  S.  Dawes,  The  Alexiad  of  the  Princess  Anna  Comnenay 
pp.  253—54).  Chalandon,  who  investigated  both  Norman  and  Byzantine  history  dur¬ 
ing  this  period,  came  to  view  Alexius  in  a  more  favorable  light  than  that  in  which 
he  was  portrayed  by  the  chroniclers  of  the  First  Crusade  (see  F.  Chalandon,  Histoire 
de  la  'premiere  croisade  jusqu^a  P election  de  Godefroi  de  Botiillony  pp.  ii6ff. j  also 
F.  Chalandon,  Essai  sur  la  regne  d^ Alexis  7®^  ComnenBy  1 08 i—i  1 18 y  pp.  175—86). 


124  armies  proceed  to  CONSTANTINOPLE 

released.  As  this  request  was  emphatically  refused  by  the  emperor, 
they  returned  to  the  army,  which  had  now  passed  through  Adrianople 
and  had  come  to  a  resting  place  in  certain  pasture  lands.  When  the  duke 
and  the  other  leaders  learned  from  their  envoys  that  the  emperor 
would  not  release  these  men,  by  common  consent  they  exposed  all  that 
region  to  plunder  by  their  legions.  Since  they  remained  there  for  eight 
successive  days,  they  completely  devastated  the  district.  As  soon  as 
news  of  this  came  to  the  ears  of  the  emperor,  he  dispatched  messengers 
to  the  duke.  He  besought  him  to  put  a  stop  to  the  ravages  of  his  le¬ 
gions  and  gave  assurance  that  the  noblemen  should  be  released  as  re¬ 
quested.  The  duke  gladly  acceded  to  this  arrangement  and  forbade  the 
legions  to  plunder  further.  He  then  marched  on  to  Constantinople 
with  his  forces  under  good  control.  There  he  spread  his  tents  and  with 
his  strong  and  numerous  army  established  his  camp  before  the  city. 

The  noblemen  just  referred  to,  Hugh  the  Great,  Drogo  de  Nesle, 
William  Carpenter,  and  Clarebold  de  Vendeuil  came  out  from  the 
city  to  meet  the  army  and  repaired  to  the  camp  to  return  thanks  for 
their  liberation.  The  duke  received  them  with  much  affection  and  due 
honor.  He  kept  them  with  him  for  some  time,  showing  them  kindness 
and  sympathizing  as  a  brother  with  them  in  the  misfortunes  which 
they  had  so  unjustly  endured. 

6.  The  emferor  invites  the  duke  to  come  to  him.  The  invitation 
is  refused y  and  a  serious  hostility  arises  between  them.  By  the 
emferor^s  trickery y  the  army  is  removed  to  a  more  confined 
flace. 

Scarcely  had  they  embraced  one  another,  however,  and  refreshed 
themselves  with  pleasant  converse,  when  messengers  arrived  from  the 
emperor.  They  bore  commands  bidding  the  duke  to  hasten  to  the  im¬ 
perial  presence  with  a  small  escort.  After  conferring  with  his  friends, 
however,  the  duke  decided  to  defer  his  going.  Thereupon  the  emperor 
became  very  indignant  and  refused  a  market  to  the  legions  which  had 
come  with  the  duke.  In  view  of  the  general  need  and  the  lack  of  sup¬ 
plies,  the  leaders  again,  by  common  consent,  overran  the  suburbs  with 
large  forces  of  armed  men.  They  drove  off  flocks  and  herds  every¬ 
where  and  brought  back  into  the  camp  a  large  supply  of  provisions  of 
all  kinds,  so  that  even  the  common  people  had  great  abundance  even  to 
satiety. 


ARMIES  PROCEED  TO  CONSTANTINOPLE  125 

When  the  emperor  saw  that  the  whole  region  was  exposed  to  fire 
and  pillage,  terrified  lest  some  worse  calamity  might  ensue,  he  ordered 
the  market  to  be  restored.  Since  the  solemn  day  of  our  Lord’s  Nativity 
was  at  hand,  out  of  reverence  for  religion  the  chiefs  decreed  that  dur¬ 
ing  those  four  days  the  troops  should  be  restrained  from  all  plunder¬ 
ing  and  outrage  of  every  kind.  The  festal  season  passed  in  perfect  peace 
and  quiet.  After  it  was  over,  a  messenger  arrived  from  the  emperor, 
requesting  with  pacific  words,  yet  with  hidden  guile,  that  they  lead  the 
troops  across  the  bridge  which  is  next  to  the  palace  called  Blachernae 
and  take  up  their  quarters  in  the  numerous  palaces  along  the  shores  of 
the  Bosphorus.  This  they  were  easily  persuaded  to  do,  for  the  approach 
of  winter  was  greatly  distressing  them.  The  unprecedented  rainstorms 
were  so  violent  that  the  tents  could  scarcely  keep  out  the  water,  and 
there  was  danger  that  food  and  equipment  of  all  kinds  would  be  de¬ 
stroyed  by  rot  through  continual  exposure  to  dampness.  Neither  man 
nor  beast  nor  any  other  living  thing  could  long  endure  the  penetrating 
force  of  the  cold  and  the  frequent  snow,  to  say  nothing  of  the  con¬ 
tinual  moisture,  discomforts  by  which  they  were  tortured  beyond  en¬ 
durance. 

Although  by  his  words  the  emperor  seemed  to  be  in  sympathy  with 
the  pilgrims,  yet  his  real  intent  was  entirely  different.  His  actual  reason 
for  this  move  was  that  the  legions,  when  confined  to  a  more  limited 
space,  would  have  less  freedom  to  wander  about,  and  his  own  power 
to  restrain  them  would  be  greater.  That  this  may  be  more  fully  under¬ 
stood,  some  facts  about  the  site  of  the  above-named  city  must  be  given 
at  this  point. 

7.  A  description  of  the  site  of  Constantinople?-^  The  duke  sends 
envoys  to  the  eTnperor*  Our  army  suppers  from  unexpected 
ambushes  laid  by  the  Greeks, 

The  Pontic  [Black]  sea,  which  takes  its  name  from  the  adjacent  re¬ 
gion,  lies  to  the  north  of  Constantinople,  about  thirty  miles  away. 
From  this  sea,  a  certain  portion,  in  form  like  a  river,  descends  toward 
the  south  through  narrow  passages.  This  branch  flows  in  a  straight 

This  description  of  Constantinople  recalls  Ovid  as  well  as  Solinus  and  Orosius, 
whom  William  cites.  Ovid’s  Tristiay  Efistulae  ex  PoittOj  and  Metamorf hoses  are 
^sug'g’ested.  William  himself  had  visited  the  city  before  he  wrote  this  passag’e,  a  fact 
which  is  reflected  in  his  reference  to  “castle  of  Bohemond.” 


126  ARMIES  PROCEED  TO  CONSTANTINOPLE 


course  for  the  space  of  two  hundred  and  thirty  miles,  passes  between 
Sestos  and  Abydos,  very  ancient  cities,  one  of  which  is  in  Europe  and 
the  other  in  Asia,  and  finally  empties  into  our  Mediterranean  sea.  Is¬ 
suing  forth  from  the  Black  sea,  it  flows  for  thirty  miles  in  a  continuous 
stream  from  the  first  passage  where  it  entered  and  toward  the  western 
part  forms  a  gulf  about  five  or  six  miles  long  and  about  one  mile  wide. 
This  narrow  sea,  which  extends  for  two  hundred  and  thirty  miles  from 
the  Black  sea  to  the  Mediterranean,  is  called  the  Bosphorus,  or  the 
Propontis,  or  the  Hellespont.  In  the  seventeenth  chapter  of  De  me- 
morabilibuSy  Solinus  bears  witness  to  this,  as  follows:  ^^The  fourth  gulf 
of  Europe  begins  at  the  Hellespont  and  ends  at  the  entrance  to  Lake 
Maeotis.  The  entire  width  of  this  body  of  water  which  divides  Europe 
from  Asia  is  compressed  into  a  strait  of  seven  stadii.  This  is  the  Helles¬ 
pont  which  Xerxes  crossed  by  a  bridge  of  boats  which  he  caused  to  be 
constructed.  From  here  the  stream  flows  on  as  a  narrow  channel  to 
Priapus,  a  city  of  Asia  which  Alexander  the  Great,  yearning  to  con¬ 
quer  the  world,  seized  as  he  passed  by.  At  this  point  it  widens  again 
into  a  very  broad  expanse  of  waters  and  forms  the  Propontis.  Presently 
it  contracts  to  a  width  of  five  hundred  paces  and  becomes  the  Bosphorus 
of  Thrace,  across  which  Darius  transported  his  troops.” 

These  names  seem  to  have  originated  in  the  tales  of  ancient  poets. 
The  Bosphorus  is  so  called  because  Jupiter  under  the  guise  of  a  bull  is 
said  to  have  carried  off  across  its  waters  Europa,  the  daughter  of 
Agenor.  The  name  Hellespont  comes  from  Helle,  the  sister  of 
Phryxis,  who,  according  to  the  myth,  also  crossed  that  sea  with  her 
brother  on  the  back  of  a  ram.  This  forms  the  boundary  between  Europe 
and  Asia  and,  in  common  parlance,  is  called  the  arm  of  St.  George.  Its 
length  is  as  we  have  given  it,  but  the  width  is  not  the  same  in  all  places. 
According  to  the  situation  and  formation  of  the  lands  adjacent  to  it, 
it  contracts  now  to  width  of  one  mile  and  again  stretches  out  to 
thirty  or  more.  The  gulf  which  extends  to  the  west,  as  has  been  men¬ 
tioned,  forms  one  of  the  most  famous  harbors  of  the  world  and  has  a 
commodious  roadstead.  Between  this  gulf  and  the  Bosphorus,  in  an 
angle,  as  it  were,  lies  the  city  of  which  we  are  speaking.  It  was  formerly 
called  Byzantium,  an  obscure  place,  almost  the  last  city  in  Thrace. 
Now  notable  under  the  happier  name  of  the  emperor  who  enlarged  it, 

Solinus  Polyhistor  Xii. 


ARMIES  PROCEED  TO  CONSTANTINOPLE  127 

it  has  become  the  capital  of  the  provinces,  the  residence  of  the  em¬ 
peror,  and  is  jealous  of  the  name  of  Rome,  its  senior,  with  her  preroga¬ 
tive  of  dignity. 

According  to  the  account  contained  in  the  third  book  of  Paul  Oro- 
sius,^^  this  city  was  founded  by  Pausanius,  king  of  the  Spartans.  It  is  in 
the  shape  of  a  triangle  with  three  unequal  sides.  The  first  of  these  ex¬ 
tends  from  that  angle  which  is  contained  between  the  sea  and  the 
Hellespont,  where  the  church  of  St.  George,  called  Mangana,  is  situ¬ 
ated,  straight  along  the  harbor  to  the  new  palace  named  Blachernae. 
The  second  side  stretches  along  the  Hellespont  from  the  same  monas¬ 
tery  of  St.  George  to  the  Golden  gate.  The  third  runs  through  level 
country  from  that  same  gate  to  the  palace  Blachernae,  just  mentioned, 
and  is  well  fortified  with  walls,  towers,  and  outer  defenses.  A  river 
flows  into  the  harbor.  This  is  rather  small  in  summer,  but  in  winter  it 
is  so  swollen  by  the  rains  that  a  bridge  is  necessary. 

Crossing  this  bridge,  our  army  repaired  to  the  quarters  assigned  to 
it  in  some  of  the  buildings  which  are  so  numerous  along  the  edge  of  the 
Bosphorus,  between  its  own  waters  and  those  of  the  Black  sea.  While 
tarrying  there  to  await  the  arrival  of  the  other  leaders,  the  duke  re¬ 
ceived  frequent  messages  from  the  emperor  requesting  his  presence. 
Distrust  of  the  monarch’s  friendliness,  however,  and  dread  of  a  con¬ 
ference  with  him  made  Godfrey  reluctant  to  respond  to  the  summons. 
He  felt,  however,  that  it  would  be  discourteous  and  contrary  to  the 
laws  of  honor,  if  he  did  not  at  least  send  suitable  persons  to  represent 
him,  since  he  did  not  wish  to  go  in  person.  Accordingly,  he  sent  the 
noble  Conon  de  Montague,  Baldwin  du  Bourg,  and  Henry  d’Esch  to 
present  his  excuses  to  the  emperor.  When  Alexius  perceived  that  the 
duke’s  decision  was  unalterable  and  that  he  could  not  be  forced  by 
any  means  to  come  into  his  presence,  he  again  forbade  the  market. 
Even  this  measure,  however,  was  not  successful  in  bending  the  will  of 
this  determined  man.  Alexius  therefore  adopted  severer  measures.  He 
secretly  dispatched  archers  across  the  river  in  boats  to  the  place  where 
the  duke’s  forces  were  encamped.  At  the  first  break  of  day,  these  bow¬ 
men  shot  and  killed  a  great  many  of  our  people,  not  only  those  who 
had  gone  down  to  the  shore,  but  others  as  well  who  were  looking  out 
of  the  windows. 


Orosius  III.  1 3. 


128  ARMIES  PROCEED  TO  CONSTANTINOPLE 


8.  The  army  returns  to  the  city,  A  great  battle  is  fought,  A  ter¬ 
rible  massacre  of  the  Greeks  results. 

When  this  fact  was  reported  to  the  duke,  he  at  once  called  the  chiefs 
of  the  people  together  for  consultation.  By  the  advice  of  allj  he  directed 
his  brother  to  take  a  detachment  of  troops  and  quickly  seize  the  bridge 
by  which  the  army  had  crossed,  lest  it  be  cut  off  in  those  confined  places 
and  suffer  great  loss  of  numbers.  With  a  detachment  of  five  hundred 
knights,  the  energetic  Baldwin  hastened  to  the  bridge  and  seized  it  by 
force;  for  now  not  only  was  the  attitude  of  those  who  had  landed  from 
the  boats  most  threatening,  but  the  entire  city  also  was  arming  in  hostile 
manner  against  our  people. 

The  Christians  perceived  that  their  adversaries  were  making  active 
and  zealous  preparations  against  them  and  that  the  citizens  as  a  body 
were  seizing  weapons  to  destroy  them.  They  therefore  set  fire  to  all 
the  palaces  where  they  had  been  quartered,  for  a  stretch  of  six  or  seven 
miles  along  the  Bosphorus.  These,  whether  private  property  or  that  of 
the  emperor,  they  burned  to  the  ground. 

Summoned  by  the  shrill  sound  of  trumpets  and  horns  from  the  dif¬ 
ferent  quarters  whither  they  had  gone  for  rest,  the  troops  hastily  seized 
their  arms  and  headlong  followed  the  duke,  who  with  battle  lines 
already  formed  was  hastening  to  the  bridge.  For  those  who  had  had 
much  military  experience  realized  with  alarm  that,  if  the  enemy  seized 
the  bridge,  the  army  would  be  caught  in  the  narrow  space  at  a  great 
disadvantage.  Consequently,  without  waiting  for  the  infantry  divi¬ 
sions,  they  had  hastily  concentrated  the  entire  cavalry  force  at  that 
point.  But,  as  has  been  stated,  Baldwin,  the  duke’s  brother,  had  hur¬ 
ried  on  ahead  and  had  already  seized  the  bridge,  in  spite  of  the  enemy’s 
efforts.  He  had  forced  them  to  turn  in  flight  and  was  now  holding  the 
farther  bank  of  the  river  for  our  army. 

Accordingly,  the  duke  and  the  entire  host,  with  the  baggage  and 
equipment  of  every  description,  crossed  without  difficulty  and  again 
took  up  a  position  before  the  city  in  the  open  country  which  extended 
in  every  direction  without  obstruction.  Toward  evening,  an  engage¬ 
ment  took  place  between  the  church  of  the  Holy  Martyrs  Cosmo  and 
Damien,  now  usually  called  the  castle  of  Bohemond,  and  the  new  pal¬ 
ace,  Blachernae,  which  lies  in  an  angle  of  the  city  near  the  harbor.  In 
this  battle  large  numbers  were  killed,  and  the  Greeks,  unable  to  endure 
the  strain  of  battle  longer,  were  forced  to  retreat  into  the  city. 


ARMIES  PROCEED  TO  CONSTANTINOPLE  129 

Our  victorious  army  then  encamped  in  the  most  convenient  part  of 
the  field  so  valiantly  won.  Had  not  the  swift  descent  of  night  put  an 
end  to  the  struggle  between  the  two  armies,  it  is  possible  that  the  towns¬ 
people  would  have  issued  forth  again,  their  hatred  lending  them  fury. 
A  second  battle  more  violent  than  the  first  would  probably  have  en¬ 
sued,  and  the  resulting  loss  of  life  would  probably  have  been  greater. 

Here  for  the  first  time,  the  nefarious  design  of  the  emperor  in  order¬ 
ing  the  camp  to  be  moved  was  clearly  revealed  without  possibility  of 
doubt  j  namely,  that  he  might  confine  that  suspected  people  within  a 
narrow  space,  as  if  within  bolts  and  bars. 

9.  The  feofle  rush  to  arms  and  devastate  the  entire  district.  A 
great  abundance  of  food  in  camf  results. 

As  soon  as  day  returned  to  the  earth,  it  was  decreed  by  public  proc¬ 
lamation  that  the  people  should  rise  to  arms.  Some,  under  specially 
assigned  leaders,  were  dispatched  to  scour  the  country  round  about 
and  bring  back  provisions,  the  sale  of  which  had  been  forbidden  by  the 
emperor.  Orders  were  given  to  obtain  these  either  by  force  or  by  pur¬ 
chase,  and  to  spare  neither  flocks,  herds,  crops,  nor  any  other  kind  of 
provisions.  Others  were  to  remain  in  the  army  with  the  duke  and  cer¬ 
tain  other  leading  men  to  guard  the  camp,  for,  having  discovered  the 
treachery  of  the  emperor  and  his  people,  they  were  protecting  them¬ 
selves  against  these  little  trickeries  by  every  possible  means. 

Accordingly,  a  large  contingent  consisting  of  both  horsemen  and 
foot  soldiers,  went  out  on  a  foraging  expedition.  For  six  successive 
days,  they  ravaged  the  fields  within  a  circuit  of  about  sixty  miles  and, 
on  the  eighth  day,  brought  into  camp  a  quantity  of  provisions  almost 
beyond  belief  j  in  fact,  so  great  was  the  throng  of  flocks  and  herds  and 
beasts  of  burden,  to  say  nothing  of  vehicles,  that  much  difficulty  was 
experienced  in  bringing  the  plunder  back. 

10.  A  messenger  from  Bohemond  arrives  to  beg  the  duke  not  to 
go  to  the  emferor.  The  duke^s  answer  to  Bohemond. 

While  these  events  were  happening  in  camp,  a  messenger  from  Bohe¬ 
mond  came  to  the  duke,  bearing  a  letter  from  the  prince  which  read  as 
follows :  “Know,  best  of  men,  that  you  have  to  do  with  the  worst  of 
beasts  and  a  very  wicked  man.  His  purpose  always  is  to  deceive  and,  in 
every  way  possible,  to  pursue  even  to  the  death  every  Latin  nation. 


130  ARMIES  PROCEED  TO  CONSTANTINOPLE 

Some  time  or  other,  your  own  judgment  will  approve  my  feelings 
toward  him  as  just.  For  I  have  known  that  the  malice  and  hatred  of 
the  Greeks  for  the  Latin  name  is  deep-seated  and  persistent.  Leave 
the  city,  therefore,  if  it  pleases  you,  and  go  to  the  country  around 
Adrianople  or  Philippopolis.  There  allow  the  troops  entrusted  to  you 
by  the  Lord  to  refresh  themselves  by  rest  and  food  in  a  fertile  land. 
Presently,  toward  the  beginning  of  spring,  I,  by  the  will  of  the  Lord, 
will  come  to  offer  you  as  my  lord  in  brotherly  affection  aid  and  advice 
against  the  wicked  prince  of  the  Greeks.” 

The  duke  read  the  letter,  and  after  fully  considering  its  contents, 
held  a  consultation  with  the  leaders.  He  then  answered,  both  by  the 
living  voice  and  by  letter,  in  this  wise: 

“I  know,  beloved  brother,  and  long  ago  was  apprised  by  report, 
that  with  inexorable  hatred  the  crafty  race  of  the  Greeks  ever  ardently 
desires  to  persecute  our  people.  If  formerly  I  lacked  any  part  of  that 
knowledge,  I  have  from  day  to  day  acquired  it  fully  by  experience.  I 
do  not  question  that  you  are  moved  against  them  by  righteous  zeal  and 
that  your  instinctive  feeling  about  their  wickedness  is  correct.  But, 
having  before  my  eyes  the  fear  of  God  and  the  object  of  my  expedi¬ 
tion,  I  shrink  from  turning  against  a  Christian  people  the  arms  which 
are  pledged  to  combat  the  infidel.  Nevertheless,  the  army  that  is  with 
us,  beloved  of  God,  awaits  your  coming  most  eagerly,  as  well  as  that 
of  the  other  princes  devoted  to  the  Lord.” 

✓ 

II.  The  emferor  sends  his  own  soUy  John  Porphyrogenitus 
as  hostage  and  invites  the  duke  to  come  to  him.  The  duke 
goes.  The  emperor  adopts  him.  Peace  is  restored  between 
them. 

Extreme  anxiety  now  beset  the  emperor  as  well  as  all  his  household 
and  court.  He  saw  that  the  entire  country  was  exposed  to  pillage,  and 
the  groans  and  lamentations  of  his  people  were  becoming  unendurable. 
Moreover,  he  knew  that  messengers  had  come  from  Bohemond  and 
that  the  prince  himself  would  follow  soon.  If  the  princes  who  were  on 

William  again  elaborates  Albert’s  account  of  the  diplomatic  interchange.  He 
correctly  omits  Albert’s  characterization  of  Bohemond  as  a  very  wealthy  prince  (Al- 
bertus  Aquensis,  Historia  Hierosolymitanay  in  Recueil  des  historiens  des  croisades.  His- 
toriens  occidentaiiXy  IV,  309). 

John  Porphyrogenitus,  literally  “born  to  the  purple,”  was  heir  apparent  to  the 
imperial  throne  and  did  succeed  his  father  in  1118. 


ARMIES  PROCEED  TO  CONSTANTINOPLE  131 

the  way  should  meet  before  he  had  succeeded  in  conciliating  the  duke, 
he  feared  that  they  would  unite  as  one  man  for  his  ruin.  He  therefore 
sent  his  messengers  a  second  time  to  beg  the  duke  to  visit  him.  It  was 
for  this  reason  that  he  exerted  himself  so  strenuously  to  accomplish 
the  reconciliation  before  they  should  arrive,  and  again  sent  a  pressing 
entreaty  to  the  duke.  He  urged  him  to  repair  to  the  palace  without 
any  hesitation  as  soon  as  he  received  John  Porphyrogenitus,  his  own 
son,  whom  he  was  sending  as  a  hostage. 

This  communication  pleased  the  leaders.  Conon  de  Montague  and 
Baldwin  du  Bourg,  men  of  very  high  degree,  were  sent  to  receive  the 
emperor’s  son,  who  was  then  entrusted  to  the  careful  guardianship  of 
[Baldwin]  the  brother  of  the  duke.  As  soon  as  this  had  been  done,  the 
duke  left  his  brother  in  charge  of  the  army  and  went  to  the  city,  accom¬ 
panied  by  the  other  leaders.  He  presented  himself  to  the  emperor,  who 
had  so  long  desired  his  presence,  and  was  received  by  him  with  much 
honor.  The  monarch  was  surrounded  by  distinguished  men,  all  eager  to 
see  the  man  of  whom  they  had  heard  so  much  and  with  whom  they 
were  somewhat  acquainted  already. 

The  nobles  in  attendance  on  the  duke  were  likewise  honored  with 
a  greeting  by  the  emperor,  according  as  their  rank  demanded,  and  re¬ 
ceived  the  kiss  of  peace.  Assiduously  inquiring  as  to  their  health,  he 
called  each  one  by  name  and  showed  himself  affable  and  kind  to  all, 
that  he  might  win  their  favor.  Then  addressing  the  duke,  he  said: 
“We  have  heard,  beloved  duke,  that  you  are  most  powerful  among 
your  princes,  and  the  pious  enterprise  which  you  are  zealously  carry¬ 
ing  out,  armed  with  the  laudable  enthusiasm  of  devotion,  is  not  un¬ 
known  to  us.  Furthermore,  frequent  rumors  have  spread  the  fact  far 
and  wide  that  you  are  a  man  of  steadfast  spirit  and  sincere  faith.  Ac¬ 
cordingly,  as  your  noble  life  deserves,  you  have  won  the  favor  of  many 
who  have  not  even  seen  you. 

“We  also  desire  to  surround  you  with  every  tie  of  affection  and  to 
show  you  peculiar  favor.  Hence  we  have  resolved  to  adopt  you  today 
as  a  son,  in  the  presence  of  the  great  men  of  our  sacred  palace.  We 
place  our  empire  in  your  power,  that,  through  you,  its  integrity  may 
remain  unimpaired,  in  the  sight  of  the  multitude  here  assembled  and 
of  those  of  future  times.” 

With  these  words,  in  accordance  with  a  regular  court  ceremonial 
which  was  always  observed  in  adoptions  of  this  kind,  he  caused  the 


132  ARMIES  PROCEED  TO  CONSTANTINOPLE 

duke  to  be  clothed  in  imperial  robes  and  adopted  him  as  son,  as  was 
the  custom  of  the  realm.  Thus  was  peace  and  good  will  fully  reestab¬ 
lished  between  them. 

9 

12.  The  duke  takes  leave  for  a  time  and  de farts  laden  with  gifts, 

A  market  is  frovided  for  the  filgrims.  The  duke^s  legions 
cross  the  Bosphorus  and  encamp  in  the  district  around  Chal” 
cedon. 

When  this  ceremonial  was  over,  the  emperor  opened  his  treasure  to 
the  duke  and  his  companions  and  bestowed  upon  them  splendid  gifts. 
These  were  of  gold,  gems,  silken  fabrics,  and  precious  vases  far  ex¬ 
ceeding  the  imagination  of  man  both  in  elegance  of  workmanship  and 
value  of  material, For  the  emperor  desired  that,  loaded  to  the  limit 
with  gifts  by  his  great  generosity,  they  should  marvel  at  the  incom¬ 
parable  quantity  of  his  riches  and  the  munificence  of  his  imperial  ma¬ 
jesty.  Nor  was  this  liberality  shown  once  only  toward  the  duke.  For 
from  the  day  of  Epiphany  even  to  the  day  of  the  Lord’s  Ascension,  he 
sent  him  each  week  from  the  imperial  palace  as  many  gold  coins  as 
four  strong  men  could  carry  on  their  shoulders,  besides  ten  measures 
of  copper  denarii.  The  duke,  however,  kept  nothing  for  himself,  but 
generously  bestowed  it  all  on  the  nobles  and  the  army,  according  as 
the  needs  of  each  individual  seemed  to  require. 

They  then  took  leave  of  the  emperor  for  a  time  and  returned  to  the 
camp.  John,  the  emperor’s  son,  who  had  been  detained  at  the  camp  as 
a  hostage  for  the  duke’s  return,  was  thereupon  sent  back  to  his  father, 
attended  by  an  honorable  escort. 

The  emperor  then  sent  forth  a  public  edict  ordering  that  all  neces¬ 
saries  for  the  duke’s  army  should  be  furnished  at  a  just  price  and  fair 
weight,  and  proclaimed  that  the  penalty  of  death  was  to  be  inflicted 
on  all  who  violated  this  mandate.  The  duke,  on  his  part,  forbade  by 
the  voice  of  the  herald  that  any  violence  or  wrong  should  be  done  in 
his  camp  to  the  emperor’s  men,  under  pain  of  death.  Thus,  with  mu¬ 
tual  cooperation,  they  kept  on  trading  quite  harmoniously. 

About  the  middle  of  March,  the  duke  learned  that  the  other  leaders 
were  arriving  and  stationing  their  armies  in  the  vicinity.  At  the  sug- 

William  here  substitutes  silken  fabrics  and  precious  vases  for  the  mules  and  horses 
which  satisfied  Albertis  imag^ination  as  fit  presents  from  the  emperor  to  the  feudal 
leaders,  perhaps  another  reflection  of  the  social  change  which  occurred  in  the  twelfth 
century. 


ARMIES  PROCEED  TO  CONSTANTINOPLE  133 

gestion  of  the  emperor,  but  with  the  consent  of  the  elders  and  of  his 
people  as  well,  he  caused  boats  to  be  made  ready  and  crossed  the 
Hellespont.  He  then  established  his  camp  at  Chalcedon,  in  Bithynia, 
which  was  the  first  province  of  Asia  to  which  he  came. 

It  was  at  the  city  of  Chalcedon  in  Bithynia,  in  the  time  of  Pope  Leo 
the  Elder  and  the  Emperor  Martian,  that  the  fourth  general  synod, 
composed  of  six  hundred  and  thirty-six  fathers,  met  to  combat  the 
heresies  of  the  monk  Eutyches  and  of  Dioscurus,  patriarch  of  Alex¬ 
andria.^®  This  place  is  very  near  Constantinople,  separated  from  that 
city  only  by  the  Bosphorus,  and  from  it  all  could  see  the  royal  city,  so 
near  a  neighbor.  Moreover,  those  whose  business  urgently  required  it 
could  easily  go  thither  and  return  to  the  camp  three  or  four  times  a  day. 

But  the  fact  that  the  emperor  by  his  persuasive  words  induced  the 
duke  to  conduct  his  army  across  the  sea  sooner  than  he  had  intended 
did  not  proceed  from  sincerity  and  good  faith.  On  the  contrary,  with 
his  usual  trickery,  he  circumvented  the  duke  in  order  that  the  latter’s 
forces  might  not  unite  with  the  others  when  they  arrived.  With  the 
same  subtlety,  he  compelled  the  others  who  followed  later  to  cross 
over  one  by  one,  so  that  two  armies  were  never  together  before  the 
city  at  the  same  time. 

13.  Bohemond  hastens  his  coming.  The  nobles  In  his  train  are  de¬ 
scribed,  The  emferor  secretly  f  ref  ares  schemes  to  entraf 
him. 

This,  then,  was  the  situation  between  the  emperor  and  the  duke  at 
Constantinople.  Meanwhile,  Lord  Bohemond,  son  of  Robert  Guiscard, 
prince  of  Taranto  had  crossed  the  Adriatic  sea,  before  the  unfavora¬ 
ble  winter  season  set  In  and  had  arrived  at  Durazzo  with  all  his  forces. 

Council  of  Chalcedon,  fourth  oecumenical  council,  a.d.  451. 

Bohemond,  the  most  vigorous  and  vivid  figure  on  the  crusade,  was  the  oldest 
son  of  Robert  Guiscard  by  a  first  wife  who  was  set  aside  for  the  more  noble-born 
Sigilgaita.  The  inheritance  passed  to  Roger,  son  of  the  latter.  Bohemond,  who  seems, 
however,  to  have  inherited  nearly  all  of  his  father’s  ability,  caused  his  half-brother 
continuous  trouble  and  forced  some  concessions  of  territory  from  him.  The  title 
‘‘Prince  of  Taranto”  was  apparently  a  later  invention.  At  this  time  he  held  only  Bari. 
The  crusade  offered  him  greater  opportunities,  and  his  qualities  of  leadership  were 
so  pronounced  that  he  was  able  to  induce  many  of  his  brother’s  soldiers  to  follow 
him  to  the  East.  His  band  was  probably  the  smallest  of  the  major  divisions  of  the 
army  which  made  up  the  crusade.  Anna  Comnena  taunts  him  for  his  poverty,  but 
her  taunts  are  in  themselves  a  tribute  to  his  ability.  (See  the  brief  but  excellent  biog¬ 
raphy  by  R.  B.  Yewdale,  Bohemond  /,  Prince  of  Antioch,^ 


134  ARMIES  PROCEED  TO  CONSTANTINOPLE 

From  there  he  marched  slowly  through  the  wilds  of  Bulgaria  with  those 
who  were  following  him.  Many  noble  and  powerful  men  from  Italy 
and  other  lands  had  attached  themselves  to  his  army.  We  have  retained 
the  names  and  number  of  some  of  these,  that  they  may  be  remembered 
forever.  They  were  Tancred,  son  of  William  Marchisusj  Richard  of 
the  Principate,  son  of  William  Iron-Arm,  the  brother  of  Robert  Guis- 
card^  Rainulf,  his  brother  3  Robert  of  Anzij  Herman  de  Cannij  Rob¬ 
ert  de  Sourdevalj  Robert,  son  of  Tostanj  Humphrey,  son  of  Ralph  3 
Richard,  son  of  Count  Rainulf  3  the  count  of  Rosinolo  with  his  broth¬ 
ers  3  also  Boello  de  Chartres  3  Albered  de  Cagnano3  and  Humphrey  of 
Montescaglioso.^®  All  these,  following  the  standard  of  Bohemond, 
arrived  at  the  city  of  Castoria,  where  they  celebrated  the  birthday  of 
the  Lord. 

At  this  place  markets  were  not  provided  by  the  city  for  people  who 
were  passing  through.  Hence  they  were  compelled  to  seize  by  force 
flocks  and  herds  and  other  things  necessary  for  food.  This  caused  loss 
to  the  natives,  who  detested  them  as  enemies.  Again  resuming  the 
march  from  here,  they  came  into  a  very  rich  region  called  Pelagonia, 
where  they  encamped.  At  this  place  they  learned  that  there  was  a 
fortified  town  near  by  inhabited  entirely  by  heretics.^®  Thither  they 
marched  with  all  speed,  captured  it  by  force  of  arms,  and  burned  the 
buildings.  They  put  the  inhabitants  to  death  either  by  fire  or  by  sword 
and  carried  off  a  great  amount  of  booty  and  richest  spoils. 

When  the  emperor  heard  that  the  legions  of  Bohemond  were  on 
the  way,  he  privately  instructed  the  chiefs  of  his  armies,  whom  he  had 
sent  into  winter  quarters  in  that  same  region,  to  march  constantly 
alongside  the  Christian  forces  as  far  as  the  river  Vardar  with  all  the 
troops  of  that  locality.  Whenever  a  suitable  opportunity  occurred, 
whether  by  night  or  by  day,  they  were  to  try  to  harass  the  advancing 

William  is  here  following  the  anonymous  author  of  the  Gesta  Francorum.  His 
identification  of  William,  brother  of  Robert  Guiscard,  as  ‘Terrebrachia,”  i.e.,  Iron- 
Arm,  may  imply  a  more  intimate  connection  with  south  Italian  affairs  than  has 
usually  been  assumed.  ‘‘Rosinolo”  has  not  been  identified  with  any  certainty,  several 
places  in  France  as  well  as  Italy  having  similar  names.  Yewdale’s  identifications 
have  been  accepted  for  the  others.  (See  also  Beatrice  A,  Lees,  Anonymi  gesta  Francorum 
et  aliorum  Hierosolymitanorumj  pp.  106—7.) 

Who  these  heretics  were  has  not  been  positively  established,  Chalandon  felt 
certain  that  they  were  the  Paulicians,  a  Manichean  group  (^Premiere  CroisadCy  p.  135). 
Hagenmeyer,  on  the  other  hand,  is  inclined  to  accept  Baldric’s  statement  that  they 
represented  several  elements,  including  Jews  and  Muslims,  who  did  not  subscribe  to 
either  Latin  or  Greek  orthodox  Christianity  (H.  Hagenmeyer,  ed.,  Anonymi  gesta 
Francorum  et  aliorum  Hierosolymitanorumj  p.  160,  notes  47,  48). 


ARMIES  PROCEED  TO  CONSTANTINOPLE  135 

army  either  openly  or  otherwise.  He  had  grave  misgivings  about  the 
coming  of  Bohemond,  for,  in  times  gone  by,  he  had  frequently  suffered 
much  from  both  that  leader  and  his  father.-®  Yet,  being  a  crafty  man, 
thoroughly  skilled  in  concealing  and  disguising  his  purposes,  he  dis¬ 
patched  some  of  the  nobles  of  his  own  household  to  that  distinguished 
man.  They  were  commanded  to  address  him  with  pacific  words,  subtly 
concealing  the  real  guile  beneath,  and  to  make  every  effort  to  deceive 
him.  The  tenor  of  the  written  message  which  he  sent,  as  well  as  the 
spoken  word  delivered  by  the  envoys,  was  as  follows. 

14.  The  letter  of  the  Emferor  Alexius  to  Lord  Bohemond.  The 
emferoA s  army  makes  a  secret  attack  on  Bohemond^s  camf, 

A  frlsoner  is  caftured  who  discloses  the  eml  designs  of  the 
emferor» 

^^OuR  majesty,  protected  by  God,  has  been  Informed  and  does  not 
doubt  that  you  are  a  great  prince,  powerful  and  illustrious,  and  that 
you  are  also  the  son  of  a  magnificent  prince,  likewise  powerful  and  in¬ 
defatigable.  We  have  ever  held  you  in  affection  and  approval,  as  your 
merits  deserve,  although,  up  to  this  time,  we  have  never  seen  you  in 
person.^ ^  We  have  learned  that,  in  pious  obedience,  you  have  girded 
yourself  for  the  service  of  God  and  have  joined  with  other  princes  de¬ 
voted  to  God  in  undertaking  this  same  pilgrimage.  Hence  it  is  our 
purpose  to  love  and  honor  you  still  more  and  to  hold  you  firmly  estab¬ 
lished  in  our  favor.  Therefore,  our  beloved  friend,  [we  beg  you  to] 
instruct  the  people  who  are  following  you  to  spare  our  subjects,  cause 
violence,  rapine,  and  fires  to  cease,  and  come  as  speedily  as  possible  to 
our  presence,  that,  free  from  all  care,  you  may  enjoy  the  many  honors 
and  favors  which  we  intend  to  bestow  upon  you.  We  have  given  com¬ 
mand  to  the  bearers  of  these  presents  to  procure  the  things  necessary 
for  your  army  at  a  just  price,  so  that  a  continual  supply  of  commodities 
may  attend  it.” 

Robert  Guiscard  had  developed  designs  on  the  Greek  peninsula  long  before  the 
time  of  Alexius.  At  one  time  it  appeared  that  a  marriage  might  be  arranged  between 
Guiscard’s  daughter  and  a  son  of  the  emperor.  The  palace  revolutions  of  1078  and 
1081  ended  those  hopes,  and  war  ensued,  1080-1085.  Bohemond  was  left  in  charge 
of  his  father’s  forces  when  the  latter  rushed  to  Pope  Gregory’s  aid  against  Henry  IV. 
He  was  not,  however,  able  alone  to  withstand  the  superior  forces  of  Alexius,  and 
though  there  was  some  hope  of  success  when  his  father  returned,  the  death  of  the 
latter  in  1085  ended  that  venture  (see  Yewdale,  Bohemond  /,  pp.  23—24). 

They  had  on  several  occasions,  however,  been  opposed  to  each  other  on  battle¬ 
fields.  William  here  as  elsewhere  expands  the  diplomatic  correspondence. 


136  ARMIES  PROCEED  TO  CONSTANTINOPLE 

Although  on  the  surface  these  words  of  the  emperor  seemed  to  con¬ 
tain  much  kindness,  yet  they  were  imbued  with  poison.  But  Bohemond, 
a  wise  and  shrewd  man,  who  was  well  aware  of  the  emperor’s  malice, 
hid  his  feelings.  He  conducted  himself  with  due  caution  and  returned 
thanks  to  the  monarch  for  the  condescension  and  solicitude  shown  for 
his  well-being. 

Led  by  these  men  as  guides,  then,  they  came  to  the  river  Vardar. 
Here  they  found  that  a  part  of  the  troops  had  already  crossed  and  were 
halting  on  the  other  shore,  while  another  section  was  still  in  the  act  of 
crossing.  At  this  moment,  the  emperor’s  satellites,  who  had  been  fol¬ 
lowing  the  footsteps  of  our  army  with  a  great  company,  thought  that 
their  opportunity  had  come  and  with  hostile  intent  fell  furiously  upon 
the  part  of  the  people  who  were  about  to  cross.  Tancred  discovered 
this  and,  always  alert  for  action,  flew  with  the  speed  of  lightning  to 
that  point.  Followed  by  about  two  thousand  knights,  he  swam  across 
the  intervening  river  to  the  farther  bank.  As  soon  as  these  warriors 
reached  the  other  shore,  they  fell  upon  the  enemy  with  their  swords, 
broke  up  their  ranks,  and  put  them  to  flight.  They  pursued  them  for 
some  time  with  great  slaughter.  Some  prisoners  were  also  taken  and 
led  before  Bohemond.  To  his  repeated  inquiries  why  they  were  pur¬ 
suing  a  Christian  army,  they  replied  that  they  were  the  emperor’s  men 
and,  to  earn  their  pay,  must  fight  as  he  ordered.  Here,  at  length,  it  was 
fully  evident  to  all  that  everything  the  emperor  had  said  to  them 
was  fraud  and  trickery  j  yet,  because  they  were  about  to  pass  through 
by  his  means,  Bohemond,  against  the  will  of  the  rest,  preferred  to  hide 
his  feelings  rather  than  uselessly  to  provoke  the  emperor’s  anger. 

15*  'The  duke  comes  out  to  meet  Bohemondy  and  conducts  the 
frince  much  against  his  will  to  the  emferory  who  receives  him 
with  great  honor.  In  the  meantime y  Tancred  moves  his  le¬ 
gions  into  Bithynia-y  where  they  unite  with  the  duke^s  army. 

After  crossing  Macedonia  and  all  Illyricum,  the  army  under  com¬ 
petent  guidance  proceeded  at  a  quicker  pace  and  began  to  approach  the 
city.  On  the  fifth  day  before  the  feast  of  Easter  the  army  halted  near 
the  city.  Here  a  second  embassy  was  received  from  the  emperor,  who 
sent  the  urgent  request  that  Bohemond  leave  his  troops  and  come  with 
a  small  escort  to  visit  him.  Bohemond  hesitated  for  a  while  and  delayed 
putting  these  commands  into  effect,  for  he  suspected  the  emperor  of 


ARMIES  PROCEED  TO  CONSTANTINOPLE  137 

evil  intentions.  While  he  was  debating  what  to  do,  the  illustrious  Duke 
Godfrey  arrived  in  state,  attended  by  an  honorable  retinue  of  nobles. 
In  compliance  with  the  earnest  entreaties  of  the  emperor  he  had  come 
to  Bohemond  to  try  to  induce  him  to  wait  on  his  imperial  majesty  with¬ 
out  fear.  The  two  embraced  each  other  and  exchanged  the  kiss  of  true 
affection.  An  agreeable  talk  then  followed  as  each  questioned  the 
other  about  his  affairs.  At  last  the  duke,  following  his  instructions,' 
advised  Bohemond  to  visit  the  emperor.  The  prince  was  very  reluctant 
at  first  and  paid  but  slight  attention  to  the  duke^s  advice,  for  he  dis¬ 
trusted  the  words  of  the  emperor,  as  we  have  said.  Finally,  however, 
he  yielded  to  Godfrey’s  persuasion  and,  escorted  by  the  duke,  went 
confidently  to  the  palace. 

The  emperor  received  him  with  the  kiss  of  peace  and  honored  him 
with  favors  of  many  kinds.  After  much  friendly  conference,  Bohemond 
finally  became  the  emperor’s  man,  as  the  saying  is.  He  did  homage  to 
the  emperor  and  swore  fealty  to  him,  according  to  the  custom  of  liege 
men  to  their  lords.^^ 

After  this,  costly  gifts  of  untold  value  were  offered  him  from  the 
royal  wardrobe  j  gold,  robes,  vases,  and  precious  stones.  Peace  was 
thus  established  between  them. 

Tancred/®  son  of  Bohemond’s  sister,  a  most  excellent  man  In  every 
respect,  had  carefully  avoided  the  presence  of  the  emperor  and  con¬ 
ference  with  him.  While  Bohemond  was  still  at  the  imperial  court, 
Tancred  had  transferred  his  entire  army  to  Bithynia  in  the  district  of 
Chalcedon,  on  the  other  side  of  the  Bosphorus.  He  camped  near  the 
army  of  the  duke,  which  had  crossed  a  short  time  before  and  was  now 
awaiting  the  arrival  of  the  later  armies. 

It  is  difficult  to  convey  in  translation  the  greater  formality  in  the  ceremony  of 
vassalage  which  had  arisen  during  the  twelfth  century.  When  the  anonymous  author 
says  simply  ^‘hominium  et  fiduciam,  sicut  alii  fecerant,”  William  writes,  “factus  est 
.  .  .  dominus  Boamundus  Imperatoris  homo,  fidelitate  manualiter  exhibita  et  jura- 
mento  praestito  corporaliter,  qualiter  solent  fideles  dominis  suis  exhibere.”  The  change 
was  not  merely  one  of  language,  for  the  ceremony  itself  was  elaborated  to  include  an 
oath  taken  with  one  hand  resting  upon  sacred  relics,  sometimes,  as  here,  upon  several 
sacred  objects.  There  was,  of  course,  greater  formality  at  Constantinople  than  in  the 
West  at  this  time,  but  toward  the  end  of  the  century  the  Western  practice,  too,  had 
become  more  formal. 

Tancred  was  the  son  of  Bohemond’s  half-sister,  Emma.  His  father,  according  to 
our  author  (Book  II,  chap.  13),  was  William  the  Marquis,  but  is  named  Odo  by 
others.  Later  legend  was  to  endow  Tancred  with  a  Saracen  father.  Nicholson,  who 
has  reviewed  the  evidence  concerning  Tancred’s  parentage,  concludes  that  the  father 
was  “a  Latin  Christian  named  Marchisus  or  Odo,  the  Good”  (see  R.  L.  Nicholson, 

Tancredy  pp.  3“9)» 


138  ARMIES  PROCEED  TO  CONSTANTINOPLE 

When  the  emperor  learned  that  Tancred  had  avoided  his  presence, 
he  was  very  angry,  but  he  wisely  concealed  his  resentment.  He  repeat- 

on  the  princes  who  had  visited  him  and 
dismissed  them  with  much  honor  to  their  own  camps  beyond  the 
Bosphorus.  There  the  two  armies  were  united  and  dwelt  together  in 
harmony  within  view  of  the  city  while  waiting  for  the  other  armies 
to  arrive.  Then  they  intended  to  proceed  together  as  one  united  host 
on  the  pilgrimage  which  they  had  undertaken. 

The  royal  city  as  well  as  the  surrounding  country  furnished  a  plenti¬ 
ful  food  supply  for  the  people  encamped  there,  so  that  all  were  able  to 
enjoy  an  abundance  according  to  their  wish. 

16.  Roberty  count  of  Flanders y  arrives  with  his  army.  Being  sum¬ 
moned  to  the  emferory  he  is  escorted  to  his  fresence  and  hon¬ 
ored  with  many  gifts.  He  crosses  the  sea  and  joins  the  other 
leaders. 

In  the  meantime,  on  the  approach  of  winter,  the  illustrious  Robert, 
count  of  Flanders,-^  had  set  sail  from  Bari,  a  coast  city  of  Apulia. 
Crossing  the  sea  with  all  his  army,  he  landed  at  Durazzo.  There,  amid 
woods  and  pastures,  in  a  fertile  country  full  of  all  kinds  of  commodi¬ 
ties,  he  had  escaped  the  rigorous  winter.  Then,  as  spring  approached, 
he  resumed  his  journey  with  much  energy,  in  order  to  join  the  other 
leaders  who  had  already  crossed  the  sea.  Before  reaching  Constanti¬ 
nople,  he  received  imperial  messengers,  as  had  the  other  leaders,  and 
through  them  he  was  commanded  to  leave  his  troops  and  proceed  with 
a  few  companions  to  the  emperor’s  presence.  Well  informed  as  to  how 
those  who  had  preceded  him  had  acted  in  this  matter  with  the  emperor, 
on  arriving  at  Constantinople  he  went  to  the  palace  with  a  small  reti¬ 
nue.  He  was  received  with  much  honor  by  the  emperor  and  treated 
very  kindly.  Following  the  example  of  the  others,  he  took  the  solemn 
oath  of  fealty  which  the  emperor  demanded.  Thereupon,  still  greater 
honors  and  gifts  were  lavished  upon  him.  His  companions  were  also 
honored  with  equal  generosity,  each  as  his  rank  demanded. 

2“^  Robert  II,  count  of  Flanders,  succeeded  his  father,  Robert  I,  the  Frisian,  in  1093. 
The  latter  had  made  a  pilgrimage  to  Jerusalem  in  atonement  for  his  sins  sometime 
in  the  decade  before  his  death.  He  had  visited  Alexius  on  his  return  journey  and 
promised  to  send  troops  to  help  Alexius  against  the  Turks,  a  promise  which  was  ful¬ 
filled  in  1090.  Robert  II,  famed  for  his  piety  as  well  as  courage,  thus  had  a  traditional 
interest  in  the  warfare  against  the  Turks  and  recovery  of  the  Holy  Land.  He  was 


edly  heaped  immense  gifts 


ARMIES  PROCEED  TO  CONSTANTINOPLE  139 

For  several  days,  his  army  was  allowed  to  enjoy  the  refreshment  of 
food  and  rest  near  the  city,  while  the  count  was  holding  frequent  con¬ 
ferences  with  the  emperor  over  matters  which  seemed  essential.  He 
then  took  leave  and  with  his  cohorts  sailed  across  the  sea  to  join  his 
fellow  pilgrims.  They  greeted  him  with  kindly  affection,  and  the  two 
armies  then  joined  their  forces. 

For  some  days  the  leaders  refreshed  themselves  by  talking  over 
with  one  another  the  various  events  which  had  happened  to  each  on 
the  journey.  After  reviewing  in  a  spirit  of  pleasant  reminiscence  the 
hardships  experienced,  last  of  all  they  proceeded  to  discuss  the  more 
urgent  matters.  It  was  necessary  to  decide,  after  careful  conference 
with  each  other,  when  and  how  the  consummation  of  the  enterprise 
which  they  had  undertaken  might  be  brought  about.  They  were  thus 
anxiously  engaged,  chiding  the  delay  of  those  comrades  who  were 
following  them  and  charging  it  to  them  that  the  time  was  passing 
without  result,  when  a  messenger  arrived  from  the  count  of  Tou¬ 
louse  and  the  bishop  of  Puy,  who  announced  that  both  were  at  hand 
and  would  soon  enter  the  city. 

17.  The  count  of  Toulouse  and  the  bishof  of  Puy  march  through 
Dalmatia  with  their  armies.  They  exferience  many  difficult 
ties  on  the  march  in  that  land. 

These  two  great  and  distinguished  men  with  their  armies  had,  from 
the  very  beginning  of  the  march,  kept  together  as  inseparable  comrades. 
There  were  in  their  company  illustrious  men  distinguished  for  nobility 
of  character  as  well  as  for  high  rank.  Among  these  were :  William, 
bishop  of  Orange,  and  Rainbald,  count  of  the  same  cityj  Gaston  de 
Beziers  j  Gerard  de  Roussillon  3  William  de  Montpellier  3  William, 
count  of  Forez3  Raymond  Pilet3  Gaston  de  Bearn  3  William  Amanjeu3 
and  many  others  whose  names,  although  we  have  not  preserved  them, 

a  cousin  of  Robert  of  Normandy.  (See  sketch  by  M.  M,  Knappen,  “Robert  II  of 
Flanders,”  Munro^CrusadeSy  pp,  79—100.) 

Raymond  IV  of  St.  Gilles,  count  of  Toulouse  and  of  Tripoli,  had  been  the  first 
of  the  leaders  to  take  the  Cross.  A  young’er  son  of  Raymond  III,  he  had  originally 
held  lesser  domains,  being  count  of  Rouergue,  Nimes,  and  Narbonne.  His  older 
brother,  William  IV,  whose  sons  had  died,  left  the  county  of  Toulouse  to  Raymond. 
The  family  had  a  reputation  for  piety.  Both  brothers  are  believed  to  have  fought 
against  Muslims  in  Spain,  and  William  is  thought  to  have  died  while  on  a  pilgrimage 
to  Jerusalem  in  1093.  Raymond,  who  was  probably  born  in  1043,  was  one  of  the 
oldest  leaders  on  the  crusade  and,  by  all  accounts,  the  wealthiest.  There  is  no  satis¬ 
factory  biography  of  him  in  English. 


140  ARMIES  PROCEED  TO  CONSTANTINOPLE 

have  assuredly  been  written  in  the  Book  of  Life.  For,  voluntarily  em¬ 
bracing  poverty,  they  left  fatherland,  relations,  friends,  and  extensive 
ancestral  estates  to  follow  Christ. 

All  these  people,  following  with  devotion  the  revered  men  named 
above,  went  down  into  Italy  and  crossed  Lombardy.  Then,  after  pass¬ 
ing  through  the  region  called  Forum  Julii,“®  they  entered  Istria  near 
Aquileia  and  at  length  reached  Dalmatia.  The  land  of  Dalmatia  ex¬ 
tends  longitudinally  between  Hungary  and  the  Adriatic  sea.  It  has 
four  large  cities:  Zara,  Salona,  also  called  Spalato,  Antivari,  and  Ra- 
gusa.  It  is  inhabited  by  a  very  fierce  people,  given  over  to  plunder  and 
murder.  The  land  is  entirely  occupied  by  mountain  and  wood,  by  great 
rivers  and  widely  extending  pastures,  so  that  there  is  little  cultivation 
of  the  fields,  except  occasionally  here  and  there.  The  inhabitants  de¬ 
pend  for  their  living  entirely  upon  their  flocks  and  herds,  with  the  ex¬ 
ception  of  a  very  few  who  dwell  on  the  seacoast  and  who  differ  from 
the  rest  in  customs  and  language.  These  use  the  Latin  idiom,  while  all 
the  other  natives  employ  the  Slavonic  tongue  and  have  the  habits  of 
barbarians. 

Entering  this  province,  they  found  many  difficulties  along  the 
route,  particularly  because  of  the  rough  country  and  because  the  win¬ 
ter  season  was  at  hand.  They  also  suffered  a  rather  severe  famine  for 
several  days,  resulting  from  the  shortage  of  food  and  supplies.  The 
natives  left  their  cities  and  fortified  places  as  if  fleeing  from  wild  beasts, 
and  retreated  to  the  hills  and  dense  woods,  with  their  wives  and  chil¬ 
dren  and  all  their  possessions,  for  they  feared  the  sight  of  our  people. 
Yet  they  furtively  followed  the  footsteps  of  our  advancing  army  at  a 
distance  and  murdered  the  sick  and  aged  men,  and  the  old  women 
too,  who  followed  with  slower  step,  if  perchance  they  happened  to 
come  upon  any  such  apart  from  the  rest. 

The  count,  filled  with  a  due  sense  of  responsibility  for  the  great  host, 
sent  some  of  the  chiefs  ahead  to  lead  the  host,  while  he  himself,  with 
the  main  force  of  knights,  always  brought  up  the  rear  and  was  the  last 
to  retire  to  his  quarters. 

The  air  was  full  of  mist,  and  the  continual  shadows  were  so  thick 

2®  William  here  turns  to  the  account  of  Raymond  d^Aguilers  for  g-uidance  and  sup¬ 
plements  it  from  tradition  and  from  his  own  geog-raphical  studies.  His  characteriza¬ 
tion  of  the  difference  in  speech  between  the  people  along  the  coast  of  Dalmatia  and 
those  in  the  interior  is  another  instance  of  intimate  knowledge  which  Italians  might 
possess.  It  was  not  derived  from  Raymond’s  account. 


ARMIES  PROCEED  TO  CONSTANTINOPLE  141 

that  they  were  almost  palpable.  The  people  behind  could  scarcely 
distinguish  those  ahead  of  them,  while  the  advance  guard  could  see 
the  road  only  a  stone^s  throw  ahead.  The  country,  as  we  have  said, 
abounded  in  rivers  and  streams,  and  was  almost  wholly  marshland. 
Each  day  there  arose  from  this  source  so  much  dampness  and  thick 
mist  that  the  air  became  almost  stifling.  In  addition,  the  Slavic  Dal¬ 
matians,  who  as  natives  had  an  intimate  knowledge  of  the  country, 
followed  along  beside  the  army  over  crags  and  dense  forests,  and  fre¬ 
quently  emerged  from  the  woods  to  attack  the  unarmed  pilgrims.  But 
the  count  and,  the  other  leaders,  in  their  turn,  very  often  made  similar 
attacks  on  their  foe,  many  of  whom  they  killed  with  lance  and  sword. 
They  would  have  slain  greater  numbers,  had  it  not  been  for  the  close 
proximity  of  the  woods  to  which  the  Dalmatians  fled  as  a  very  present 
refuge.  One  day  it  happened  that  some  of  these  malefactors  were 
caught.  The  count  ordered  that  their  hands  and  feet  be  cut  off,  in  the 
hope  that  this  punishment  would  so  terrify  the  rest  that  they  would 
fear  to  follow  the  army. 

For  three  successive  weeks,  the  pilgrims  painfully  traversed  this 
part  of  the  country.  At  last  they  came  to  a  place  called  Scutari,  and 
there  they  found  the  king  of  the  Slavs.  The  count,  a  kindly  man, 
affable  and  merciful,  presented  gifts  with  a  free  hand,  hoping  by  this 
means  to  form  ties  of  friendship  and  gain  the  good  will  of  the  natives 
for  his  people,  at  least  to  the  extent  of  obtaining  a  market  well  supplied 
with  goods.  Not  even  in  this  way,  however,  could  he  soften  the  ferocity 
of  that  people.  In  fact,  he  found  them  thereafter  even  more  savage. 
After  plodding  for  forty  days  through  the  entire  land  of  Dalmatia, 
undergoing  great  hardships,  they  finally  reached  Durazzo. 

18.  At  Durazzo y  an  imferial  defutation  meets  the  count.  The 
bishof  of  Puy  is  cafinred  by  the  Bulgarians,  By  the  mercy  of 
Gody  however y  he  is  soon  released.  At  RodostOy  envoys  from 
the  emferor  and  also  from  our  leaders  again  come  to  Ray¬ 
mond, 

The  emperor  felt  many  misgivings  in  regard  to  the  count’s  coming, 
because  the  prince  was  a  wise  and  magnificent  man  and  was  leading 
with  him  a  very  large  force.  Long  before  the  Christians  reached  this 
place,  therefore,  he  had  sent  an  embassy  of  honorable  men  to  meet  the 
count  at  Durazzo.  They  were  to  extend  kind  and  courteous  greetings 


142  ARMIES  PROCEED  TO  CONSTANTINOPLE 

on  behalf  of  the  emperor.  In  obedience  to  their  lord’s  command,  these 
men  presented  themselves  before  the  count,  addressed  him  with  flat¬ 
tering  words,  and  presented  the  emperor’s  letter,  the  substance  of 
which  was  as  follows:  ‘Tor  a  long  time,  beloved  count,  numerous  re¬ 
ports  of  your  wisdom  and  the  fragrance  of  your  good  renown  have 
been  spread  far  and  wide  and  have  come  to  the  notice  of  our  court. 
This  has  led  us  to  love  you.  For  love  of  you,  therefore,  and  because  we 
are  minded  to  show  our  affection,  we  have  summoned  you,  that,  as 
your  merits  deserve,  we  may  manifest  affection  for  you  in  person  and 
honor  you  still  more.  Hence,  we  have  awaited  your  coming  with  great 
longing,  for  we  desire  to  discuss  many  matters  concerning  public  affairs 
with  your  highness,  a  man  so  dear  to  our  empire.  We  earnestly  pray 
you  to  pass  through  our  lands  without  commotion  and  strife,  and  make 
haste  to  come  to  us,  relying  on  our  favor  and  confident  of  the  many 
honors  which  we  have  in  mind  to  bestow  upon  you.  We  have  com¬ 
manded  the  bearers  of  these  presents  to  arrange  that  a  supply  of  com¬ 
modities  for  sale  and  a  constant  interchange  of  trade  be  afforded  your 
people  under  favorable  conditions.” 

The  spirits  of  the  count  and  his  army  were  greatly  cheered  by  this 
letter.  Again  they  resumed  the  march  and  for  many  days  laboriously 
traversed  woods  and  mountains.  After  crossing  the  entire  land  of 
Epirus,  they  finally  descended  into  the  district  called  Pelagonia,  which 
abounded  in  all  good  things.  There  they  made  camp. 

The  bishop  of  Puy,  that  man  of  revered  life,  for  convenience’s  sake 
had  placed  his  tent  somewhat  apart  from  the  rest  at  a  little  distance 
from  the  camp.  The  Bulgars  attacked  him  and  took  him  prisoner.  But 
because  so  great  a  priest  was  still  necessary  to  the  people  of  God, 
through  the  mercy  of  the  Lord  his  life  was  saved  by  a  mere  chance. 
For  one  of  the  robbers  demanded  his  gold  and  thus  protected  him 
from  the  others.  A  quarrel  thereupon  arose  among  the  thieves,  the 
noise  of  which  roused  the  whole  army.  Seizing  arms,  they  rushed  upon 
the  evildoers  and  rescued  the  lord  bishop  and  his  people. 

Again  they  resumed  their  journey.  They  crossed  Thessalonica  and 
the  entire  land  of  Macedonia  and  for  many  days  continued  on  their 
toilsome  march  until  they  came  to  Rodosto.  This  is  a  maritime  city  on 
the  Hellespont,  distant  a  journey  of  four  days  from  Constantinople. 
Here  another  deputation  from  the  emperor  met  the  count  and  also 
messengers  from  the  leaders  who  had  preceded  him.  They  all  urgently 


ARMIES  PROCEED  TO  CONSTANTINOPLE  143 

advised  and  admonished  him  to  allow  his  army  to  proceed  more  slowly 
while  he  himself  hastened  with  a  small  escort  to  the  emperor.  By  the 
time  his  business  with  the  emperor  was  finished,  his  army  would  have 
arrived  and  he  would  be  able  to  follow  the  others  more  quickly  with¬ 
out  detaining  the  host,  who  were  eager  to  hasten  on.  The  count  had 
already  dispatched  messengers  on  his  own  initiative,  and  they,  on  their 
return,  encouraged  him  to  take  the  same  step, 

19.  The  count  leaves  his  army  and  waits  on  the  emferor.  He  does 
not  jail  in  with  the  latter^ s  views.  The  emferor  treacher¬ 
ously  gives  orders  to  attack  the  counts  army. 

The  count^s  hesitation  was  finally  overcome  by  the  urgent  plea  of  the 
imperial  legates  and  the  persuasion  of  the  leaders  who  also  begged 
him  to  hasten  to  the  court.  Leaving  his  army  under  the  watchful  pro¬ 
tection  of  the  bishops  and  other  nobles  who  were  in  the  camp,  he  him¬ 
self,  in  response  to  the  repeated  summons,  entered  Constantinople 
with  a  small  retinue  under  the  escort  of  the  imperial  deputies  and 
presented  himself  before  the  emperor.  He  was  received  with  a  great 
show  of  honor,  not  only  by  the  monarch,  but  by  the  illustrious  men 
who  surrounded  him,  and  was  treated  with  the  utmost  consideration. 
But  when  soon  after  he  was  assailed  with  flattering  words  of  persua¬ 
sion  and  strongly  urged  to  take  an  oath  of  fealty  to  the  emperor,  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  form  used  by  the  other  leaders  who  had  preceded  him, 
he  steadfastly  refused.^'^ 

While  these  events  were  happening  in  Constantinople,  the  emperor, 
Indignant  that  the  count  should  decline  to  do  him  homage  as  had  the 
others,  surreptitiously  ordered  the  chiefs  of  his  legions  who  were  sta¬ 
tioned  in  those  parts  to  make  a  sudden  attack  on  the  count’s  forces. 
They  were  directed  to  make  every  effort  to  harass  them,  even  to  the 
extent  of  massacre.  The  emperor  dared  to  make  this  attempt  because 
all  the  other  leaders  had  bound  themselves  to  him  by  the  oath  of 
fealty.  Moreover,  all  their  armies  had  now  crossed  the  sea  and  could 

not  easily  be  brought  back.  For  all  the  boats  which  had  been  assembled 

\ 

It  seems  strange  that  William  offers  no  explanation  for  the  refusal.  According 
to  Raymond  d’Aguilers,  whose  account  he  used.  Count  Raymond  refused  to  take  the 
oath  for  the  pious  reason  that  on  this  expedition  he  was  vassal  to  God  alone,  but  that 
he  would  agree  to  be  subject  to  Alexius  if  the  latter  would  accompany  the  expedition 
as  commander.  Raymond’s  arrival  at  Constantinople  is  dated  April  21  {H.  Ckron.^ 
no.  139). 


144  armies  proceed  TO  CONSTANTINOPLE 

either  for  the  purpose  of  trade  or  to  ferry  the  people  across,  had  been 
at  once  prevented  from  leaving  the  farther  shore,  in  order  that  all 
thought  of  return  might  be  vain,  since  means  of  transportation  were 
lacking.  It  was  with  this  intent  that  the  emperor  by  flattery  and  shrewd 
persuasion,  as  we  have  said,  had  induced  the  armies  to  cross  over  sep¬ 
arately,  that  the  united  forces  might  not  congregate  in  the  city  at  the 
same  time.  For,  as  has  also  been  explained,  he  viewed  the  coming  of 
our  armies  with  misgiving  and  regarded  their  concentration  as  still 
more  dangerous.  His  lavish  liberality  toward  the  leaders  did  not  pro¬ 
ceed  from  generosity  or  good  will,  but  was  a  shrewd  policy  of  decep¬ 
tion,  the  result  of  desperate  fear.  Our  chiefs,  however,  advanced  with 
single-hearted  confidence  and  trust.  It  was  very  difficult  to  convince 
them  of  malice  of  the  Greeks  and  the  wicked  deception  and  persistent 
circumventions  of  the  emperor,  especially  since  he  had  displayed  mu¬ 
nificence  and  pretended  good  will  toward  them  so  bountifully. 

20.  In  the  count^s  absence  hts  army  Is  secretly  attacked  by  the 
Greeks.  The  count  is  wroth  with  the  emferor.  Alexius  re- 
fents  of  his  action  andy  fearing  for  himself y  demands  the  in-- 
tervention  of  the  leaders.  He  alleges  his  innocence. 

The  officers  who  had  received  the  emperor’s  commands,  his  centurions, 
quinquagenariiy  and  those  in  charge  of  the  military  forces,  carried  out 
his  directions.  Their  men  received  instructions  beforehand  and,  while 
it  was  still  night,  stealthily  attacked  the  count’s  army.  Since  these 
had  feared  nothing  of  the  kind,  they  were  taken  off  guard  and  many 
were  killed.  For  before  they  could  be  roused  sufficiently  to  seize  their 
weapons,  a  disgraceful  flight  and  lamentable  slaughter  took  place.  Fi¬ 
nally  they  recovered  their  presence  of  mind,  regained  their  courage 
and  strength,  and,  urged  on  by  the  more  valiant,  inflicted  many  losses 
on  the  military  brigands,  the  emissaries  of  the  emperor.  The  Christians 
had  shown  a  manly  resistance,  considering  the  time  and  place.  Yet,  in 
view  of  the  difficulty  of  the  way  and  the  frequent  unexpected  perils 
which  they  encountered  nearly  every  day,  they  were  beginning  to 
give  way  and  almost  regretted  that  they  had  undertaken  the  pilgrim¬ 
age.  They  became  less  and  less  enthusiastic  as  they  were  more  ex¬ 
hausted  by  the  tedious  hardships.  Not  only  many  of  the  people  but 
even  some  of  the  more  important  men  now  began  to  regret  their  enter¬ 
prise.  They  doubted,  indeed,  whether  it  could  be  accomplished  and. 


ARMIES  PROCEED  TO  CONSTANTINOPLE  145 

forgetting  their  vows,  were  disposed  to  return.  Had  they  not  been  re¬ 
strained  by  the  warnings  and  exhortations  of  bishops  and  clergy  and 
inspired  anew  to  accomplish  their  vows,  they  would  have  deserted  the 
host  and  tried  to  return,  no  matter  at  what  peril,  to  their  own  lands. 

When  the  count  heard  this  news,  he  was  stricken  to  the  heart  with 
sorrow  and  cried  out  that  he  had  been  betrayed.  He  sent  some  of  his 
loyal  nobles  to  the  emperor  and  charged  him  with  being  a  traitor. 
While  he,  Raymond,  In  obedience  to  many  messages  and  summons 
had  been  in  attendance  on  his  majesty,  the  latter  had,  against  all  de¬ 
cency,  ordered  his  men  to  take  arms  against  the  count’s  army.  To  the 
leaders  also,  in  compliance  with  whose  urgent  entreaties  he  had  left  his 
army  and  hastened  to  Constantinople,  the  count  made  known  the  lam¬ 
entable  disaster  which  had  befallen  his  legions  and  the  manifest 
treachery  of  the  emperor.  From  them,  as  from  brothers,  he  demanded 
revenge  for  these  wrongs. 

If  the  count’s  power  for  avenging  his  people  had  been  equal  to  his 
earnest  desire,  it  Is  beyond  all  question  that  neither  threats,  fear,  nor 
the  Intervention  of  the  other  leaders  would  have  moved  him  from  his 
determination,  for  he  had  the  reputation  of  being  a  man  of  great  spirit, 
who  never  forgot  an  injury  and  was  strongly  set  in  his  own  opinion. 
But  the  emperor  now  realized  that  he  had  gone  too  far  and  repented 
of  his  conduct.  Accordingly,  he  caused  the  leaders  who  still  remained 
with  their  armies  on  the  farther  shores  of  the  sea  to  be  summoned  to 
his  presence.  Through  the  intervention  of  these  lords,  namely  the 
lord  duke,  Bohemond,  and  the  count  of  Flanders,  he  hoped  to  propiti¬ 
ate  th.e  count.  They  responded  to  his  call,  and  although  greatly  angered 
at  what  had  happened,  they  felt  that  it  was  not  a  fitting  time  or  place 
to  demand  revenge.  They  therefore  counselled  the  count  privately 
and  succeeded  in  persuading  him  by  convincing  arguments  to  hide  the 
wrongs  which  they  felt  concerned  them  all,  lest,  in  pursuit  of  revenge, 
he  should  undo  the  work  of  many  days  and  prove  a  hindrance  to  those 
who  wished  to  proceed  on  the  way  of  the  Lord.  Finally,  at  their  pious 
intercession,  the  count,  who  was  at  heart  a  discreet  man,  laid  aside  his 
bitter  feelings,  yielded  to  the  advice  of  the  leaders,  and  agreed  to  their 
arrangement.  They  then  went  to  the  emperor  in  a  friendly  way  and 
unanimously  expressed  the  indignation  which  they  felt  over  what  had 
occurred.  On  perceiving  their  displeasure  and  the  steadfast  unanimity 
of  feeling  which  united  them,  the  emperor  condescended  to  excuse 


146  ARMIES  PROCEED  TO  CONSTANTINOPLE 

himself  in  the  presence  of  the  count  and  of  all  the  court,  both  members 
of  his  own  household  and  foreigners.  He  protested  under  oath  that  the 
reported  outrage  had  taken  place  without  his  knowledge  or  command. 
Yet  he  said  that  for  fhe  sake  of  his  own  innocence  he  was  willing  to 
give  satisfaction  to  the  count. 

Thus,  more  and  more,  day  by  day,  the  trickery  of  the  Greeks  and 
the  treachery  of  the  emperor  were  revealed.  There  was  now  no  one  of 
the  chiefs  to  whom  it  was  not  plain,  in  fact  clearer  than  the  sun  at  mid¬ 
day,  that  Alexius  was  pursuing  our  people  with  intense  hatred  and  that 
he  detested  the  whole  Latin  race.  However,  as  the  purpose  of  their 
pilgrimage  was  hurrying  them  on  to  other  ends  and  they  yearned  to 
accomplish  that  task  more  pleasing  to  God,  they  judged  it  safer  to 
hide  the  wrongs  they  had  suffered  rather  than  to  turn  aside  from 
so  pious  an  undertaking  or  to  impede  the  task  they  had  undertaken. 

21.  Through  the  mediation  of  the  leaders y  the  count  is  recon¬ 
ciled  to  the  emferor  and  invites  him  to  accomfany  the  Chris¬ 
tian  leaders  on  the  way.  The  armies  that  had  already  crossed 
the  sea  hasten  on  to  Nicaea,  The  count  follows  them  immedi¬ 
ately. 

In  compliance  with  the  advice  of  the  leaders,  the  count  became  recon¬ 
ciled  to  the  emperor  and  swore  fealty  in  accordance  with  the  tenor  of 
the  oath  taken  by  the  others.  Thereupon  he  was  restored  to  full  favor 
and,  in  token  of  the  emperor^s  lavish  generosity,  was  honored  with 
wonderful  gifts,  which  in  number  and  value  were  beyond  measure. 
The  other  leaders  also  received  additional  gifts.  They  then  took  leave, 
and,  requesting  the  count  above  all  not  to  delay  following  them,  they 
crossed  the  Hellespont  and  joined  their  legions  in  Bithynia. 

In  the  meantime,  the  count’s  army  likewise  reached  Constantinople 
and  by  his  orders  at  once  crossed  the  sea  and  joined  the  other  hosts 
which  had  preceded  them.  The  count  himself  remained  in  the  city 
several  days  longer  to  attend  to  matters  of  his  own.  While  he  was  look¬ 
ing  after  his  private  affairs,  however,  like  a  wise  man  he  did  not  cease 
to  be  concerned  about  the  public  welfare.  For  as  he  had  been  requested 
by  the  other  chiefs,  he  often  earnestly  endeavored,  as  each  of  the  other 
leaders  had  done  before  him,  to  persuade  the  emperor  to  accompany 
them  on  the  way  and  be  the  leader  and  ruler  of  the  army  of  the  Lord. 
But  although  all  our  leaders,  and  the  count  of  Toulouse  in  particular. 


ARMIES  PROCEED  TO  CONSTANTINOPLE  147 

had  prayed  him  again  and  again  that  he  would  deign  to  be  their  com¬ 
rade  and,  as  the  leader  of  the  Lord’s  army,  take  supreme  command  of 
the  people  who  had  surrendered  themselves  to  divine  obedience,  he 
kept  making  excuses.  He  affirmed  that  he  was  surrounded  by  cruel  ene¬ 
mies.  Bulgars,  Cumans,  and  Patzinaks  were  constantly  hovering 
about  the  frontiers  of  his  empire,  seeking  opportunity  to  make  sudden 
incursions  and  disturb  his  peace.  Therefore,  although  he  eagerly  de¬ 
sired  to  participate  in  the  great  pilgrimage  and  to  share  in  the  future 
reward,  he  could  not  abandon  the  responsibility  of  his  realm  and 
thereby  afford  an  opportunity  to  the  enemy  who  surrounded  it.  But  all 
that  he  said  was  false  and  full  of  deceit.  He  alleged  this  on  his  own 
behalf  simply  because,  jealous  of  our  departure,  he  sought  any  pretext 
whereby  he  might  withdraw  his  assistance  from  our  people  and,  in 
every  possible  way,  hinder  their  progress. 

The  leaders  who  had  already  crossed  the  sea — namely,  Godfrey, 
Bohemond,  Robert,  count  of  Flanders,  and  the  bishop  of  Puy — had  ar¬ 
ranged  their  baggage  and  were  ready  to  resume  the  pilgrimage  once 
more.  They  intended  to  proceed  slowly  to  Nicaea  and  there  await  their 
companions  who  were  following.  They  marched  the  entire  day  toward 
Nicomedia,  which  is  the  largest  metropolis  of  the  province  of  Bithynia, 
when  the  venerable  priest,  Peter  the  Hermit,  came  out  to  meet  the 
advancing  legions  and  greet  the  leaders.  With  the  few  people  who 
were  the  sole  survivors  of  his  army  he  had  passed  the  winter  in  that 
vicinity  to  avoid  the  severe  weather.  He  now  joined  the  pilgrim  forces 
and  was  kindly  welcomed  by  all.  On  being  questioned  about  the  mis¬ 
fortunes  of  his  army,  he  gave  a  detailed  account  of  all  that  had  hap¬ 
pened.  He  described  the  unruly  and  insubordinate  spirit  which  charac¬ 
terized  the  obstinate  people  who  had  gone  on  ahead  with  him  and  said 
that  the  disaster  which  had  overtaken  them  had  resulted  more  from 
their  own  conduct  than  from  the  acts  of  others. 

The  leaders  sympathized  deeply  with  him  because  of  the  catastrophe 
which  had  befallen  him  and  his  army.  They  bestowed  generous  gifts 
upon  him  and  his  followers.  Then,  the  army,  greatly  increased  in  num¬ 
bers  by  the  grace  of  God — for  the  various  bands  had  been  combined 
into  one  body — resumed  the  march  under  capable  leadership  and  in 
due  time  arrived  at  Nicaea.  The  camp  was  placed  in  a  circle  around 

9 

According  to  Kadlec,  the  Cumans  and  Patzinaks  were  very  closely  related  tribes 
of  Turkish  origin.  They  figure  in  Balkan  history  for  several  centuries  (C.  Kadlec, 
“The  Empire  and  Its  Northern  Neighbors, Cambridge  Medieval  History y  IV,  197  fi.). 


148  ARMIES  PROCEED  TO  CONSTANTINOPLE 

the  city,  stations  were  designated  for  the  chiefs  who  were  yet  to  comCj 
and  on  May  15,  they  laid  siege  to  the  city.^^ 

When  the  count  of  Toulouse  had  finished  his  affairs  in  Constanti¬ 
nople,  he  took  leave  of  the  emperor,  who  again  honored  him  with  gifts 
of  great  liberality.  Then  with  the  members  of  his  army  who  had  re¬ 
mained  with  him,  he  followed  the  camp  of  the  others  at  a  rapid  pace 
and  soon  arrived  at  the  above-named  city. 

22.  Robert y  count  of  Normandy y  and  Eustaccy  the  duke^s 
brother y  arrive  at  Constantinople  with  their  legions.  The 
emperor  receives  them  with  great  honor  and  many  gifts. 

They  cross  the  Hellespont  and  join  the  other  chiefs. 

Meanwhile,  Lord  Robert,^®  the  illustrious  count  of  Normandy,  and 
other  distinguished  nobles  who  were  in  the  same  company,  namely. 
Lord  Stephen,^ ^  count  of  Chartres  and  Blois,  and  Lord  Eustace,^^ 

A  day  earlier,  Ascension  Day,  May  14,  1097,  according  to  Hagenmeyer  (H. 
Chron.y  no.  150). 

Robert,  duke  of  Normandy,  was  the  oldest  son  of  William  the  Conqueror,  from 
whom  he  received  his  nickname  “Curthose”  or  “Short-Boots.’^  He  was  born  shortly 
before  1054.  He  grew  up  with  the  expectation  of  succeeding  his  father.  William, 
however,  was  not  disposed  to  yield  any  real  power  while  still  able  to  wield  it.  Robert 
became  impatient,  yielded  to  imprudent  advice,  and  demanded  the  rule  of  Normandy. 
A  family  quarrel  led  to  open  revolt  on  Robert’s  part,  1078—1080.  This  was  but  the 
first  in  a  series  of  quarrels  which  continued  until  the  Conqueror’s  death.  During  much 
of  this  time  Robert  was  a  wanderer  in  exile.  Friends  interceded  for  him  with  his  dying 
father,  who  was  disposed  to  disinherit  him  completely.  Due  to  their  efforts,  Robert 
was  granted  Normandy  and  Maine,  while  his  younger  brother,  William  Rufus,  be¬ 
came  king  of  England.  Family  quarrels  continued  with  fluctuating  fortune,  however, 
until  the  end  of  1095,  when  Urban’s  speech  at  Clermont  offered  Robert  a  way  out  of 
his  more  immediate  difficulties-  The  details  of  Robert’s  career  are  presented  in  the 
comprehensive  biography  of  C.  W.  David,  Robert  Curthosej  fassim. 

Stephen  was  the  oldest  son  of  Theobald  III,  count  of  Champagne,  Brie,  Blois, 
and  Chartres.  He  married  AdHe,  daughter  of  William  the  Conqueror,  in  1081.  He 
is  believed  to  have  been  well  educated  and  even  to  have  written  poetry.  The  letters 
which  he  wrote  to  his  wife  during  the  crusade,  two  of  which  have  been  preserved, 
are  among  the  most  charming  pieces  of  writing  of  the  period.  Perhaps  it  was  his 
charm  of  manner  which  made  him  a  favorite  of  Alexius  and  for  a  time  also  the 
chosen  leader  of  the  crusading  army.  Unfortunately,  as  William  will  relate,  he  lacked 
certain  other  essential  qualities.  His  letters  are  translated  in  A.  C.  Krey,  The  First 
Crusade^  fassim, 

Eustace  III,  count  of  Boulogne,  was  probably  the  oldest  and  least  famous  of  the 
three  brothers  who  took  such  prominent  parts  on  the  crusade  and  in  the  establishment 
of  the  Latin  states  in  the  East.  He  inherited  his  father’s  lands  and  title.  There  is  some 
doubt  whether  he  accompanied  his  brothers  on  the  journey  through  Hungary  or  Robert 
of  Normandy  through  Italy,  as  William  states.  William,  who  follows  Fulcher  for 
this  account  of  the  journey  of  Robert  of  Normandy  to  Constantinople,  draws  from 
Albert  the  statement  of  Eustace’s  presence,  which  Fulcher  does  not  mention. 


ARMIES  PROCEED  TO  CONSTANTINOPLE  149 

brother  of  Duke  Godfrey,  dispatched  messengers  to  the  emperor  and 
to  their  brethren  announcing  that  they  would  soon  arrive.  With  them 
also  were:  Stephen,  count  of  Aumale^  Alan  Fergant  and  Conon, 
both  great  men  of  Brittany  j  Rotrou,  count  of  Perchej  and  Roger  de 
Barneville.  All  these  nobles  with  many  other  valiant  and  notable  men, 
including  the  count  of  Flanders  and  Hugh  the  Great,  had  reached 
Apulia  the  preceding  year,  just  as  winter  was  beginning.  The  two  lat¬ 
ter  crossed  to  Durazzo,  but  the  others,  dreading  the  severity  of  the 
weather,  had  passed  the  winter  in  comfortable  quarters  in  Apulia  and 
on  the  frontier  of  Calabria. 

As  soon  as  spring  returned,  they  summoned  their  fellow  pilgrims, 
arranged  their  baggage  for  the  march,  and  went  down  to  the  coast. 
Following  the  route  of  the  others,  they  set  sail  for  Durazzo  where 
they  disembarked.  From  there  they  resumed  the  march  and  proceeded 
on  the  way  with  all  diligence  in  order  to  make  up  for  the  time  spent 
in  Apulia.  With  the  aid  of  God,  they  passed  through  the  middle  prov¬ 
inces,  namely,  Illyricum,  Macedonia,  and  the  two  Thraces,  and  at  last, 
after  a  peaceful  journey,  reached  Constantinople.^^  They  were  sum¬ 
moned  by  the  emperor  as  the  other  leaders  had  been  and,  on  entering 
the  palace,  were  received  with  great  honor  by  his  majesty  and  the  il¬ 
lustrious  men  who  surrounded  him. 

After  much  conference  held  with  the  three  chiefs  together  and  with 
each  one  individually,  the  emperor,  with  bland  and  persuasive  words 
and  many  promises,  pressingly  demanded  that  they  also  render  the 
fealty  which  he  had  obtained  from  the  others. 

Before  they  went  to  the  emperor,  they  had  been  well  instructed 
by  the  other  leaders  and  said  to  themselves,  “We  are  not  greater  than 

our  fathers.”  Accordingly,  with  the  example  of  these  in  mind,  they 

« 

bound  themselves  to  the  emperor,  rendered  the  fealty  demanded,  and 
took  the  oath  in  the  terms  used  by  those  who  had  preceded  them.  In 
return,  they  were  received  into  still  greater  favor  and  were  held  worthy 
of  more  lavish  gifts.  The  treasury  was  opened,  and  they  were  given 
presents  of  marvellous  value  such  as  they  had  never  before  seen — gifts 
of  gold,  precious  vestments,  vases  worthy  of  admiration  for  both  ma¬ 
terial  and  workmanship,  and  silken  fabrics.  The  generosity  of  the 
emperor  dazzled  the  minds  even  of  the  recipients,  so  far  did  the.  gifts 

Their  arrival  is  dated  May  14.  Two  weeks  were  spent  in  the  neig-hborhood  be¬ 
fore  they  started  for  Nicaea,  which  they  reached  on  June  3  (//.  Chron.y  nos.  149,  155). 


150  ARMIES  PROCEED  TO  CONSTANTINOPLE 

surpass  anything  of  ours,  both  in  character  and  value.  Then,  laden 
with  these  wonderful  presents,  they  took  leave  of  the  emperor  and, 
not  to  delay  their  fellow  pilgrims,  crossed  the  Hellespont  and  has¬ 
tened  with  their  legions  to  Nicaea,  where  the  entire  Christian  army  still 
remained.  The  princes  who  had  gone  on  ahead  of  them  welcomed 
them  with  affectionate  embraces,  and  by  uanimous  consent  they  en¬ 
camped  in  the  place  that  had  been  reserved  for  them.^^ 

23.  One  Taticiusy  a  servant  of  the  emferoVy  a  very  crafty  man  of 
notorious  wicked?zesSy  becomes  associated  with  our  leaders. 

A  CERTAIN  Greek,  Taticius  by  name,  a  close  confidant  of  the  em¬ 
peror,  had  joined  our  camp.  He  was  a  wicked  and  treacherous  man, 
whose  slit  nostrils  were  a  sign  of  his  evil  mind.  Our  leaders  had  asked 
for  a  guide  to  render  their  journey  safer,  and  by  imperial  command 
he  had  been  assigned  as  our  future  comrade  and  guide.  He  was  chosen 
not  only  because  he  was  said  to  have  a  thorough  knowledge  of  the 
localities,  but  also  because  the  emperor  relied  greatly  upon  his  malice 
and  unscrupulous  duplicity.  With  some  of  his  own  forces  he  had  joined 
our  leaders,  that  there  might  be  a  goose  to  cackle  loudly  among  the 
swans  and  an  evil  snake  among  the  eels.  He  reported  to  the  emperor 
everything  that  took  place  on  the  expedition,  and  to  every  remark 
made  by  anyone  he  gave  a  sinister  meaning.  In  return,  he  received 
from  his  master,  through  frequent  messengers  who  went  back  and 
forth  between  them,  outlines  of  plans  directing  his  nefarious  schemes. 

Here  for  the  first  time  there  was  formed  one  united  army  of  the 
Living  Lord  from  the  various  bands  which  had  followed  the  individ¬ 
ual  leaders  through  divers  places  at  different  times.  It  now  took  on  in¬ 
dividual  unity  from  the  combination  of  the  many  companies  which  had 
arrived.  For  from  the  time  that  the  leaders  and  heads  of  the  armies 
beloved  of  God  had  left  their  homes  and  set  out  upon  the  pilgrimage 
until  they  reached  this  city  and  encamped  there,  they  never  had  had 

They  were  the  last  important  contingent  to  reach  Nicaea,  and  with  their  arrival 
the  city  was  completely  encircled  on  the  land  side,  on  June  3  {H.  Chron,^  no.  155). 

Taticius  w^as  of  Saracen,  perhaps  Turkish,  origin,  according  to  Anna,  who  says 
that  his  father  had  been  captured  in  battle.  Though  a  member  of  the  imperial  house¬ 
hold,  he  had  established  a  reputation  for  bravery  in  battle  and  was  frequently  en¬ 
trusted  with  a  command  of  troops.  He  was  thoroughly  familiar  with  the  region  into 
which  the  crusaders  were  going  (Elizabeth  A.  S.  Dawes,  trans.,  THe  Alexiad  of  the 
Princess  Anna  Comnena^  p.  103  et  fasstm). 


ARMIES  PROCEED  TO  CONSTANTINOPLE  151 

the  privilege  of  seeing  one  another  or  of  discussing  together  matters 
concerning  the  general  interest. 

When  a  census  of  the  legions  was  taken,  it  was  found  that  there  were 
six  hundred  thousand  people  of  both  sexes  on  foot  and  one  hundred 
thousand  cuirassed  knights.^®  This  entire  host,  stationed  before  the 
city  [of  Nicaea]  devoted  its  energy  in  every  possible  way  to  the  prob¬ 
lem  of  taking  it  by  storm,  thus  consecrating  the  first  fruits  of  its  labor 
with  all  devotion  to  the  Lord. 

These  figures  are  taken  from  the  account  of  Fulcher.  William  himself  later  ex¬ 
pressed  doubt  as  to  the  accuracy  of  earlier  estimates  of  the  size  of  armies,  Christian  as 
well  as  infidel.  These  figures  cannot  be  accepted  literally,  but  no  satisfactory  formula 
for  their  correction  has  yet  been  devised.  Hagenmeyer  after  a  review  of  the  con¬ 
temporary  estimates,  is  inclined  to  accept  Caffaro’s  statement  of  *‘6o,ooo”  fighting 
men  as  most  nearly  accurate  (see  H.  Hagenmeyer,  ed.,  Fulcheri  Carnotensis  historia 
merosolymitanoy  pp,  183-84,  notes  ii,  12). 


HERE  ENDS  THE  SECOND  BOOK 


THE  THIRD  BOOK  BEGINS 


CAPTURE  OF  NICAEA  AND  THE  MARCH 

THROUGH  ASIA  MINOR 

I.  A  descriftion  of  the  city  of  Nicaea  and  its  claims  to  fame. 

Mow  Qilij  ArslaUy  who  was  ruling  there y  had  gathered  a 
great  force  of  Turks  from  the  entire  East  to  fight  against 
us y  and  how  they  lurked  in  ambush  to  attack  us. 

Nicaea  is  a  city  of  Bithynia  which  was  formerly  subject  to  Nicomedia, 
the  metropolis  of  that  region.  Later,  however,  it  was  freed  from  this 
jurisdiction  by  the  Emperor  Constantine,  out  of  respect  for  the  first 
holy  synod  which  met  in  that  city.  For  in  the  time  of  Pope  Sylvester 
and  of  the  venerable  Alexander,  patriarch  of  Constantinople,  and  of 
the  Emperor  Constantine  to  whom  we  have  just  alluded,  a  holy  synod 
of.  three  hundred  and  eighteen  fathers  met  at  Nicaea  to  take  action 
against  the  heresy  of  Arius  and  his  followers.  This  synod  denounced 
the  corrupt  and  pernicious  doctrine  of  these  men  and  established  the 
truth  by  the  testimony  of  the  scriptures.  Thus  a  pure  form  of  faith  was 
afforded  for  the  entire  church  of  God.^  Still  later,  in  the  time  of  the  de¬ 
vout  Emperor  Constantine,  son  of  Irene,  another  general  synod — the 
seventh — convened  in  the  same  city  to  protest  against  the  Iconoclasts, 
that  is,  the  assailants  of  the  holy  images.  The  Roman  pope  at  that  time 
was  Adrian,  and  the  patriarch  of  Constantinople  was  the  venerable 
Tharatius.  In  this  synod  these  heretics  just  mentioned  received  from 
the  orthodox  church  the  well-deserved  sentence  of  condemnation  for 
their  perfidy.^ 

Nicaea  has  a  very  favorable  site.  It  lies  in  the  plain,  yet  it  is  not  far 
from  the  mountains  by  which  it  is  surrounded  on  every  side.  It  has  the 
best  of  fields,  fertile  soil,  and,  in  addition,  the  many  advantages  af¬ 
forded  by  woods  and  forests.  Near  the  city,  extending  to  the  west,  is  a 

iThis  was  the  famous  council  of  Nicaea,  which  was  held  under  the  auspices  of 
Constantine  I  in  a.d.  325,  Here  as  elsewhere  William  is  supplementing  the  accounts  of 
the  chroniclers  from  his  own  extensive  studies  of  church  history. 

“  The  seventh  oecumenical  council  was  also  held  at  Nicaea,  a.d.  787.  Constantine  VI 
was  emperor  at  the  time  though  his  mother,  Irene,  was  probably  the  real  ruler.  Adrian 
I  was  pope  at  Rome. 


CAPTURE  OF  NICAEA 


153 

rather  wide  lake  of  great  length,  which,  when  swelled  by  the  waves, 
washes  the  very  walls.  Across  this  lake  ships  from  various  parts  bring 
provisions,  and  this  is  the  best  defense  the  city  could  have.  A  moat 
surrounds  the  walls  on  the  other  sides,  and  this  is  always  filled  to  over¬ 
flowing  by  the  influx  of  springs  and  rivulets.  This  of  itself  would 
prove  a  serious  obstacle  to  anyone  approaching  the  city  with  hostile  in¬ 
tent.  In  addition,  Nicaea  had  a  very  large  and  warlike  population  and 
was  so  remarkably  defended  by  thick  walls  and  lofty  towers  of  solid 
masonry  that  our  men  as  they  drew  near  marvelled  at  the  massive 
construction  of  the  fortifications.^ 

The  lord  of  this  city  as  well  as  of  the  whole  region  and  the  adjacent 
provinces  was  a  very  powerful  Turkish  satrap,  Qilij  Arslan,  sur named 
Sa,^  which  in  the  Persian  tongue  is  interpreted  “king.”  He  was  a  valiant 
man  of  much  subtlety.  When  he  heard  that  our  troops  were  coming, 
he  was  greatly  concerned,  and  long  before  their  arrival  had  gone 
down  to  the  Orient  to  implore  aid  from  the  rulers  of  those  lands  against 
the  approaching  hosts  of  Christians.  By  dint  of  persuasive  words  and 
many  urgent  entreaties,  not  without  the  use  of  money  also,  he  had 
drawn  to  himself  from  Persia  and  the  adjacent  lands  a  vast  number 
of  Turks.  By  aid  of  these  people  he  hoped  to  be  able  to  save  [Nicaea] 
and  the  entire  district  from  the  danger  which  threatened  it. 

Some  time  before  this,  while  Romanus  Diogenes  was  emperor  of 
Constantinople,  the  third  before  the  present  Emperor  Alexius,  Malik 
Shah,  the  most  powerful  sultan  of  Persia,  uncle  of  Qilij  Arslan,®  had 

^  William  here  reflects  the  almost  universal  awe  with  which  the  early  chroniclers 
gazed  at  the  massive  fortifications  in  the  East.  It  has  therefore  been  assumed  that  the 
West  did  not  as  yet  possess  such  fortifications  and  that  those  which  were  erected  there 
during  the  twelfth  and  thirteenth  centuries  owed  much  to  the  experience  of  the  crusaders. 
T.  E.  Lawrence,  however,  has  challenged  this  view,  asserting  that  the  fortresses  erected 
by  the  crusaders  were  on  Western  models,  especially  some  in  Normandy  which  had 
been  built  before  the  crusade.  These  views  are  not  necessarily  contradictory,  for  the 
Normans  had  encountered  similar  Greek  fortresses  in  southern  Italy  and  Sicily  during 
the  eleventh  century  and  may  well  have  begun  to  build  similarly  in  Normandy.  The 
effect  of  the  crusading  experience,  therefore,  may  have  been  primarily  that  of  acquaint¬ 
ing  all  Western  Europe  with  this  type  of  building  (see  T.  E.  Lawrence,  Crusader 
Castles^  passim) . 

^  Our  author  is  still  confused  about  the  early  Salj  uqs.  Sa,  or  Shah,  is  still  the  title 
of  the  ruler  of  Persia,  but  it  was  also  part  of  the  name  of  the  Saljuq  sultan,  Malik 
Shah,  who  accomplished  the  capture  of  Asia  Minor.  The  name  or  title  was  not  ap¬ 
plied  to  Qilij  Arslan  (Soliman),  whom  he  here  discusses. 

®  See  Book  IV,  chaps.  9  and  24,  notes  44,  48,  iii.  The  relationship  is  somewhat 
more  distant.  The  fathers  of  Malik  Shah  and  of  Qilij  Arslan  were  cousins  (see  P,  K, 
Hitti,  History  of  the  ArabSj  pp.  475—76). 


CAPTURE  OF  NICAEA 


154 

seized  by  force  of  arms  all  the  provinces  from  the  Hellespont  as  far  as 
Syria,  a  journey  of  thirty  days,  and  from  our  Mediterranean  sea  to  the 
north,  a  journey  of  the  same  extent.  Most  of  these  lands  he  had  given 
to  Qilij  Arslan,  who  held  them  at  this  time.  By  right  of  proprietorship 
he  claimed  all  the  country  from  Tarsus  of  Cilicia  to  the  Hellespont. 
Accordingly,  in  sight  of  Constantinople  itself  he  had  his  own  pro¬ 
curators  who  exacted  duties  from  those  passing  by  and  collected  for 
the  use  of  their  master  tributes  and  taxes  from  all  the  surrounding 
country. 

This  potentate,  with  the  host  which  he  had  gathered  with  so  much 
effort,  was  lingering  in  the  mountains  near  by,  scarcely  ten  miles  from 
our  army.  He  was  watching  for  a  favorable  opportunity  to  attack  our 
forces  without  danger  to  himself.  In  this  way  he  hoped  to  free  the  city 
from  anxiety  arising  from  this  source. 

2.  Our  forces  attack  the  city  furiously y  but  the  citizens  have  a 
free  outlet  across  the  lake*  Qilij  A rslan  sends  them  a  letter  of 
encouragement. 

As  soon  as  our  forces  arrived  before  the  city,  they  began  a  furious 
attack  upon  it,  although  their  ranks  were  not  in  good  array,  for  the 
camp  had  not  yet  been  laid  out  in  proper  order.  Nevertheless  those 
who  had  already  arrived  selected  definite  positions  for  themselves  and 
assigned  suitable  places  for  those  who  were  to  follow  them.  Especial 
attention  was  given  to  preventing  the  citizens  from  entering  or  leaving 
the  city.  But  the  lake  which  laved  the  city  walls,  as  has  been  said,  was 
a  great  hindrance  to  these  plans,  for  by  ships  ready  at  hand,  those  who 
wished  to  go  or  come  were  carried  safely  across  to  various  parts,  accord¬ 
ing  to  their  pleasure.  Since  our  army  had  no  naval  force,  it  could  not 
in  the  least  restrain  this  freedom  of  movement.  By  numerous  varied 
devices,  however,  it  did  succeed  in  cutting  off  access  by  land,  for  it 
guarded  with  most  vigilant  care  all  the  roads  and  approaches. 

Then  Qilij  Arslan,  who  knew  that  his  city  was  undergoing  the  woes 
of  a  siege,  sent  two  of  his  own  retainers  to  comfort  the  citizens  and  en¬ 
courage  them  to  further  resistance.  These  men  were  to  reach  the  city 
by  boat  over  the  lake,  and  by  them  he  sent  words  of  cheer  which  read 
after  this  fashion :  ® 

®  It  is  interesting  to  note  that  William  does  not  profess  to  repeat  the  exact  words  of 
Qilij  Arslan.  The  practice  of  supplying  speeches  and  letters  to  leading  characters  was 


CAPTURE  OF  NICAEA 


155 

“The  coming  of  this  wretched  and  barbarous  people  who  have  had 
the  presumption  to  place  our  city  under  siege  should  not  cause  you. 
great  fear,  for  I  have  taken  up  a  position  in  the  vicinity  with  a  great 
force  of  strong  and  noble  men  and  am  awaiting  still  larger  numbers 
which  are  to  follow.  Very  soon,  when  all  these  troops  have  been  united 
into  one  body,  we  shall  make  a  sudden  attack  upon  their  camp.  When 
we  attack  from  without,  therefore,  be  prepared  on  your  part  to  assist 
us.  Be  ready  to  unbar  the  gates  and  come  forth  as  with  one  mind  to 
attack  them.  But  you  must  not  fear  their  great  numbers.  Coming  as 
they  do  from  the  far-distant  lands  of  the  West,  because  of  the  long 
march  and  the  hardships  they  have  endured,  without  horses  to  bear 
the  weight  of  battle,  they  cannot  be  equal  in  strength  or  power  of  exer¬ 
tion  to  our  fresh  forces  who  have  just  come.  Bear  in  mind  also  how 
easily  we  triumphed  over  their  mighty  host,  and  in  one  day  consigned 
to  death  more  than  fifty  thousand  of  their  number.  Be  comforted, 
therefore,  and  have  no  fear,  for  tomorrow  before  the  seventh  hour  of 
the  day  you  shall  receive  abundant  aid  and  be  delivered  from  the 
enemy.” 

3.  The  bearer  of  the  letter  is  caftured.  He  discloses  all  the  se¬ 
crets  of  the  enemy  to  the  leaders.  The  count  of  Toulouse y 
who  alone  was  ahsenty  sfeedily  arrives  at  the  call  of  the  other 
chiefs. 

The  messengers  sailed  along  the  shore  seeking  the  best  place  to  land. 
As  they  were  looking  about  for  a  better  entrance,  however,  our  people 
suddenly  attacked  them  and  took  captive  one  of  the  two.  The  other 
perished  by  the  sword  during  the  disturbance.  The  prisoner  was  con¬ 
ducted  in  safety  to  the  leaders,  where  he  was  led  by  threats,  and  fear  to 
confess.  He  made  a  full  disclosure  of  everything,  telling  why  and  by 
whom  he  had  been  sent.  From  his  story  it  was  plain  that  Qilij  Arslan 
had  sent  the  two  men  to  tell  the  citizens  that  he  was  coming,  that  he 
was  close  by  with  the  mighty  forces  which  he  had  gathered,  and  that 
he  intended,  the  next  day,  to  make  a  surprise  attack  upon  our  camp. 

When  the  chiefs  of  our  legions  learned  that  Qilij  Arslan  was  about 
to  come,  they  ordered  the  prisoner  to  be  kept  under  guard  and  imme¬ 
diately  sent  out  couriers  to  beg  the  count  of  Toulouse  and  the  bishop  of 


common  among*  chroniclers  of  the  time.  Our  author  is  here  elaborating*  the  similar 
ejffort  of  Albert  of  Aix. 


CAPTURE  OF  NICAEA 


156 

Puy,  who  had  not  yet  joined  the  rest,  to  come  as  speedily  as  possible. 
On  receiving  this  message  from  their  brethren,  these  leaders  felt  no 
slight  anxiety.  Chafing  at  any  delay,  they  set  forth  and  marched 
throughout  the  entire  night.  Very  early  in  the  morning,  before  sunrise, 
they  arrived  at  the  camp  with  loud  shouts  and  cries,  banners  flying  and 
armor  gleaming.  Scarcely  had  they  laid  aside  their  packs  so  that  they 
might  take  their  places  with  the  rest  in  the  positions  assigned  to  them, 
when  about  the  third  hour,  just  as  their  prisoner  had  declared,  Qilij 
Arslan  came  down  from  the  mountains  and  entered  the  plain  on  his 
way  to  the  city.  He  had  with  him  a  great  company  of  cavalry  estimated 
at  about  fifty  thousand  men.  As  soon  as  they  saw  the  foe,  our  people 
flew  to  arms.  With  warning  trumpets  and  clanging  horns,  they  roused 
the  cohorts,  drew  up  their  lines,  and  formed  in  battle  array.  No  pos¬ 
sible  contingency  was  overlooked,  and  with  strict  attention  to  the  rules 
of  military  discipline,  in  which  they  had  had  much  training  and  experi¬ 
ence,  they  prepared  to  meet  the  oncoming  foe. 

4.  Qtlij  Arslan  comes  down  from  the  hills  and  makes  a  furious 
attack  on  our  camf.  His  army  is  defeated,  ’Tokens  of  the  vic¬ 
tory  are  sent  to  the  emferor.  He  rewards  the  chiefs, 

Qilij  Arslan  sent  on  ahead  a  squadron  of  ten  thousand  horsemen  as 
an  advance  guard  and  hastened  toward  the  south  gate.  This  had  been 
put  in  charge  of  the  count  of  Toulouse,  but  Qilij  Arslan,  ignorant  of 
Raymond's  arrival,  had  expected  to  find  it  unprotected  as  it  had  been 
for  the  past  two  days.  His  hope  was  vain,  however,  for  he  found  almost 
more  troops  stationed  there  than  at  any  other  point.  Entirely  unaware 
of  these  changes,  he  marched  swiftly  thither  and  fell  furiously  upon 
the  count^s  men.  Although  these  had  scarcely  laid  aside  their  packs, 
they  bore  the  charge  splendidly,  broke  the  attack,  and  completely  scat¬ 
tered  the  enemy’s  first  line.  The  latter  had  already  turned  to  flee  when 
the  appearance  of  Qilij  Arslan  with  strong  reinforcements  revived  the 
courage  of  the  disordered  troops  and  forced  them  to  return  to  the  fray. 

At  this  point,  the  duke,  Bohemond,  and  the  count  of  Flanders  ob¬ 
served  that  the  enemy  had  come  up  with  larger  forces  and  more  closely 
serried  ranks  j  they  realized  too  that  the  count’s  men  were  exhausted 
beyond  endurance  by  an  overwhelming  host  of  undaunted  courage. 
With  forces  armed  to  the  teeth,  they  rushed  as  with  one  accord  to  the 
assistance  of  their  comrades.  Attacking  the  foe  at  close  quarters,  they 


CAPTURE  OF  NICAEA 


157 

pressed  them  hard  with  lance  and  sword«  Although,  at  their  first  ap¬ 
pearance,  the  infidels  seemed  to  have  both  courage  and  strength,  yet, 
after  an  hour’s  resistance,  during  which  about  four  thousand  were 
killed  and  some  captured,  they  turned  and  fled. 

Thus  by  the  help  of  God  our  forces  won  this  first  victory.  They  con¬ 
tinued  to  carry  on  the  siege  by  laying  out  their  camp  in  an  unbroken 
circle  around  the  walls.  From  that  day,'^  as  long  as  the  siege  continued, 
neither  Qilij  Arslan  nor  any  other  of  the  infidel  princes  dared  to  un¬ 
dertake  a  similar  attack. 

In  this  engagement  the  chiefs  named  above  acquitted  themselves 
nobly,  but  Tancred,  Walter  of  Garland,  seneschal  of  the  king  of  the 
Franks,  Guy  of  Possessa,  and  Roger  de  Barneville  won  great  renown 
by  their  prowess. 

To  strike  still  greater  terror  to  the  hearts  of  the  foe,  orders  were 
given  that  the  heads  of  the  slain  Turks  in  large  numbers  be  thrown 
into  the  city  by  the  hurling  machines.  One  thousand  of  these  heads  and 
a  number  of  prisoners  were  sent  to  the  emperor,  a  present  which  won 
his  hearty  favor.  In  addition,  Alexius  very  generously  sent  not  a  little 
money  and  silken  stuffs  of  various  kinds  as  a  reward  for  the  chiefs  of 
the  armies.  Furthermore,  with  great  liberality,  he  commanded  that 
without  delay  the  necessary  provisions  and  a  market  plentifully  sup¬ 
plied  with  goods  be  provided  for  them. 

5.  The  leaders  station  themselves  in  the  positions  assigned  to 
them.  The  citjy  besieged  on  every  sidey  is  attacked.  Certain 
nobles  jail  in  battle. 

In  order  to  carry  out  their  purpose,  our  leaders  deemed  it  expedient 
to  blockade  the  city  on  all  sides,  as  we  have  said,  and  to  station  the 
leaders  in  strategic  positions,  for  thus,  when  disaster  was  assailing  them 
from  every  direction,  the  citizens  might  more  easily  be  forced  to  sur¬ 
render.  In  accordance  with  this  plan,  as  agreed  upon  by  all,  they 
divided  the  circuit  of  the  wall  into  equal  parts  and  allotted  each  sector 
to  individual  chiefs. 

The  duke,  with  his  two  brothers  and  their  forces,  was  stationed  on 
the  east  side.  Bohemond,  with  Tancred  and  the  other  leaders  who  had 
followed  him,  whose  names  were  given  above,  held  the  north  side  of 
the  city  with  his  army.  Next  to  these  in  order  came  the  count  of  Flan- 

May  16,  1097. 


CAPTURE  OF  NICAEA 


158 

ders  and  the  prince  of  Normandy,  also  with  their  cohorts.  Raymond, 
count  of  Toulouse,  and  the  bishop  of  Puy,  with  their  comrades,  were 
assigned  the  southern  section.  Beyond  them  Stephen,  count  of  Chartres 
and  Blois,  with  Hugh  the  Great  and  some  other  noble  and  distin¬ 
guished  men,  had  placed  his  camp.  When  the  city  had  been  completely 
surrounded  in  this  fashion  the  commanders  decided  to  have  built  as 
rapidly  as  possible  the  necessary  machines  for  undermining  the  walls, 
called  scrofhae.  Hurling  machines  known  as  mangons  and  fetraries 
were  likewise  ordered  built  with  all  speed.®  Suitable  material  for  these 
engines  was  available  from  the  woods  near  by. 

Artisans  were  called  and  the  work  was  pressed  on  with  great  dili¬ 
gence.  Each  vied  with  the  other  in  working  zealously,  that  as  soon  as 
the  task  was  finished  the  city  might  be  attacked.  For  seven  weeks  they 
had  applied  themselves  most  earnestly  to  this  work  and  had  made  re¬ 
peated  assaults  upon  the  city  when  one  day,  during  the  usual  skirmish, 
by  a  wretched  misfortune,  they  lost  two  valiant  fighters,  both  noble 
men  of  high  rank.  Baldwin  sur named  Calderon  and  Baldwin  of  Ghent 
perished  while  fighting  manfully  during  the  storming  of  the  city.  One 
was  struck  by  a  rock,  and  the  other  was  pierced  by  an  arrow.  Later,  by 
the  advice  and  decree  of  the  leaders,  a  second  attack  was  launched,  and 
in  this  engagement  William,  count  of  Forez,  and  Galo  de  Lille,  while 
fighting  too  eagerly,  were  wounded  by  arrows,  and  they  too  perished. 

Here  also,  Guy  of  Possessa,  a  nobleman  of  the  kingdom  of  the 
Franks,  was  seized  with  a  violent  illness  from  which  he  died.  Stricken 
with  consternation  by  the  death  of  these  warriors,  the  people  of  God 
consigned  their  bodies  with  honors  to  the  tomb  and  with  pious  affection 
rendered  the  fitting  obsequies  which  are  customarily  shown  to  men 
of  high  rank. 

6.  'The  towns feofle  destroy  a  machine  which  had  been  af filed 
to  the  walls.  Many  Christians  ferish  beneath  it.  The  lake 
hinders  the  success  of  our  efforts. 

At  another  time,  all  the  leaders  engaged  in  the  siege  were  valiantly 
striving  without  rest  or  intermission  to  apply  their  engines  to  the  wall. 

®  The  scrophae^  or  <‘sows,”  were  apparently  moveable  shelters  to  protect  digg-ing  op¬ 
erations  and  were  so  named  from  their  likeness  to  either  the  shape  or  the  activities  of 
the  hog.  The  distinction  between  mangons  and  fetraries  is  not  clear,  for  both  could 
be  used  to  hurl  either  rocks  or  javelins  (see  Charles  Oman,  A  History  of  the  Art  of  War 
in  the  Middle  Ages,  I,  13 1  ff.). 


’  CAPTURE  OF  NICAEA 


159 

They  desired  to  weaken  it  in  every  possible  way  that  they  might  force 
an  entrance.  Count  Hartman  and  Henry  d’Esch,  noble  and  distin¬ 
guished  men  from  the  kingdom  of  the  Teutons,  nobly  assisted  by  their 
retainers  and  household  servants,  were  thus  engaged  in  attaching  to 
the  fortifications  a  skilfully  built  engine.  It  was  made  of  oaken  beams 
joined  together  and  enclosed  by  stout  walls.  Within  the  protection  of 
its  enclosure  it  was  thought  that  the  twenty  brave  knights  stationed 
inside  for  the  purpose  of  undermining  the  wall  would  be  safe  from 
even  the  most  massive  rocks  hurled  from  the  engines.  But  when  the 
machine  was  applied  to  the  ramparts,  as  we  have  said,  the  citizens 
eagerly  pressed  forward  from  above  to  defend  the  walls.  The  result 
was  that  the  structure  was  so  completely  wrecked  by  the  blows  of  heavy 
stones  that  the  joints  gave  way  and  all  inside  were  crushed  to  death. 
The  sympathy  of  the  entire  people  went  out  to  these  nobles,  for  the 
work  of  many  days  performed  at  so  great  a  cost  was  utterly  ruined  and 
rendered  of  no  account.  They  grieved  also  for  the  fate  of  those  brave 
men  who  had  perished  so  pitiably.  Yet  the  hope  of  victory  comforted 
them,  especially  as  they  doubted  not  that  those  who  had  risked  their 
lives  for  Christ  in  such  a  work  had  won  a  better  life.  For  with  justice 
they  felt  that  men  who  had  perished  in  a  combat  of  this  kind  had  died 
as  martyrs.  Hence  they  too,  scorning  death  and  regarding  the  present 
life  as  of  no  value,  were  rendered  still  more  brave  by  this  hope  and 
continued  to  expose  themselves  with  full  confidence  to  all  kinds  of 
danger. 

As  with  one  accord,  therefore,  the  leaders  pressed  on  the  work  of 
storming  the  city  along  the  whole  circuit  of  the  walls.  And  in  propor¬ 
tion  as  each  leader  showed  himself  zealous  in  harassing  the  besieged 
in  the  section  assigned  to  him,  so  was  his  fame  enhanced  in  the  eyes  of 
the  rest.  The  work  progressed,  although  at  great  cost,  and  the  per¬ 
sistent  combats  and  almost  constant  skirmishes  gave  the  townspeople 
no  respite. 

The  lake  adjacent  to  the  city,  however,  formed  the  greatest  hin¬ 
drance  to  the  work  of  the  Christians  and  prevented  their  strenuous 
efforts  from  having  the  desired  result.  It  afforded  the  besieged  com¬ 
forts  of  every  description,  for,  sailing  across  its  waters,  they  brought  in 
freely  supplies  of  food  and  provisions.  From  time  to  time  also,  under 
the  very  eyes  of  our  forces,  who  were  powerless  to  prevent  it,  they 
brought  in  great  numbers  of  cattle. 


i6o 


CAPTURE  OF  NICAEA 


7.  The  Christians  transfort  boats  on  vjagons  from  the  sea. 

They  take  fossesston  of  the  lake.  The  cithsens  m  desfalr 
marvel  at  the  resourcefulness  of  our  feofle. 

Accordingly  the  leaders  beloved  of  God  met  to  consider  this  particu¬ 
lar  problem  and  to  devise  the  best  means  of  grappling  with  it.  It  was 
finally  resolved  by  unanimous  consent  to  send  down  to  the  sea  a  host 
of  people  escorted  by  some  cavalry  squadrons.  Upon  wagons  or  vehi¬ 
cles  or  by  any  means  whatsoever,  they  were  to  drag  boats  overland  to 
the  lake,  either  entire  or  in  parts.  If  this  measure  were  not  taken,  it  was 
evident  that  all  the  efforts  of  the  Christians  would  prove  futile,  their 
work  and  money  would  have  been  expended  in  vain,  and  the  whole 
rendered  of  no  account. 

When  those  entrusted  with  the  execution  of  this  enterprise  reached 
the  sea,  the  Lord  mercifully  directing  their  route  and  their  under¬ 
taking,  they  found  there  ships  of  medium  size.  These  they  easily  ob¬ 
tained  from  the  emperor  and  drew  up  out  of  the  sea  upon  the  dry  land. 
Three  or  four  wagons  were  joined  together  according  as  the  length  of 
the  boats  required,  and  the  vessels  were  placed  thereon.  Then,  during 
the  course  of  one  night,  by  ropes  placed  on  the  shoulders  and  necks  of 
men  and  horses,  the  people  dragged  these  overland  to  the  lake,  a  dis¬ 
tance  of  seven  miles  or  more.  Among  the  number  were  some  ships  of 
larger  size,  capable  of  holding  fifty  or  a  hundred  fighters. 

When  this  fleet  had  been  dragged  overland  and  placed  upon  the 
lake,  the  Christian  army  rejoiced  greatly.  The  leaders  hurried  down 
to  the  shore.  Oarsmen  skilled  in  handling  ships  were  brought  and  like¬ 
wise  men  strong  of  arm  and  of  acknowledged  bravery.  Confident  hope 
of  soon  taking  the  city  filled  the  hearts  of  all. 

The  townspeople  noticed  that  there  were  more  than  the  customary 
number  of  boats  on  the  lake.  They  were  puzzled,  uncertain  whether 
these  were  a  part  of  their  own  fleet  which  had  come  to  assist  them  or 
whether  they  belonged  to  the  enemy.  After  a  time,  however,  they 
became  convinced  that  our  people  had  drawn  them  out  of  the  sea, 
dragged  them  by  heroic  efforts  overland,  and  placed  them  on  the  lake. 
They  marvelled  greatly  at  the  strength  and  ingenuity  of  the  Chris¬ 
tians,  who  had  successfully  carried  through  a  desperate  and  well-nigh 
impossible  undertaking.^ 

^According  to  Anna  Comnena,  this  stratagem  was  devised  by  her  father,  Emperor 
Alexius,  and  constituted  the  decisive  step  in  the  capture  of  Nicaea.  The  ships  occupied 


CAPTURE  OF  NICAEA 


i6i 


8.  Nicaea  is  again  stormed  on  all  sides.  The  count  of  Toulouse 
attemfts  to  weaken  a  tower  offosite  him.  He  uses  the  ma¬ 
chines  and  every  other  possible  device ^  but  the  resistance  of 
the  citi’zens  makes  his  efforts  futile. 

Thus  the  city’s  outlet  by  way  of  the  lake  was  cut  off  by  the  introduction 
of  the  Christian  fleet.  Public  proclamation  was  thereupon  made  by  the 
voice  of  the  herald  that  each  legion  should  arm  and  take  the  position 
assigned  to  it  under  its  own  leader.  Extraordinary  pressure  was  to  be 
put  forth  against  the  townspeople  by  another  vigorous  assault  on  the 
city.  Each  leader  urged  on  his  own  men  and  led  them  fully  armed  to 
the  combat.  An  unusually  fierce  encounter  followed.  Bold  and  effective 
use  was  made  of  the  engines,  and  while  some  turned  their  attention  to 
sapping  the  walls,  others  hurled  huge  stones  to  weaken  the  fortifi¬ 
cations. 

On  the  south  side,  which  had  been  assigned  to  the  count  of  Toulouse 
as  the  point  of  attack,  was  a  tower  conspicuous  beyond  the  rest  for  its 
height  and  massive  construction.  Near  this,  it  was  rumored,  the  wife 
of  Qilij  Arslan  had  her  residence.  For  several  days  the  count  had  de¬ 
voted  all  his  efforts  toward  wrecking  this  tower,  but  in  vain.  For,  al¬ 
though  he  battered  it  persistently  with  rocks  hurled  from  two  engines, 
the  solid  construction  rendered  it  impossible  to  dislodge  even  a  single 
stone.  Instead  of  abandoning  his  purpose  as  if  conquered,  however,  he 
redoubled  the  pressure  and  even  increased  the  number  of  machines. 
Gradually  under  the  blows  of  even  larger  masses  of  stone  and  rocks  of 
immense  weight,  it  began  to  show  cracks  and  finally,  weakened  by  the 
continual  strokes,  it  began  to  crumble.  At  this  welcome  sight,  the  army, 
as  one  band,  leaped  across  the  moat  and  approached  the  walls.  With 
shouts  of  encouragement  to  one  another,  they  tried  to  overthrow  it  or, 
at  least,  to  make  a  breach  in  it. 

The  citizens,  however,  were  well  aware  that  there  was  danger  of 
their  tower  falling.  They  had,  therefore,  filled  the  interior  with  stones 
and  cement,  that  if  the  walls  should  be  undermined  or  so  weakened 
by  the  engines  as  to  give  way,  the  new  work  would  take  the  place  of 
the  old  and  present  an  obstacle  to  those  trying  to  make  the  breach. 


the  lake  by  the  morning  of  June  i8,  and  the  surrender  of  the  city  followed  on  the 
next  day,  June  19,  1097  (H,  Hagenmeyer,  Chronologie^  nos.  159,  160).  This  strata¬ 
gem  was  to  be  used  again  by  crusaders  in  an  audacious  attempt  to  capture  Mecca 
(see  G.  Schlumberger,  Renaud  de  Chdtillony  pp,  257—83). 


i62 


CAPTURE  OF  NICAEA 


Meanwhile  our  men,  protected  by  a  solid  testudo  which  they  had  at¬ 
tached  to  the  wall  by  force,  were  trying  to  sap  the  fortifications.  After 
much  toil  they  finally  succeeded  in  making  an  opening  with  their  iron 
tools  sufficiently  large  to  admit  two  men  easily.  Meanwhile  the  citizens 
made  preparations  to  resist  with  vigor  all  the  efforts  of  their  foe  j  they 
met  stratagem  with  stratagem,  strength  with  strength,  and  displayed 
a  spirit  not  inferior  to  that  of  the  Christians.  With  bows  and  ballistae, 
hurling  engines,  and  every  conceivable  weapon,  they  strove  as  one  man 
to  thrust  back  the  foe  and  avert  the  injuries  that  were  being  wrought 
upon  them. 

9.  Duke  Godfrey's  notable  feat.  A  citizen  hurls  fire  and  fat 
ufon  the  machines .  T he  sad  fate  of  an  illustrious  man* 

Among  those  who  were  defending  the  wall  against  the  assailing  force 
there  was  one  man  notable  for  his  great  size  and  strength  who  dis¬ 
played  more  animosity  than  the  rest.  He  worked  much  havoc  on  our 
men  with  his  bow.  Finally,  puffed  up  by  the  success  which  he  had  all 
too  long  enjoyed,  he  began  to  hurl  forth  insulting  abuse  against  our 
soldiers,  taunting  them  as  lazy  and  cowardly.  In  this  impudent  man¬ 
ner,  he  was  raging  along  that  section  of  the  wall  which  the  duke  and 
his  cohorts  were  attacking.  The  illustrious  Godfrey  could  not  endure 
this  ignominy.  He  took  a  heavy  bow,  sought  a  suitable  position,  and 
directed  his  aim  so  accurately  that  the  weapon  pierced  the  vitals  of  that 
miscreant  and  he  fell  lifeless  to  the  ground.  Thus  with  a  just  penalty 
he  expiated  the  many  injuries  which  he  had  done  to  the  Christians. 
Under  the  impulse  of  his  example  the  rascal’s  coworkers  had  been 
putting  up  a  very  bold  defense  in  that  section,  but  thereafter,  much 
terrified  by  this  act,  they  hurled  forth  fewer  weapons  and  insults. 
Others,  however,  ignorant  of  this  disaster,  continued  to  work  valiantly 
in  defense  of  the  city  in  other  places  along  the  wall.  Protecting  them¬ 
selves  with  all  due  caution,  they  did  not  cease  with  all  their  strength 
to  inflict  wounds  and  death  on  our  men  from  the  walls  and  towers. 
Not  only  did  they  throw  down  pitch,  oil,  lard,  and  other  things  which 
are  wont  to  lend  fury  to  the  flames,  but  they  even  hurled  lighted 
brands  directly  upon  our  machines.  Consequently,  a  great  many  of 
these  were  destroyed,  except  where  carefully  watched. 

Those  who  were  assiduously  working  on  the  south  side  in  the  attack 


CAPTURE  OF  NICAEA 


163 

on  the  tower  continued  their  zealous  efforts  toward  that  end.  As  they 
saw,  however,  that  any  part  of  the  wall  undermined  during  the  day 
was  completely  restored  in  the  course  of  the  next  night,  they  soon  be¬ 
gan  to  slacken  their  efforts  somewhat.  Realizing  that  their  work  was 
meeting  with  no  success,  they  were  about  to  abandon  their  purpose 
when  a  valiant  man  of  high  degree,  a  knight  from  the  army  of  the 
count  of  Normandy,  essayed  a  remarkable  feat.  Inspired  by  the  hope 
that  others  would  follow  his  example,  he  donned  cuirass  and  helmet 
and  with  undaunted  courage  crossed  the  moat.  Then  protected  by  his 
shield  he  approached  the  wall.  His  purpose  was  to  tear  down  the  new 
stone  structure  which  the  citizens  had  built  during  that  night  and  to 
reopen  the  breach  made  the  day  before.  The  townspeople,  however, 
pressed  on  the  assault  from  above  with  much  vigor,  and  since  none  of 
the  other  Christians  dared  to  come  to  his  help,  his  attempt  was  unsuc¬ 
cessful.  He  was  crushed  to  death  by  massive  stone  missiles  and  perished 
by  the  wall  in  full  view  of  his  comrades.  They,  though  most  willing, 
were  unable  to  render  him  any  assistance.  The  infidels  raised  the 
breathless  body  with  iron  hooks  and  threw  it  within  the  walls,  where 
it  lay  exposed  to  their  insulting  mockery.  Finally,  stripped  of  cuirass 
and  helmet,  it  was  thrown  back  to  our  people  outside.  The  people  wept 
over  it  and  extolled  the  great  bravery  of  the  man  as  with  due  rites  of 
burial  they  committed  his  remains  to  the  tomb.  They  doubted  not  that 
his  death  was  precious  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord  and  that,  because  of  this 
noble  end,  his  soul  would  be  united  with  those  of  the  elect  spirits.  For 
as  has  been  said,  all  were  agreed  in  the  opinion  that  those  who  fell  thus 
in  battle  merited  eternal  life  and  would  occupy  the  places  in  glory 
promised  to  them  among  the  saints. 


10.  A  certain  artisan  offers  his  services  to  the  desfairing  chiefs. 

He  builds  a  machine  and  undermines  the  wall.  It  straightway 
jails. 

Meanwhile  the  chiefs  of  our  legions  vowed  to  God’s  service  met  to¬ 
gether  for  conference,  as  was  their  usual  custom.  It  was  apparent  to 
them  that  they  were  making  no  progress  in  their  undertaking  but  were, 
on  the  contrary,  uselessly  wasting  efforts  and  zeal.  They  therefore 
diligently  consulted  with  one  another  as  to  what  ought  to  be  done 
under  the  existing  conditions.  While  they  were  earnestly  considering 


CAPTURE  OF  NICAEA 


164 

the  problem  with  anxious  hearts,  a  certain  man,  a  Lombard  by  nation, 
came  to  the  leaders.  He  had  noticed  that  all  the  schemes  of  the  engi¬ 
neers  were  in  vain  and  their  labor  fruitless.  He  claimed  to  possess  great 
skill  in  that  same  craft  and  declared  that  if  the  necessary  materials  were 
provided  and  sufficient  money  to  complete  the  work  given  him  from 
the  general  fund,  he  would  within  a  few  days,  by  the  will  of  God,  over¬ 
throw  that  tower  and  make  a  wide  breach  so  that  all  who  wished  might 
enter.  This  he  would  accomplish,  he  asserted,  without  the  loss  of  a 
single  man.  Accordingly,  a  sum  sufficient  to  defray  the  expense  was 
furnished  him  from  the  public  funds  and,  in  addition,  an  adequate 
allowance  was  named  as  a  recompense  for  his  labor.  The  materials 
which  he  desired  were  provided,  and  thereupon  he  built  a  machine 
with  marvellous  skill.  It  was  so  designed  that,  in  spite  of  the  enemy’s 
efforts,  those  inside  could  attach  it  to  the  walls  without  danger  to  them¬ 
selves.  Concealed  therein  they  could  then  carry  on  the  work  of  sapping 
the  fortifications  without  fear.  This  he  actually  carried  out.  For  after 
the  machine  had  been  put  together  and  well  defended  in  every  part, 
according  to  his  directions,  he  entered  it  with  a  number  of  brave  men. 
All  wore  the  cuirass  and  were  well  equipped  with  weapons  and  the 
iron  tools  needed  for  the  work.  The  engine  with  the  workmen  was 
then  moved  across  the  moat  and  with  much  ingenuity  and  skill  applied 
to  the  walls.  With  their  usual  audacity,  however,  the  citizens  kept  hurl- 
ing  great  rocks  and  combustibles  upon  it  from  above.  None  of  these 
missiles  did  any  damage  because  the  steep  pitch  of  the  roof  and  the 
sloping  sides  of  the  engine  prevented  them  from  lodging  there.  Con¬ 
sequently  no  harm  came  to  the  men  below,  and  the  enemy  soon  began 
to  lose  confidence  in  their  customary  expedients.  Much  they  marvelled 
at  the  ingenuity  of  the  inventor  and  the  strength  of  the  machine,  for 
no  tactics  seemed  to  prevail  against  it. 

Those  hidden  within  that  shelter  were  completely  protected  from 
the  wiles  of  the  enemy.  They  pursued  the  work  of  undermining  the 
tower  and  breaching  the  wall  with  all  their  strength.  As  fast  as  the 
stone  foundation  was  wrenched  away,  it  was  replaced  with  timbers  and 
wooden  supports,  for  there  was  danger  that  when  the  base  of  the  wall 
was  torn  away  the  upper  part  would  fall  upon  the  engine  and  crush  it. 

^  Naturally,  the  machine  would  not  be  able  to  support  the  weight  of  so 
great  a  mass  descending  upon  it. 


CAPTURE  OF  NICAEA 


165 

When  it  appeared  that  the  tower  had  been  sapped  sufficiently  to 
cause  its  fall,  fire  was  applied  to  the  props  holding  the  doomed  wall. 
Suitable  combustible  materials  to  keep  the  fires  burning  were  also  sup¬ 
plied.  The  workmen  then  left  the  machine  and  hastened  back  to  their 
comrades.  About  midnight,  when  the  wooden  supports  had  burned 
away  and  been  reduced  to  ashes  by  the  consuming  flames,  the  tower 
fell  with  a  crash  like  an  earthquake,  which  shook  with  horror  even 
those  who  were  far  distant  and  carried  fear  and  consternation  to  their 
hearts.  Roused  by  the  sound,  the  legions  flew  to  arms,  determined  to 
force  their  way  into  the  city. 

II.  The  wife  of  Qilij  Arslan^  zuhile  trying  to  escafe^  is  taken 
frisoner  with  her  two  sons,  T he  citizens  are  in  desfair,  T hey 
discuss  with  Taticius  the  Greek  the  advisability  of  surrender¬ 
ing,  T he  leaders  send  envoys  to  the  emferor  concerning  this 
matter. 

The  wife  of  Qilij  Arslan  up  to  this  time  had  endured  the  hardships 
of  the  siege,  although  with  much  difficulty.  Now,  however,  exceed¬ 
ingly  terrified  by  the  fall  of  the  tower,  after  the  manner  of  women, 
she  ordered  ships  to  be  made  ready  and,  attended  by  her  maids  and  all 
her  household,  secretly  left  the  city  with  the  intention  of  seeking  a 
safer  place.  But  the  Christians  had  stationed  guards  on  the  lake  in 
boats  to  prevent  the  besieged  from  coming,  or  going;  and  they,  like 
wise  men  ever  on  the  alert,  watched  every  movement  with  the  utmost 
vigilance.  These  guards  discovered  the  lady  as  she  was  about  to  flee 
and  seized  her.  With  her  two  young  sons,  she  was  led  to  the  command¬ 
ers,  who  directed  that  she  be  kept  with  her  fellow  prisoners  under 
strict  guard. 

The  citizens  were  thrown  into  a  state  of  consternation  over  the 
breach  opened  by  the  foe  and  the  capture  of  a  woman  of  such  impor¬ 
tance.  In  utter  distrust  of  their  own  strength,  they  straightway  sent  a 
deputation  to  the  chiefs  begging  them  to  grant  a  truce  for  the  purpose 
of  arranging  for  surrender. 

Now  Taticius,  that  extremely  shrewd  man  of  whom  I  have  spoken, 
had  foreseen  that  the  citizens  would  wish  to  abandon  their  own  de¬ 
fense.  Accordingly,  he  had  already  called  a  meeting  of  the  principal 
men  of  the  city  and  advised  them,  in  the  event  of  a  surrender,  to  honor 


CAPTURE  OF  NICAEA 


i66 

the  emperor.  He  pointed  out  that  the  army  of  pilgrims  now  before  the 
city  was  hastening  on  to  other  affairs.  It  was  only  incidentally  that 
these  people  had  engaged  in  the  siege,  and  in  passing,  as  it  were,  had 
turned  aside  from  their  main  objective.  The  emperor  would  always  be 
near  them.  On  his  praiseworthy  clemency  they  might  wholly  rely  and 
ever  hope  for  more  prosperous  affairs.  Hence  it  would  be  wiser,  on 
the  surrender,  to  give  the  preference  to  the  emperor  rather  than  to 
an  unknown  people  of  a  barbarous  race.  The  capitulation,  which  they 
could  not  avoid,  would  then  be  made  to  him.  Thus,  through  their  aid, 
the  emperor  would  recover  the  city  of  which  he  had  been  with  injustice 
deprived  recently,  through  the  violence  of  the  Turk.  By  these  argu¬ 
ments  and  others  of  similar  import,  the  assembled  citizens  were  per¬ 
suaded  to  consent.  On  condition  that  their  safety  be  guaranteed,  they 
elected  to  resign  the  city,  their  persons,  and  all  their  possessions  into 
the  hand  of  the  emperor. 

This  proposal  was  not  unsatisfactory  to  the  Christian  leaders  also, 
since  their  whole  purpose  was  in  truth  directed  toward  a  far  different 
end,  nor  was  it  their  intention  to  linger  long  at  Nicaea.  They  hoped, 
however,  that  in  accordance  with  the  terms  of  the  agreement,  the  spoils 
of  the  city  would  be  given  to  the  army  as  compensation  for  the  hard¬ 
ships  and  losses  which  it  had  suffered.  Before  they  would  treat  con¬ 
cerning  surrender  or  agree  to  satisfy  the  wishes  of  the  citizens  in  that 
respect,  however,  all  the  brethren  from  the  army  of  Peter  the  Hermit 
who  had  been  taken  prisoners  by  Qilij  Arslan  at  the  fortress  of  Civitot, 
and  also  those  taken  by  the  citizens  during  the  siege,  were  restored  to 
the  army. 

Then  with  the  acquiescence  of  the  chiefs  and  the  consent  of  the 
people  as  well,  envoys  were  sent  to  the  emperor  with  the  following 
message:  ^^The  Christian  army  and  its  leaders  have  labored  faithfully 
in  the  siege  of  Nicaea  for  love  of  the  name  of  Christ.  By  their  earnest 
and  persistent  efforts,  with  the  help  of  God,  they  have  compelled  that 
city  to  surrender.  We  earnestly  beseech  your  serene  highness,  there¬ 
fore,  not  to  delay  to  send  to  these  parts  some  of  your  principal  men 
with  a  force  sufEcient  to  hold  this  city,  which  has  been  surrendered  for 
the  honor  of  your  name.  They  must  also  arrange  for  the  transference 
of  a  great  number  of  captives.  For  as  soon  as  the  city  has  been  delivered 
to  your  highness,  we  wish  to  proceed  immediately  on  the  pilgrimage 
which,  by  the  authority  of  God,  we  have  undertaken.” 


CAPTURE  OF  NICAEA 


167 


12,  The  emferor  sends  envoys  to  receive  the  city.  He  also  sends 
gifts  and  thanks  to  the  leaders.  The  feofle  are  indignant. 

They  comflain  that  the  agreement  has  been  broken.  The 
emferor  orders  the  caftives  to  be  conducted  to  Constanti- 
nofle.  He  honors  them  with  gifts  and  sends  them  thence  to 
their  own  land. 

This  message  filled  the  heart  of  the  emperor  with  joy  and  gladness. 
He  at  once  sent  to  Nicaea  certain  members  of  his  own  retinue  on  whose 
fidelity  and  diligence  he  could  rely  to  receive  and  fortify  the  city.  The 
envoys  were  directed  to  seize  as  the  property  of  the  emperor  all  the 
substance  of  the  captives  in  gold  and  silver  and  in  furnishings  of  every 
kind.  To  the  commanders  the  monarch  sent  immense  gifts  in  the  hope 
of  gaining  their  good  will.  Moreover,  he  thanked  them  heartily,  both 
by  dispatches  and  verbal  messages,  for  their  honorable  services  and  the 
great  increase  that  had  come  to  the  empire  through  their  efforts. 

But  the  people  and  the  men  of  second  rank  were  greatly  incensed. 
They  too  had  worked  valiantly  in  the  siege  of  the  city  and  had  expected 
to  repair  the  loss  of  their  own  property  by  the  spoils  taken  from  the 
prisoners  and  the  rich  store  of  goods  found  in  the  city  itself.  They  now 
saw  that  their  labors  were  not  to  receive  a  satisfactory  reward.  It  was 
evident  that  the  emperor  intended  to  turn  into  his  own  private  purse 
and  treasury  the  spoils  which  according  to  the  compact  were  to  become 
public  property.  Consequently,  they  repented  of  their  labor,  and  the 
money  expended  for  it  now  seemed  to  have  been  entirely  wasted.  The 
leaders  likewise  consistently  maintained  that  the  emperor  had  acted 
treacherously  in  respect  to  the  provisions  of  the  treaty.  For  in  the 
clauses  of  the  agreement  between  them,  this  stipulation  was  said  to 
have  been  included:  namely,  that  “if,  during  their  entire  march  to 
Syria,  under  the  guidance  of  God,  they  should  chance  to  take  any  one 
of  the  cities  which  had  formerly  belonged  to  his  empire,  that  city  with 
its  adjacent  dependencies  should  be  restored  to  the  emperor 3  but  the 
booty,  the  spoils,  and  everything  else  should  be  handed  over  intact  to 
the  armies  without  question,  in  remuneration  for  their  labor  and  in 
payment  of  expenses.” 

The  later  claim  of  Bohemond  to  Antioch  rested  in  part  upon  the  theory  that 
Alexius  broke  the  ag'reement  which  he  had  made  with  the  crusaders.  William  apparently 
is  determined  to  point  out  every  possible  instance  of  a  breach  of  that  treaty  by  Alexius. 
His  attitude  must  be  regarded  as  partisan  even  though  he  is  consistent  in  his  condemna¬ 
tion  of  breaches  of  treaties.  The  full  text  of  the  treaty  whose  substance  he  here  reports 


i68 


CAPTURE  OF  NICAEA 


$ 


The  Christians  might  easily  and  quickly  have  driven  the  emissaries 
of  the  emperor  from  the  city  and  sent  them  back  empty  to  their  lord. 
They  would  have  been  justified  in  such  an  action,  for  to  keep  faith  with 
one  who  is  attempting  to  act  contrary  to  a  treaty  is  wrong.  Neverthe¬ 
less,  they  had  the  fear  of  God  before  their  eyes  and  were,  moreover, 
hastening  on  to  more  important  matters.  Hence,  that  the  aim  of  their 
pilgrimage  might  be  more  speedily  accomplished,  they  concealed  their 
true  feelings  for  the  sake  of  the  common  good.  With  persuasive  words 
they  endeavored  to  restrain  the  people,  who  were  highly  indignant  at 
this  treatment. 

The  Greeks  who  had  been  sent  to  take  over  the  place  entered  the 
city,  received  the  arms  of  the  citizens,  and  completed  the  surrender. 
They  then  went  to  the  camp  and  appeared  before  the  commanders  as 
suppliants  for  the  life  and  safety  of  the  citizens.  For  these,  they  de¬ 
clared,  had  restored  the  city  to  the  emperor  and  had  subjected  their 
necks  to  the  yoke  of  his  rule. 

After  the  city  had  been  surrendered  in  this  fashion,  a  force  sufficient 
for  its  protection  was  assigned.  The  wife  of  Qilij  Arslan  and  her  two 
sons  with  a  large  number  of  other  prisoners  were  then  led  off  to  Con¬ 
stantinople.  The  emperor  treated  them  not  only  mercifully  but  even 
generously.^^  Within  a  few  days  they  were  restored  to  their  former 
state  of  freedom.  It  is  said  that  he  did  this  in  the  hope  of  winning  the 
good  will  of  the  Turks  and  also  that,  by  such  favors,  he  might  more 
easily  rouse  them  against  us.  Then,  if  our  armies  chanced  to  lay  siege 
to  another  city,  he  trusted  that  the  people  would  not  be  deterred  by 
fear  from  making  a  similar  surrender. 

The  city  of  Nicaea  was  taken  on  the  twentieth  day  of  June,  in  the 
year  1097  of  the  Incarnation  of  the  Lord.^- 

13.  The  siege  is  raised  and  the  army  resumes  its  march»  The 
leaders  sefarate.  Qilij  Arslan  with  a  great  host  again  en’- 
counters  the  Christians. 

As  soon  as  the  siege  was  raised,  the  leaders  gave  the  command  to  re¬ 
sume  the  march.  The  baggage  was  arranged  and  on  June  29  they  set 

has  not  been  preserved  (see  A.  C.  Krey,  “A  Neglected  Passage  in  the  Gesta,”  Munro^ 
Crusades^  pp.  57-78:  R.  B.  Yewdale,  Bohemond  /,  Prince  of  Antioch^  pp.  125—29). 

According  to  Anna,  who  frankly  acknowledges  her  father’s  treachery  toward  the 
crusaders  at  Nicaea,  the  wife  of  Qilij  Arslan  was  promised  by  Alexius  not  only  freedom, 
but  also  generous  gifts  as  an  inducement  to  surrender  (see  Elizabeth  A.  S.  Dawes,  trans.. 
The  Alexiad  of  the  Princess  Anna  Comnena^  pp.  271—75). 

June  19  rather  than  20. 


CAPTURE  OF  NICAEA 


169 

forth.  For  two  days  the  legions  advanced  in  one  united  body.  On  the 
second  night  they  chanced  to  encamp  by  a  certain  bridge  because  of 
the  convenience  of  water.  At  earliest  dawn  before  daybreak,  while  the 
shades  of  night  were  still  hanging  over  the  earth,  they  again  made 
ready  to  march  and  crossed  the  bridge.  At  this  point,  whether  by  acci¬ 
dent  or  design,  the  leaders  with  their  legions  separated  from  one  an¬ 
other.  Bohemond,  the  count  of  Normandy,  Stephen,  count  of  Blois, 
Tancred,  and  Hugh,  count  of  St.  Pol,  turned  to  the  left  and  marched 
by  themselves  that  day.  Finally  they  came  to  a  valley  called  Gorgon.^^ 
Here,  about  the  ninth  hour,  they  made  camp  by  the  bank  of  a  running 
stream,  where  they  had  the  advantage  of  pasturage  and  grass.  They 
surrounded  the  camp  with  guards  and,  although  somewhat  anxious  in 
mind,  passed  a  quiet  night. 

All  the  other  leaders  kept  to  the  right  and,  after  the  day’s  march, 
pitched  their  camp  scarcely  two  miles  from  that  of  the  others.  Here, 
too,  there  was  good  pasturage  and  a  water  supply. 

Meanwhile,  Qilij  Arslan,  mindful  of  the  injury  done  him,  con¬ 
stantly  brooded  over  the  thought  that  through  the  Christians  he  had 
lost  not  only  that  excellent  city  but  also  his  wife  and  sons.  With  all  his 
heart  he  yearned  to  retaliate  and  determined,  if  possible,  to  lay  an 
ambush  for  his  foe.  Accordingly,  once  more  he  mustered  a  great  force 
of  soldiers  and  followed  with  nearly  equal  pace  the  host  which  had 
turned  to  the  left.  His  scouts  kept  him  constantly  informed  about  the 
movements  of  the  advancing  host,  and  he  waited  eagerly  for  a  fitting 
opportunity  to  fall  upon  them.  Through  these  scouts  he  soon  learned 
that  the  army  had  divided  and  that  the  section  which  was  apparently 
weaker  in  strength  and  numbers  was  quite  near  him.  He  at  once  de¬ 
cided  that  the  chance  for  which  he  had  been  waiting  had  arrived  and 
with  his  countless  host  descended  the  mountain. 

Scarcely  had  Aurora  announced  the  coming  of  the  next  day  and 
light  begun  to  disperse  the  dense  shadows  of  the  night  when  the  sen¬ 
tinels  caught  sight  of  the  foe,  for  men  had  been  stationed  to  watch  from 
afar  for  the  wiles  of  the  enemy,  should  there  be  any,  and  to  give  timely 
notice  to  the  army.  At  once  the  trumpets  sounded  the  warning  that  the 
infidels  were  approaching  at  a  rapid  pace.  Admonished  by  the  trum¬ 
pet’s  blare  and  the  herald’s  voice,  the  entire  host  flew  to  arms,  made 

The  site  o£  the  battle  of  Dorylaeum  has  not  been  definitely  established,  though  its 
general  location  is  clear  enough.  The  name  of  the  battle  is  derived  from  Anna’s  identifi¬ 
cation  of  the  site  with  the  ruins  of  the  ancient  city  of  Dorylaeum,  which  archaeologists 
dispute  (if.  Chron,^  no.  169). 


CAPTURE  OF  NICAEA 


170 

ready  their  horses,  and  prepared  for  a  struggle  at  close  quarters.  It  was 
early  on  the  morning  of  July  i.  The  entire  people  were  drawn  up  in 
battle  formation,  centurions  and  captains  of  fifty  were  placed  over  the 
individual  cohorts,  and  the  chiefs  took  their  positions  on  the  wings  of 
the  infantry  forces. 

That  the  troops  might  advance  to  battle  without  encumbrance,  all 
the  infirm  and  the  aged  men  and  women,  a  helpless  throng,  were 
placed  with  the  baggage  in  a  neighboring  thicket  of  reeds.  This  place 
was  further  protected  by  the  chariots  and  other  vehicles  and  seemed 
to  afford  a  safe  refuge.  Messengers  were  dispatched  to  carry  the  news 
of  their  critical  situation  to  the  other  divisions  of  the  army  from  which 
they  had  so  rashly  separated  and  to  urge  them  to  come  with  all  speed 
to  the  rescue. 

Thus  everything  in  Bohemond’s  camp  had  been  arranged  in  good 
order  according  to  the  rules  of  military  science.  About  the  second  hour 
of  the  day,  Qilij  Arslan  appeared,  leading  with  him  an  untold  number 
of  Turks.  Our  army  marvelled  that  in  a  multitude,  said  to  exceed  two 
hundred  thousand,  only  cavalry  was  to  be  seen.^^  Our  forces,  on  the 
other  hand,  as  has  been  said,  consisted  of  a  mixed  host  of  both  cavalry 
and  infantry. 

14.  A  battle  is  j ought,  Williamy  Tancred^s  brother y  jails,  Bohe~ 
mond^s  entire  army  is  flaced  in  great  danger,  T ancred  him- 
self  barely  escapes  capture. 

As  the  army  of  Turks  approached,  the  uproar  in  the  camp  became  so 
great  that  hardly  a  word  could  be  distinguished.  The  clang  of  armor, 
the  neighing  of  horses,  the  trumpet’s  blast,  together  with  the  awe¬ 
inspiring  roll  of  the  drum  and  the  eager  shouts  of  the  soldiers  which 
seemed  to  rise  to  the  skies,  struck  terror  to  the  hearts  of  the  legions, 
unaccustomed  as  they  were  to  such  a  scene. 

As  the  Turkish  lines  hurled  themselves  upon  our  forces,  they  let  fly 
a  shower  of  arrows  which  filled  the  air  like  hail.  Scarcely  a  man  in  the 
Christian  ranks  escaped  without  a  wound.  The  first  shower  had  barely 
ceased  when  another  no  less  dense  followed.  From  this  no  one  who 

William’s  account  of  the  battle  is  derived  from  at  least  three  of  the  early  chronicles, 
those  of  Albert  of  Aix,  Fulcher  of  Chartres,  and  the  anonymous  author  of  the  Gesta, 
He  refused  to  accept  the  enormous  figure  of  three  hundred  and  sixty  thousand  which 
Fulcher  states  as  the  number  of  the  enemy.  Even  the  more  modest  figure  two  hundred 
thousand  which  William  substituted  seemed  too  large,  and  he  therefore  reports  it  on 
hearsay. 


CAPTURE  OF  NICAEA 


171 

had  haply  escaped  from  the  former  attack  emerged  unscathed.  This 
method  of  fighting  was  strange  to  our  men,  and  because  they  were 
unaccustomed  to  it,  it  seemed  harder  to  endure.  They  saw  their  horses 
falling,  yet  were  powerless  to  help,  for  they  themselves  were  perishing 
as  the  result  of  blows  coming  from  an  unexpected  and  inescapable 
source.  Nevertheless,  they  continued  to  charge  the  foe  with  sword  and 
lance  and  tried  to  drive  them  back.  But  the.  Turks,  when  unable  to 
withstand  the  force  of  the  onset,  purposely  opened  their  ranks  to  avoid 
the  clash,  and  the  Christians,  finding  no  one  to  oppose  them,  had  to 
fall  back  deceived.  Then  as  soon  as  our  people  returned  to  their  own 
ranks  unsuccessful,  the  Turks  again  closed  their  lines  and  again  sent 
forth  showers  of  arrows  like  rain.  Scarcely  a  Christian  escaped  without 
receiving  serious  wounds.  Protected  by  their  breastplates,  helmets,  and 
shields,  our  men  resisted  as  well  as  they  could,  but  the  horses  and  those 
who  had  no  arms  were  felled  to  the  ground  without  distinction. 

Almost  two  thousand  men  of  note,  both  knights  and  foot  soldiers, 
fell  in  that  engagement.  Among  the  number  was  William,  a  youth  of 
more  than  usual  promise,  son  of  the  Good  Marquis  and  brother  of 
Tancred.  While  valiantly  fighting  for  his  people  in  battle,  he  was 
struck  by  an  arrow  and  killed. 

Robert  of  Paris,  a  man  of  brilliant  prowess  in  war,  also  met  his  end 
in  the  same  way.  Even  Tancred  himself,  reckless  of  life  and  regardless 
of  his  high  rank,  barely  escaped  death.  In  the  thick  of  the  fight,  he  was 
hurling  destruction  upon  the  enemy  when  he  was  forcibly  rescued  in 
spite  of  himself  by  the  efforts  of  Bohemond. 

The  ranks  of  the  infidels  kept  growing  stronger,  and  those  of  the 
Christians  began  to  weaken.  The  Turks  now  attacked  with  swords  at 
close  quarters.  Meanwhile  the  bow,  hanging  from  the  shoulder,  neg¬ 
lected  its  office.  Our  cohorts  finally  broke  ranks,  took  flight,  and  re¬ 
treated  to  their  packs  and  baggage.  There  in  the  dense  thickets  of  reeds 
they  huddled  together  around  the  chariots  and  wagons,  in  the  hope  of 
finding  some  protection. 

15.  The  other  leaders  arrive.  They  come  to  the  aid  of  their  over” 
burdened  brethren.  Qilij  Arslan  is  fut  to  flight  and  his  army 
'perishes.  The  Christians  bring  back  very  rich  spoils.  The  hosts 
again  become  one  united  whole. 

Under  such  disasters  was  the  army  of  the  faithful  struggling,  and 
Bohemond’s  strength  was  beginning  to  weaken  and  give  way.  Mean- 


CAPTURE  OF  NICAEA 


172 

while,  those  illustrious  and  splendid  men,  Duke  Godfrey,  Count  Ray¬ 
mond,  Hugh  the  Great,  Baldwin  and  Eustace,  the  duke’s  brothers, 
and  the  other  leaders  devoted  to  God,  were  advancing  swiftly  to  the 
assistance  of  their  brethren.  Leaving  the  unmounted  throng  in  the 
camp  with  the  baggage  of  every  description,  they  had  gone  to  the 
rescue  with  a  force  of  forty  thousand  knights  splendidly  armed.  Their 
coming  brought  fresh  courage  to  Bohemond’s  forces,  who  but  now 
had  been  ready  to  succumb.  With  strength  renewed  they  again  re¬ 
turned  to  the  fray.  Eager  to  retaliate  for  the  wrongs  done  them  and 
to  redeem  their  earlier  defeat,  they  threw  themselves  vigorously  on 
the  foe.  Valiantly  they  used  their  swords  with  a  strong  right  hand  and 
in  a  short  time  had  routed  the  infidels  now  powerless  to  resist — ^that 
enemy  whom  so  recently  they  had  dreaded  as  superior  to  themselves. 

The  bishop  of  Puy,  with  some  of  his  coworkers  in  the  same  ministry, 
admonished  the  people  and  encouraged  the  commanders  not  to  relax 
their  efforts.  They  bade  them  avenge  the  blood  of  their  slaughtered 
brethren,  in  full  assurance  that  victory  would  be  granted  from  on  high. 
Let  them  not  suffer  the  enemies  of  the  faith  and  name  of  Christ  to 
glory  longer  over  the  massacre  of  the  faithful.  With  these  and  like 
words  of  exhortation,  the  men  of  God  urged  on  the  people  to  combat 
and,  as  far  as  lay  within  their  power,  inspired  them  with  courage. 

Thereupon  the  Christians  with  unwonted  energy  made  a  furious 
attack  upon  the  foe  with  swords.  They  broke  up  the  battle  lines  of  the 
infidels  and  put  them  to  flight  with  dreadful  slaughter.  Persistently 
they  followed  the  fugitives  for  three  or  four  miles  beyond  the  enemy’s 
camp,  which  was  located  in  an  exceedingly  rich  valley.  Awful  was  the 
massacre  which  they  wrought. 

The  Turks  were  thus  dispersed  in  great  disorder  with  heavy  loss  of 
life.  The  Christians  then  turned  back  to  the  enemy’s  camp.  With  them 
they  brought  some  of  their  own  people  who  had  been  carried  away 
captive  by  the  foe.  In  this  camp  were  found  great  amounts  of  gold  and 
silver.  Many  asses  and  pack  horses,  troops  of  camels — animals  which 
our  people  had  never  seen  before — and  some  horses  were  seized.  Tents 
and  pavilions  of  various  colors  and  unusual  shapes  were  also  found.  All 
these  treasures  the  Christians  bore  away  with  them.  Thus  laden  with 
the  richest  spoils,  and  driving  before  them  animals  and  slaves,  the 
victors  returned  to  their  own  camp. 

The  enemy  is  said  to  have  lost  that  day  nearly  three  thousand  pow- 


CAPTURE  OF  NICAEA 


173 

erful  and  illustrious  men  of  the  highest  position  among  their  own 
people.  Four  thousand  of  our  common  people  and  those  of  the  lowest 
rank,  both  men  and  women,  fell  in  that  battle,  but  according  to  the 
recollection  of  aged  men,  only  two  of  higher  rank  perished.^ ^  This 
battle  was  fought  July  i,  with  varying  fortune  and  with  forces  quite 
unequal  in  strength  and  number.  It  lasted  from  the  second  to  the 
eighth  hour  of  the  day.  The  number  in  Qilij  Arslan^s  army,  horsemen 
alone  being  counted,  was  said  to  exceed  one  hundred  and  fifty  thou¬ 
sand.  On  the  other  hand,  the  number  of  Christian  knights  who  fought 
in  that  great  battle  was  barely  fifty  thousand. 

After  this  great  victory  had  been  won  by  divine  favor,  the  army 
was  again  brought  together  and  granted  a  short  rest  to  care  for  the 
wounded.  For  three  successive  days,  amid  green  pastures,  they  re¬ 
freshed  their  bodies  and  cared  for  their  horses.  The  great  abundance 
of  provisions  and  the  vast  accumulation  of  supplies  which  the  enemy 
had  been  forced  to  abandon  when  they  fled  added  much  to  the  enjoy¬ 
ment  of  all. 

Our  great  leaders  bore  themselves  splendidly  in  that  perilous  crisis; 
but  some  of  the  less  prominent  men  also  won  everlasting  glory  on  that 
occasion,  notably,  Baldwin  du  Bourg,  Thomas  de  La  Fere,  Renaud 
de  Beauvais,  Galo  de  Chaumont,  Gaston  de  Bearn,  and  Gerard  de 
Cherisi. 

From  that  day  it  was  decreed  by  common  counsel  that  the  armies 
should  unite  and  thereafter  march  together  as  one  inseparable  body. 
Thus  both  adverse  and  prosperous  fortune  would  be  shared  together. 

1 6.  The  legions  enter  Pts'idia,  Here  they  suffer  greatly  from  lack 
of  water.  The  situation  of  the  army  is  'pitiable  and  dangerous 
in  the  extreme. 

For  three  days,  as  has  been  said,  they  tarried  in  that  place,  a  period  of 
rest  very  much  needed  by  themselves  and  their  horses.  Then  at  the  call 
of  the  trumpet,  they  once  more  made  ready  to  continue  the  pilgrimage 

It  is  not  certain  that  William  is  here  referring  to  oral  tradition.  Some  modern 
historians,  Prutz  among  them,  have  scouted  the  implication  of  this  statement  that 
any  of  the  participants  were  still  living  in  William’s  time  to  impart  their  oral  recol¬ 
lections  to  him.  William’s  childhood,  however,  was  spent  in  the  Holy  Land  within 
less  than  fifty  years  after  this  battle,  and  at  least  one  participant  in  the  events  of  the 
next  few  months  was  still  living  in  1166,  indeed  writing  history  as  late  as  1164.  This 
was  Caffaro,  the  Genoese  knight,  merchant,  and  historian. 


CAPTURE  OF  NICAEA 


174 

which  they  had  begun.  The  route  led  them  across  the  entire  country  or 
Bithynia  into  Pisidia,  In  the  hope  of  shortening  their  march,  they 
descended  by  chance  into  an  arid  region  which  was  wholly  without 
water.  Here,  overcome  by  the  double  distress  of  intolerable  thirst  and 
extreme  heat,  such  as  is  usual  in  fiery  July,  the  people  began  to  give 
way  in  great  numbers.  According  to  report,  more  than  five  hundred  of 
both  sexes  died  at  that  time,  prostrated  by  their  sufferings  from  thirst 
and  heat.  The  story  relates  further  that,  as  the  result  of  thirst  and  the 
raging  heat,  pregnant  women  brought  forth  their  offspring  prema¬ 
turely,  a  fact  which  no  other  history  has  recorded.^^  Mothers,  in  agony 
of  spirit,  cast  forth  their  babes  into  the  camp,  some  living,  some  dead, 
and  others  in  a  dying  condition.  Other  women,  moved  by  feelings  of 
deeper  humanity,  clasped  their  babes  to  their  breasts  and,  regardless 
of  their  sex,  rolled  themselves  along  the  road  half  nude,  concerned 
rather  with  the  imminent  danger  of  death  than  with  maintaining  the 
respect  due  to  their  womanhood. 

Men  found  that  their  greater  physical  strength  availed  them  but 
little.  Fainting  under  the  heat  and  their  own  exertions,  gasping  for  air 
with  open  mouths  and  distended  nostrils,  they  sought  the  help  of  mois¬ 
ture  as  some  alleviation  from  the  intolerable  thirst,  but  found  it  not. 
Nor  was  mankind  alone  subjected  to  such  tortures.  The  very  beasts 
who  bore  the  baggage,  and  all  other  animals  as  well,  with  parched 
vitals  refused  their  usual  obedience.  Delicate  birds,  soaring  hawks  and 
falcons,  with  which  the  nobility  is  wont  to  take  delight  when  hunting 
and  hawking,  breathed  forth  their  lives  in  the  hands  of  their  masters, 
notwithstanding  the  care  lavished  upon  them.  Keen-scented  dogs 
trained  for  hunting,  the  pets  of  their  lords,  deserted  the  masters  whom 
they  had  ever  faithfully  followed  and,  panting  from  thirst,  succumbed 
all  along  the  route.  Most  serious  of  all,  the  faithful  steeds,  companions 
in  battle,  on  whom  their  masters  relied  for  their  own  safety  and  who 
formerly  gloried  in  their  state  with  prancing  hoof  and  gleaming  teeth, 
gave  way  like  common  beasts  of  burden,  under  the  torture  of  heat  and 
thirst. 

At  last  the  Father  of  all  pity  and  the  God  of  all  consolation  merci¬ 
fully  came  to  the  relief  of  these  sufferers  from  lack  of  water.  A  river 
eagerly  desired  and  long  sought  was  found,  and  to  its  waters  with  pas- 

Derived  from  Albert  of  Aix — this  statement  indicates  William’s  conscious  use  of 
a  comparative  method  in  arriving-  at  his  facts. 


CAPTURE  OF  NICAEA 


175 

sionate  longing  the  pilgrims  ran.  They  vied  with  one  another  In  their 
haste  to  reach  it.  But  when  this  water  so  greatly  desired  was  found, 
they  fell  into  even  greater  danger.  For  they  drank  of  it  too  freely,  and 
many  who  had  survived  the  peril  of  thirst  now  showed  so  little  self- 
control — a  fault  under  such  conditions — ^that,  through  the  very  abun¬ 
dance  of  water,  they  met  the  death  which  they  had  before  escaped. 
Not  only  men  but  many  beasts  of  burden  also  perished  in  this  way. 

Finally,  by  the  help  of  God,  they  were  rescued  from  these  dangers 
and  came  down  into  a  very  rich  and  fertile  land  near  Antioch  the 
Lesser,  the  well-known  capital  of  Pisidia.  This  was  a  most  delightful 
region  with  streams,  woods,  and  pastures,  and  there  in  green  fields 
they  made  their  camp. 

17.  Some  of  the  leaders  se  far  ate  from  the  rest  and  ravage  the 
surrounding  country.  I^he  duke  narrowly  escafes  death  in  an 
encounter  with  a  hear. 

At  this  place,  for  the  first  time,  some  of  the  chiefs  and  their  forces 
purposely  withdrew  from  the  main  army.  The  first  to  do  this  was  Bald¬ 
win,  the  duke^s  brother.  With  him  went  Peter,  count  of  Stenayj  his 
brother,  Reinard,  count  of  Toul;  Baldwin  du  Bourg^  and  Gilbert  de 
Montclair.  They  took  with  them  seven  hundred  knights  and  several 
companies  of  infantry.  The  second  to  depart  was  Tancred.  He  was  ac¬ 
companied  by  Richard  of  the  Principate,  Robert  of  Anzi,  and  several 
other  noblemen  with  a  force  of  five  hundred  knights  and  some  foot 
soldiers. 

The  purpose  of  all  these  knights  was  one  and  the  same :  namely,  to 
reconnoiter  the  routes,  explore  the  surrounding  country,  and  try  their 
fortune.  They  were  then  to  report  to  the  leaders  who  had  sent  them 
all  that  had  happened  both  as  to  time  and  place,  that  the  army  might 
proceed  with  more  prudence  and  safety.  At  first  on  leaving  the  camp 
they  kept  to  the  royal  highway.  They  passed  through  the  neighboring- 
cities  of  Iconium  and  Heraclea  and  then,  turning  to  the  right,  began 
to  hasten  toward  the  coast. 

In  the  meanwhile,  the  duke  and  the  other  leaders  who  had  remained 
at  the  camp,  attracted  by  the  delightful  surroundings  and  the  close 

These  cities  were  a  considerable  distance  apart.  It  is  possible  that  William  was 
here  the  victim  of  a  copyist’s  error,  the  word  Finimine^  the  chronicler’s  name  for 
Philomelium,  having  become  fnitimas  which  William  here  uses.  Philomelium  was  the 
first  of  the  three  cities  on  this  line  of  march.  William  refers  to  it  later. 


CAPTURE  OF  NICAEA 


176 

vicinity  of  the  woodsj  went  into  the  forest  to  hunt.  For  in  the  midst  of 
their  strenuous  labors,  they  felt  the  need  of  some  recreation  and  de¬ 
sired  to  withdraw  even  for  a  short  time  from  the  consuming  cares 
which  constantly  beset  them.  On  entering  the  forest,  different  interests 
led  them  in  diverse  ways,  and  various  adventures  befell  them. 

The  duke,  who  had  gone  into  the  wood  for  exercise  and  recreation, 
encountered  by  chance  a  huge  bear  of  ferocious  appearance.  It  was 
fiercely  pursuing  a  poor  pilgrim  laden  with  wood.  The  latter  was  striv¬ 
ing  in  vain  to  find  a  refuge  from  his  pursuer.  He  was  calling  loudly 
for  help  in  his  imminent  danger,  when  the  duke  happened  to  appear. 
Ever  full  of  sympathy  for  his  brethren,  he  quickly  rushed  to  the  as¬ 
sistance  of  the  sufferer.  As  soon  as  the  beast  caught  sight  of  the  duke, 
who  was  in  the  act  of  raising  his  sword  to  strike,  it  at  once  spurned  its 
former  victim  and  hurled  itself  with  teeth  and  claws  upon  the  braver 
foe.  His  horse  was  seriously  wounded  j  nevertheless,  the  duke,  now 
necessarily  on  foot,  attacked  the  bear  with  his  sword.  The  beast,  roaring 
horribly,  met  him  with  open  jaws.  It  scorned  alike  the  perseverence 
and  the  sword  of  the  duke  as  of  no  account  and  tried  to  grapple  with 
him.  As  the  animal  charged,  the  duke  drove  it  back  with  his  sword  and 
endeavored  with  all  his  might  to  give  it  a  deadly  thrust.  The  bear 
avoided  the  weapon,  however,  and,  clasping  the  duke  in  its  arms,  tried 
to  throw  him  to  the  ground  that,  while  he  lay  helpless  beneath  it,  it 
might  more  easily  tear  him  to  pieces  with  teeth  and  claws.  But  the 
illustrious  soldier  clung  to  his  sword,  and,  as  he  was  a  man  of  great 
strength,  he  seized  the  monster  with  his  left  hand  and  with  the  right 
plunged  his  sword  up  to  the  hilt  in  the  side  of  the  struggling  beast. 
This  caused  its  death.  The  duke  had  won  a  bloody  victory,  however, 
for  he  was  seriously  wounded  in  the  leg.  Prostrated  by  his  wound,  he 
lay  on  the  ground,  so  weakened  by  loss  of  blood  that  he  could  not  rise. 
The  cries  of  the  poor  man  who  had  escaped  death  by  the  duke’s  help, 
at  last  notified  the  legions  of  the  accident.  All  the  people  ran  to  the 
spot  where  the  brave  hero,  the  defender  of  the  armies,  was  said  to  be 
lying  wounded.  He  was  placed  on  a  litter,  and  amid  the  tearful  lamen¬ 
tations  of  all,  the  other  leaders  bore  him  to  the  camp.  Surgeons  were 
summoned,  and  it  was  hoped  that  through  their  zealous  efforts  and 
the  use  of  proper  remedies  he  might  be  restored  to  health.^® 

This  story,  derived  from  Albert,  is  usually  listed  among"  the  legendary  epi¬ 
sodes  of  Godfrey’s  career.  William  does  not  accept  all  of  Albert’s  legends  about  God¬ 
frey,  though  this  one  apparently  seemed  probable  to  him. 


CAPTURE  OF  NICAEA 


177 


18.  The  coiifit  of  T.  oulouse  ts  sick  ufito  dcdth,  'JThc  ciTwy  cvosscs 
Lycaonia  and  arrives  at  Marash*  The  wife  of  BaldwtUy  the 
duke^s  brother y  dies. 

Just  at  this  time,  Raymond,  count  of  Toulouse,  a  magnificent  man  of 
great  renown,  had  been  seized  with  a  serious  illness  and  was  likewise 
being  borne  in  a  litter.  So  sick  was  he  that,  when  placed  on  the  ground 
in  anticipation  of  his  death,  he  was  barely  breathing.  Accordingly, 
William,  bishop  of  Orange,  a  man  of  revered  life,  performed  the  rites 
due  to  the  souls  of  the  faithful,  as  for  one  already  dead.^^ 

Deprived  as  it  were  of  the  counsels  of  two  such  great  men,  the  le¬ 
gions  almost  despaired  of  continuing  their  pilgrimage  in  fulfillment 
of  their  vows.  Gravely  concerned  over  the  condition  of  their  leaders, 
all,  as  with  one  mind  dissolved  in  tears,  besought  the  Lord  to  restore 
them  to  health.  During  the  celebration  of  the  divine  offices,  prayers 
were  offered  on  behalf  of  the  two  chiefs  by  that  entire  pilgrim  people. 
The  God  of  all  pity  graciously  listened  to  their  supplications  and  vows. 
He  restored  their  leaders  to  good  health  and  granted  with  divine  favor 
the  prayers  of  His  worshipping  people. 

After  crossing  Pisidia,  they  entered  Lycaonia  and  came  to  Iconium, 
the  capital  of  this  region.  This  area  was  barren,  and  the  pilgrims  suf¬ 
fered  desperately  from  lack  of  food.  The  Turks  had  been  warned  in 
advance  that  we  were  coming.  As  they  had  no  confidence  that  any  of 
their  towns  could  resist,  they  despoiled  them  and  laid  waste  the  entire 
district.  Then,  taking  their  wives  and  children,  the  flocks  and  herds, 
and  all  the  rest  of  their  possessions,  they  fled  into  the  impenetrable 
mountains.  Their  only  hope  lay  in  the  possibility  that  the  Christians, 
exhausted  by  lack  of  food,  might  hurry  across  their  country.  This  hope 
did  not  deceive  them,  for  the  pilgrims  fled  from  the  sterile  country 
which  afforded  them  no  food  and  marched  forward  with  all  possible 

4 

haste.  After  leaving  Heraclea,  they  came  to  the  city  of  Marash.  There 
they  encamped  and  made  a  stay  of  three  days. 

At  Marash,  the  wife  of  Baldwin,  Godfrey’s  brother,  whom  her  hus¬ 
band  on  his  departure  had  commended  to  the  care  of  his  brothers,  was 
called  from  this  life.  After  a  long  and  exhausting  illness,  she  fell  asleep 
peacefully  in  the  Lord.  She  was  an  English  lady  of  noble  birth,  Gu- 
tuera  [Godehilde]  by  name,  a  woman  worthy  of  the  highest  praise  for 

This  is  drawn  from  Raymond  d’Aguilers. 


178  CAPTURE  OF  NICAEA 

her  life  and  character.-*^  She  was  buried  with  due  rites  of  honor  at  that 
same  place. 

19.  Tancred  goes  down  into  Cilicia  and  lays  siege  to  Tarsus* 
Baldwin y  the  duke^s  brother y  also  visits  those  same  farts  and 
is  received  with  due  honor* 

Meanwhile,  Tancred,  a  man  worthy  of  praise  in  every  respect,  with 
those  in  his  train  had  laid  siege  to  Tarsus,  the  chief  city  of  that  province. 
He  had  taken  advantage  of  short  routes  and  was  thus  the  first  to  reach 
Cilicia. 

Cilicia  is  one  of  the  provinces  of  the  Orient.  On  the  authority  of  the 
ancients,  the  province  of  Antiochena  is  called  the  diocese  of  the  Orient. 
Cilicia  is  bounded  on  the  east  by  Coelesyria,  on  the  west  by  Isauria,  on 
the  north  by  the  Taurus  range,  and  on  the  south  by  the  Cyprian  or 
Aegean  sea.  It  contains  within  its  boundaries  two  capital  cities :  namely. 
Tarsus,  fatherland  and  birthplace  of  the  teacher  of  the  Gentiles,  of 
which  we  are  now  speaking,  and  Anavarza,  each  with  its  dependent 
cities.  Hence,  there  are  said  to  be  two  Cilicias,  Prima  and  Secunda. 

The  reputed  founder  of  Tarsus  was  Tharsis,  the  second  son  of  Ja- 
pham,  the  son  of  Japhet,  who,  according  to  ancient  traditions,  was  the 
third  son  of  Noah.  As  a  proof  of  this  is  offered  the  fact  that  the  city 
bears  the  name  of  the  founder.  Solinus,  however,  has  a  different  'opin¬ 
ion  about  the  founder  and,  in  the  forty-third  chapter  of  the  De  memo- 
rabilibusy  he  writes  as  follows:  “Cilicia  possesses  Tarsus,  mother  of 
cities,  which  was  founded  by  Perseus,  the  noble  son  of  Danae.  The 
river  Cydnus  divides  it  into  two  parts.  Some  authorities  say  that  this 
stream  rushes  down  in  a  precipitous  torrent  from  the  Taurus  range, 
while  others  claim  that  it  has  its  origin  in  the  Hydaspes  river.”  There 

Albert  and  William  both  allude  to  Baldwin’s  wife  as  a  noble  Englishwoman. 
According  to  Rey,  however,  Baldwin’s  first  wife  was  of  Norman,  not  of  English 
origin.  W.  Morris,  on  the  other  hand,  believes  that  Albert  and  William  are  justified 
by  the  fact  that  both  her  father  and  her  first  husband  lived  many  years  in  England 
and  that  she  may  well  have  spent  most  of  her  early  life  there  (see  W.  Morris,  Britain 
and  the  Holy  Land  .  .  .  Unpublished  thesis,  University  of  Minnesota,  1940).  Her 
name  is  variously  written  by  the  chroniclers,  Gertrude  and  Ginievre  being  preferred 
by  modern  writers.  She  is  identified  as  Godehilde,  daughter  of  Ralph  II,  seigneur  of 
Toeny  and  Conches.  She  had  separated  from  her  first  husband,  Robert  de  Beaumont, 
count  of  Meulant.  Her  marriage  with  Baldwin  was  her  second  marriage  (see  Sieur 
Charles  du  Fresne  DuCange,  Les  Families  d^OutremeVy  ed,  E.  G.  Rey). 

This  passage  is  numbered  38  in  the  edition  by  Mommsen.  William  seems  to 
have  had  a  version  of  the  Polyhistor  of  Solinus  different  from  the  one  edited  by 
Mommsen.  (See  Th.  Mommsen,  ed.,  C.  Julii  Solini  collectanea  rerum  memorabiliumJ) 


CAPTURE  OF  NICAEA 


179 

may  be  some  truth  in  both  stories,  namely,  that  Tharsis  founded  it,  and 
that  later  Perseus  restored  and  enlarged  it. 

Tancred  and  his  men  carried  on  the  siege  for  several  days,  when  he 
forced  the  citizens  by  threats  and  bland  words  to  make  this  arrange¬ 
ment,  namely,  that  his  standard  should  be  carried  into  the  city  and 
placed  over  one  of  the  higher  towers  as  a  sign  that  they  intended  to 
surrender.  They  made  the  condition,  however,  that  he  should  protect 
them  until  Bohemond  and  the  main  army  came  and  in  the  interim 
should  not  compel  them  against  their  will  to  move  from  their  homes 
or  to  leave  their  estates.  On  these  terms  they  agreed  to  surrender  the 
city  quietly  to  Bohemond  on  his  arrival.  This  arrangement  seemed 
good  to  Tancred,  and  he  accepted  it. 

The  population  of  this  city,  as  of  all  the  rest  of  the  region,  was 
Christian.  It  was  composed  of  Armenians  and  Greeks,  with  the  excep¬ 
tion  of  a  few  [Turks]  who  were  experienced  in  arms  and  held  mili¬ 
tary  authority.  These  had  charge  of  the  fortifications  and  oppressed 
the  people  with  harsh  domination.  The  faithful  were  not  allowed  to 
bear  arms  but  devoted  all  their  attention  to  trade  and  agriculture. 

Meanwhile,  Baldwin,  the  duke’s  brother,  who  with  those  in  his 
company  had  followed  out-of-the-way  routes,  had  suffered  greatly 
from  want  of  food.  Finally  after  many  circuitous  wanderings,  he  came 
by  chance  to  the  top  of  a  mountain.  From  this  height  he  was  able  to 
obtain  a  view,  uninterrupted  as  far  as  the  sea,  of  Cilicia  and  its  cities 
spread  out  below  him. 

When  Baldwin  discovered  that  there  was  a  camp  around  Tarsus,  he 
began  to  have  misgivings  about  his  route,  for  he  supposed  that  these 
were  the  tents  of  the  enemy.  Nevertheless,  anxious  to  learn  what  the 
region  was  and  whose  camp  he  had  seen  from  afar,  with  his  usual  cour¬ 
age  he  led  his  company  down  into  the  plain.  Tancred  also  had  been 
notified  by  the  lookouts  whom  he  had  stationed  at  high  points,  and  he 
too  was  on  his  guard  against  possible  wiles  of  the  enemy.  He  at  once 
summoned  his  comrades  and  took  arms,  for  he  believed  that  these  were 
hostile  forces  coming  to  the  aid  of  the  city.  He  shouted  encouragement 
to  his  men  and  marched  out  against  the  advancing  troops  with  stand¬ 
ards  raised.  His  spirit  was  undaunted,  for  his  faith  was  in  God.  But 
as  the  two  armies  approached  and  saw  each  other  at  close  range  it  was 
discovered  that  these  were  not  the  arms  of  an  enemy.  Both  companies 
therefore  drew  near  each  other  with  confidence  and  exchanged  mutual 


i8o 


CAPTURE  OF  NICAEA 


embraces.  Then,  after  pleasant  interchange  of  familiar  conversation, 
they  joined  forces  and  proceeded  to  the  city  to  continue  the  siege.  Tan- 
cred  received  them  with  affection  and  hospitality,  and  that  night  a 
noble  feast  was  held,  the  viands  for  which  were  supplied  from  the 
flocks  and  herds  which  had  been  driven  in  from  the  surrounding 
country. 

20.  Baldiuln  demands  that  Tancred^ s  standard  be  torn  down 
from  the  citadel.  He  raises  his  own  in  its  flace.  Tancred  re¬ 
tires  in  anger.  Guelf  seizes  Adana. 

In  the  morning,  Baldwin  and  his  comrades  perceived  that  Tancred^s 
banner  had  been  placed  on  the  highest  tower  of  the  city.  Immediately 
the  pangs  of  jealousy  laid  hold  on  them.  They  forgot  the  professions 
of  love  which  they  had  made  while  they  were  marching  along  peace¬ 
fully  like  own  brothers,  professions  which  one  and  all  had  resolved 
should  be  kept  forever.  They  were  angry  that  Tancred  had  dared  to 
raise  his  own  standard  over  the  city  while  other  more  powerful  leaders 
were  present  with  far  more  troops. 

Tancred  was  a  modest  man  and  wished  to  calm  their  wrath.  He 
denied  that  the  raising  of  his  standard  was  intended  as  an  insult  to 
them.  He  said  that  he  had  entered  into  this  agreement  with  the  citizens 
by  virtue  of  his  own  valor,  before  the  arrival  of  the  chiefs  and  before 
there  was  any  hope  of  their  coming.  Instigated  by  his  companions, 
however,  who  urged  this  course  with  all  their  might,  Baldwin  paid  no 
attention  to  the  merits  of  the  case.  On  the  contrary,  carried  by  his  own 
feelings  far  beyond  the  limits  of  discretion,  he  exasperated  Tancred 
by  his  insolent  words.  His  arrogance  brought  the  matter  to  such  a  pass 
that  they  were  on  the  point  of  turning  their  weapons  against  one  an¬ 
other  for  mutual  slaughter.  Finally  Baldwin  called  the  citizens  to  him 
and  publicly  threatened  that  unless  they  pulled  down  Tancred’s  stand¬ 
ard  and  raised  his  own  in  its  stead,  he  would  abandon  the  city  and  all 
the  adjacent  suburbs  to  destruction,  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  Tancred 
had  promised  them  immunity. 

The  citizens  perceived  that  Baldwin  was  a  man  of  far  greater  prow- 
ess  and  had  more  troops  than  had  Tancred.  Under  the  same  form  of 
treaty,  therefore,  and  the  same  terms  which  they  had  formerly  made 
with  Tancred,  they  pulled  down  his  flag  and  on  the  same  height  raised 
that  of  Baldwin.  Overwhelmed  by  an  act  of  such  injustice,  Tancred 
burned  with  righteous  indignation  j  nevertheless,  with  wise  counsel 


CAPTURE  OF  NICAEA  i8i 

and  pious  long-suffering,  he  controlled  his  feelings.  Then,  fearing  lest 
a  dangerous  dissension  might  arise  among  the  forces  of  the  faithful, 
he  broke  camp  and  retired  to  a  neighboring  city  called  Adana.  When 
he  arrived  there,  however,  he  was  not  permitted  to  enter.  For  a  certain 
Guelf  of  the  Burgundian  nation  had  seized  that  clty.^^  He  with  others 
had  separated  from  the  main  army  and  drawn  a  great  throng  of  people 
to  his  standard.  Chance  brought  him  to  Adana,  where  he  drove  out  the 
Turks  and  took  possession  by  force. 

When  Tancred  learned  that  this  city  had,  by  the  will  of  God,  fallen 
into  the  power  of  our  people,  he  sent  messengers  to  Guelf  and  besought 
him  to  unbar  the  gates  for  himself  and  his  people.  They  desired  to 
lodge  there  and  to  purchase  the  necessaries  of  life.  The  envoys  were 
admitted  and  everything  needful  for  Tancred  and  his  horses  as  well 
was  furnished  in  ample  quantity,  some  free,  the  rest  at  a  fixed  price. 
For  Guelf  had  found  the  place  full  of  gold  and  silver,  flocks  and  herds, 

grain,  wine,  and  oil,  in  fact  overflowing  with  every  good  thing. 

» 

21.  Tancred  takes  fossession  by  force  of  Mamistra^  a  city  in 
that  same  district. 

At  break  of  day,  Tancred  left  the  city  with  all  his  company  and 
marched  at  a  rapid  pace  along  the  royal  highway  to  Mamistra.  This 
was  one  of  the  splendid  cities  of  the  same  province,  noted  for  its  wall 
and  towers  and  also  for  its  large  population.  Its  delightful  situation, 
fertile  fields,  and  rich  soil  also  gave  it  prestige.  Near  Mamistra,  Tan¬ 
cred  established  his  camp.  He  at  once  assailed  the  place  and  kept  up 
such  a  continual  series  of  assaults  and  onslaughts  that,  within  a  few 
days,  by  the  help  of  God  he  took  the  city  by  force  and  slew  the  infidels 
who  lived  there.  A  vast  amount  of  riches  and  quantities  of  provisions 
of  every  description  were  found  there.  All  these  Tancred  divided 
among  his  followers  in  such  portions  as  the  services  of  each  deserved. 
Thus  his  entire  company  was  enriched.  The  great  abundance  of  food 
available  here  well  repaid  the  pilgrims  for  the  privations  which  they 
had  previously  endured.  In  the  meantime,  while  they  were  satisfying 

Ralph  of  Caen,  intimate  friend  and  panegyrist  of  Tancred,  states  that  Adana 
was  held  by  an  Armenian  named  ‘^Ursinus.”  Hagenmeyer  believes  that  this  Latin 
word  for  bear  might  easily  have  led  oral  tradition  to  substitute  wolf  (guelf)  and 
hence  started  the  story  which  Albert  wrote  and  William  repeats  (H.  Hagenmeyer,  ed., 
Anonymi  gesta  Francorum  et  aliorum  Hterosolymitanorum^  p.  293,  note  66).  Nichol¬ 
son,  however,  prefers  Chalandon’s  identification  of  Ursinus  as  Oshin,  lord  of  Lampron 
(R.  L.  Nicholson,  Tancredy  p.  48,  note  2). 


i82 


CAPTURE  OF  NICAEA 


their  own  physical  needs  with  rest  and  food,  they  allowed  their  horses 
and  all  the  beasts  of  burden  to  graze  at  will. 

22.  Baldwin  takes  Tarsus,  By  an  unjortunate  mishafy  three 
hundred  ChAstians  die  before  the  city  gate. 

After  Tancred’s  departure,  Baldwin  repeatedly  admonished  the  peo¬ 
ple  of  Tarsus.  Mingling  vigorous  threats  with  his  warnings,  he  ordered 
them  to  throw  open  the  gates  and  admit  his  forces.  For  it  seemed  to 
him  disgraceful  that  he  should  thus  waste  time  and  sit  there  idly  doing 
nothing  until  the  army  arrived.  The  citizens  feared  that  if  they  refused 
to  obey,  he  would  attack  the  city  at  close  range,  for  they  had  seen  that 
Tancred  could  not  withstand  him.  They  had  but  slight  confidence  in 
their  own  strength,  so  they  made  of  necessity  a  virtue,  opened  the 
gates,  and  admitted  Baldwin  and  his  entire  force.  They  assigned  two 
towers  for  his  use,  which  he  was  to  hold  for  the  time  being.  In  the 
meanwhile,  the  rest  of  his  people  were  lodged  in  the  homes  of  the 
faithful  throughout  the  city.  The  Turks  who  still  held  the  city,  how¬ 
ever,  as  yet  retained  possession  of  the  other  towers.  They  were  more 
in  number  and  still  held  without  dispute  the  greater  part  of  the  city 
fortifications,  yet  they  were  suspicious  of  the  company  of  Christians 
whom  they  had  admitted.  Since  they  had  no  hope  of  gaining  assistance, 
however,  they  were  seeking  an  opportunity  of  stealthily  leaving  with 
their  wives  and  children  and  all  their  substance. 

That  same  night,  three  hundred  men  belonging  to  Bohemond’s  ex¬ 
pedition,  who  were  on  their  way  to  join  Tancred,  happened  to  reach 
Tarsus.  By  Baldwin's  orders,  they  were  refused  entrance  to  the  city. 
Wearied  by  their  long  march,  destitute  of  necessary  supplies,  they 
earnestly  begged  for  lodgings  and  a  market.  The  pilgrims  of  lesser 
rank  within  the  city  sympathized  with  these,  their  fellow  pilgrims,  and 
earnestly  prayed  that  they  be  admitted.  The  request  was  not  granted, 
however,  for  they  were  said  to  be  members  of  Bohemond^s  expedition 
who  were  hastening  to  the  aid  of  Tancred.  Although  they  could  not 
go  outside,  the  Christians  within  the  city  were  not  lacking  in  brotherly 
feelings.  They  lowered  baskets  full  of  bread  and  wine  in  skins  from  the 
wall  by  ropes  and  thus  supplied  those  outside  with  sufficient  food  to 
enable  them  to  pass  the  night.  So,  forced  to  remain  outside,  these  men 
established  themselves  before  the  city  gates  and  rested  as  well  as  they 
could. 


CAPTURE  OF  NICAEA 


183 

That  same  night,  the  Christians  both  within  and  without  the  city 
•  had  surrendered  to  sleep  and  were  enjoying  grateful  repose.  In  the 
deceptive  silence,  the  Turks  and  other  infidel  inhabitants  of  Tarsus 
opened  the  gates  without  a  sound  and  stealthily  departed.  They  took 
with  them  their  wives  and  children,  servants  and  maidservants,  and 
all  their  belongings.  For  they  could  not  feel  quite  at  home  with  the 
guests  whom  they  had  received  and  feared  to  dwell  with  them.  They 
were  entirely  free  to  leave,  for  one  or  two  city  gates  were  still  in  their 
power.  In  order  to  leave  a  bloody  victory  behind  them  for  their  ene¬ 
mies,  however,  they  sent  ahead  their  packs  and  all  the  heavy  baggage 
and  then  killed,  almost  to  a  man,  those  who  were  lying,  heavy  with 
sleep,  outside  the  gates. 

% 

23.  The  feofle  take  uf  arms  against  Baldwin  but  are  finally 
quieted,  A  fleet  with  men  from  the  West  arrives  at  Tarsus, 

The  next  day,  as  soon  as  it  was  fully  light,  the  Christians  who  had 
slept  inside  the  city  arose  and  found  it  deserted.  Astonished  at  the 
enemy^s  noiseless  flight,  they  searched  the  walls  and  entrances  to  dis¬ 
cover,  if  possible,  whence  they  had  departed.  While  they  were  care¬ 
fully  scrutinizing  every  nook  and  corner,  they  discovered  the  massacre 
which  the  departing  Turks  had  wrought  on  the  servants  of  Christ. 
Deepest  sorrow  and  well-deserved  grief  came  upon  them,  and  forth¬ 
with  they  gave  themselves  over  to  lamentations.  Then  the  men  of  the 
second  rank  stood  apart  from  the  rest  and  took  up  arms  against  Bald¬ 
win  and  the  more  important  leaders.  For  they  imputed  to  them  the 
death  and  destruction  of  the  brethren  because  they  had  refused  to 
their  fellow  pilgrims  the  grace  of  hospitality,  a  right  which  is  justly 
due  to  all  who  are  needy.  Hence,  moved  with  righteous  resentment, 
the  people  rushed  with  hostile  intent  upon  their  chiefs.  If  the  latter 
had  not  withdrawn  to  the  highest  towers,  the  massacre  wrought  out- 
side  would  have  been  avenged  in  about  equal  numbers  on  the  persons 
of  the  leaders.  Finally,  Baldwin  perceived  that  the  disturbance  which 
had  arisen  among  the  people  from  a  just  cause  was  increasing,  and  he 
began  to  consider  anxiously  how  to  excuse  himself  to  the  people  that 
the  tumult  might  be  quieted.  He  obtained  a  slight  respite  and  de¬ 
manded  silence.  The  crowd  of  foot  people,  still  holding  their  arms, 
were  quieted  a  little.  Baldwin  now  began  to  protest  his  innocence.  He 
declared  on  oath  that  the  only  reason  why  he  had  barred  the  pilgrims 


CAPTURE  OF  NICAEA 


184 

from  the  city  was  that  he  had  faithfully  promised  to  admit  no  one  until 
the  duke  arrived.  Thereupon,  through  the  flattering  and  persuasive 
words  of  certain  nobles,  so  essential  at  such  a  time  and  place,  the  people 
were  somewhat  appeased  and  a  reconciliation  was  effected. 

Thus  the  quarrel  was  settled.  They  had  remained  there  in  full  tran¬ 
quillity  for  several  days,  when  lo,  a  fleet  was  seen  on  the  sea  about 
three  miles  away  from  Tarsus.  At  sight  of  this,  both  knights  and  foot 
soldiers  eagerly  hastened  down  to  the  sea.  They  talked  with  the  new¬ 
comers  from  the  shore  and  learned  from  their  own  account  that  they 
were  Christians.  Asked  as  to  their  country,  they  answered  that  they 
were  from  Flanders,  Holland,  and  Frisia,  in  which  parts  they  had  for 
eight  years  carried  on  piracy.  At  last  pricked  in  heart  and  repenting  of 
their  sins,  they  had  sailed  into  this  sea  on  their  way  to  Jerusalem  for 
the  sake  of  prayer.  When  our  people  learned  that  they  were  men  of 
the  faith,  they  invited  them  to  enter  the  port.  Right  hands  were  clasped 
in  greeting  and  the  kiss  of  peace  exchanged.  Then  after  the  fleet  had 
been  stationed  in  a  safe  harborage,  the  men  themselves  were  conducted 
to  Tarsus. 

Their  chief  was  one  Guinemer  from  the  district  of  Boulogne  in  the 
land  of  Count  Eustace,  the  father  of  Lord  Godfrey.^^  As  soon  as  Gui¬ 
nemer  recognized  Baldwin  as  the  son  of  his  lord,  he  left  the  fleet  and 
arranged  to  accompany  him  to  Jerusalem.  He  was  very  rich  and  had 
become  still  wealthier  from  that  despicable  calling  which  he  had  so 
long  practiced.  He  had  many  people  in  his  service,  most  of  whom  ac¬ 
companied  him  when  he  decided  to  follow  Baldwin.  A  detachment  of 
five  hundred  men  selected  from  the  following  of  the  two  commanders 
was  thereupon  left  as  a  sufficient  protection  for  the  city,  and  all  the  rest 
made  preparations  to  set  forth  to  test  fortune. 

24.  Ajter  taking  TarsuSy  Baldwin  marches  on  to  Mamistra,  A 
combat  takes  flace  between  Tancred  and  Baldwin,  The 
two  are  finally  reconciled. 

After  leaving  Tarsus,  the  army  kept  to  the  royal  highway  until  Ma- 
mistra  was  reached.  Only  a  short  time  before,  as  has  been  related, 
Tancred  had  seized  this  place  by  force  of  arms  and  was  now  holding  it 

This  episode  of  Guinemer  and  his  pirates  has  also  been  viewed  with  some  sus¬ 
picion.  Certain  details  in  the  story  as  told  by  Albert  and  followed  by  William  are  ob¬ 
viously  legendary,  and  one  or  two  in  conflict  with  attested  facts.  The  participation  of 
fleets  from  the  Channel  ports  is  however  abundantly  attested  by  other  sources.  Albert 
is  undoubtedly  guilty  of  embellishing  the  original  facts  with  fanciful  details  not  all 


CAPTURE  OF  NICAEA 


185 

with  a  strong  hand.  Well  aware  that  his  forces  would  not  be  received 
in  the  city,  Baldwin  lodged  them  outside  in  the  surrounding  gardens. 

When  Tancred  heard  that  Baldwin  had  arrived  and  had  established 
his  camp  near  by,  he  was  extremely  angry.  The  memory  of  the  wrongs 
which  he  had  so  unjustly  suffered  from  that  man  recurred  to  his  mind, 
and  his  spirit  burned  within  him.  Furious  with  wrath,  he  called  his  men 
to  arms,  determined  to  repay  in  the  same  coin  the  evil  treatment  which 
he  had  received.  A  troop  of  bowmen  was  dispatched  to  wound  the 
^horses  which  had  been  turned  out  into  the  pastures,  or  to  capture  and 
drive  them  off.  Tancred  himself  with  five  hundred  mailed  knights  fell 
upon  Baldwin’s  camp  j  he  surprised  the  men  off  guard  and  before  they 
could  seize  their  arms  nearly  annihilated  them.  They  took  up  their 
weapons,  however,  and  prepared  to  resist.  A  fierce  struggle  ensued. 
Both  sides  fought  furiously  as  if  they  had  been  the  bitterest  of  enemies. 
Many  fell  and  some  prisoners  on  both  sides  were  taken.  But  Tancred’s 
forces  both  in  strength  and  numbers  were  unequal  to  those  of  Baldwin. 
Finally  unable  longer  to  endure  the  stress  of  battle,  he  was  forced  to 
give  way  and  retreated  to  the  city. 

Between  Baldwin’s  camp  and  the  town  flowed  a  river  spanned  by  a 
very  narrow  bridge.  This  formed  such  a  serious  hindrance  to  Tancred’s 
forces  in  their  hurried  flight  to  the  city  that  many,  knights  and  foot 
soldiers  alike,  were  killed.  Others,  however,  made  good  their  escape 
into  the  town.  Perchance  even  greater  losses  might  have  resulted, 
since  both  sides  were  burning  with  hatred,  had  not  the  coming  of  night 
put  an  end  to  the  fighting. 

Among  the  followers  of  Tancred  captured  were  the  noble  and  dis¬ 
tinguished  men,  Richard  of  the  Principate,  a  near  kinsman,  and  Robert 
of  Anzi.  It  was  mainly  due  to  the  advice  and  instigation  of  these  nobles 
that  Tancred  had  resorted  to  the  revenge  just  described.  One  distin¬ 
guished  prisoner  of  high  rank,  Gilbert  de  Montclair,  was  captured 
from  Baldwin’s  following.  The  absence  of  these  leaders  caused  much 
disturbance  in  the  ranks  on  both  sides,  for  it  was  believed  that  they  had 
fallen  in  the  day’s  conflict. 

When  dawn  appeared  the  next  day,  feelings  of  hatred  began  to 
subside,  and  anger  was  somewhat  assuaged.  Thanks  to  divine  mercy, 
they  once  more  remembered  their  profession  and  returned  to  their 


of  which  are  accepted  by  William  (see  C.  W.  David,  Robert  Curthose-y  pp.  237-38, 
and  H.  Hagenmeyer,  Efisttdae  et  cJiartae  ad  historiam  frimi  belli  sacri  sfectanteSj  p. 
359,  note  7). 


i86 


CAPTURE  OF  NICAEA 


right  minds.  Messengers  were  dispatched  to  ask  for  terms  of  peace  j 
the  captives  on  both  sides  were  returned  j  and  to  the  mutual  satisfac¬ 
tion  of  both  armies,  the  kiss  of  peace  was  exchanged  and  full  harmony 
restored. 

25*  Baldwin  returns  to  the  main  army,  Tancred  invades  and 
conquers  all  Cilicia.  The  neighboring  rulers  hasten  to  win 
his  javor.  They  ojfer  gifts. 

From  Mamistra,  at  the  demand  of  his  comrades,  Baldwin  returned 
with  all  his  forces  to  the  main  army.  This,  as  has  been  stated,  had  now 
arrived  at  Marash.  He  had  learned  of  the  serious  accident  which  had 
befallen  the  duke  before  Antioch  in  Pisidia  and,  full  of  anxiety  about 
Godfrey’s  safety,  wished  to  ascertain  more  fully  his  real  condition. 

Meanwhile,  Tancred  reinforced  his  own  forces  by  associating  with 
them  the  rest  of  the  people  who  had  come  with  the  fleet.  With  this 
greatly  increased  army,  he  overran  all  Cilicia.  He  took  by  storm  strong¬ 
holds  of  the  enemy  wherever  he  found  them,  burned  them  to  the 
ground,  and  put  all  within  to  the  sword.  The  last  place  to  be  stormed 
was  Alexandria  Minor.  This  also  he  captured,  notwithstanding  its 
desperate  resistance.  'With  this  last  victory  the  entire  region  came  un¬ 
der  his  power. 

The  news  that  Tancred  was  subduing  the  entire  country  with  a 
strong  and  numerous  force  soon  reached  the  Turkish  and  Armenian 
satraps  who  dwelt  in  the  mountains.  Terror  seized  them  lest  he  ascend 
to  them  also,  conquer  their  cities,  and  enslave  their  people.  In  eager 
rivalry,  they  hastened  to  send  envoys  bearing  immense  gifts  of  gold 
and  silver,  horses,  mules,  and  silken  stuffs.  By  such  liberality  they 
hoped  to  turn  aside  the  wrath  of  this  great  chief,  to  win  his  favor,  and 
obtain  treaties  of  friendship. 

Thus  Tancred  was  successful  in  all  he  undertook,  for  God  was  with 
him.  The  Lord  directed  all  his  works  as  those  of  a  faithful  servant.^^ 

Tancred,  like  Godfrey,  had  become  one  of  the  great  heroes  of  the  First  Crusade 
by  the  time  William  wrote.  None  of  the  contemporary  chronicles,  not  even  that  of 
Ralph  of  Caen,  which  was  virtually  a  panegyric  of  Tancred,  however,  had  por¬ 
trayed  him  as  quite  so  free  from  blemish  as  he  appears  in  this  work.  For  some  reason 
William’s  critical  faculties  cease  to  function  when  he  writes  of  Tancred.  The  story 
of  the  friction  between  Baldwin  and  Tancred  in  this  advance  guard  action  is  treated 
in  detail  by  P.  Gindler,  Graf  Balduin  von  Edessa^  and  by  R.  L.  Nicholson,  Tancred. 


HERE  ENDS  THE  THIRD  BOOK 


THE  FOURTH  BOOK  BEGINS 


CRUSADERS  OVERRUN  NORTHERN  SYRIA 

AND  BEGIN  SIEGE  OF  ANTIOCH 

I.  Baldwifiy  the  duke^ s  brother y  returns  to  the  main  army,  At 
the  suggestion  of  Pakrady  he  again  undertakes  a  campaign. 

He  marches  to  the  north  and  seixes  the  entire  country  as 
far  as  the  Eufhrates, 

While  Tancred  was  thus  valiantly  subjugating  everything  in  Cilicia, 
the  main  army  had  already  reached  Marash.^  Thither  Baldwin  re¬ 
paired  to  visit  his  brother.  As  he  found  Godfrey  convalescent,  he  began 
to  feel  the  fires  of  ambition  once  more.  Kindled  to  rivalry  by  the  uni¬ 
versal  praise  of  Tancred’s  valor,  which  was  everywhere  proclaimed, 
he  gathered  his  comrades  and  determined  to  set  forth  again  on  a  quest 
for  new  adventures.  But  those  whom  he  invited  to  join  him  for  this 
purpose  were  loath  to  accompany  him,  for  they  had  heard  of  the 
haughty  insolence  with  which  he,  relying  on  his  large  following,  had 
treated  Tancred  before  the  walls  of  Tarsus  in  Cilicia.  Practically  every¬ 
one  regarded  his  conduct  as  abominable,  a  judgment  which  his  guilt 
demanded,  and,  if  regard  for  the  duke  had  not  prevented,  Bohemond 
and  his  men  would  not  have  left  unpunished  the  wrong  which  had 
been  done  to  Tancred.  Thus  it  happened  that  Baldwin  found  few 
comrades  to  accompany  him  on  this  expedition.  His  brother,  the  serv¬ 
ant  of  God,  reprimanded  him  severely  for  his  action,  and  he  himself, 
recognizing  his  guilt,  promised  in  all  humility  to  make  fitting  amends 
to  the  noble  Tancred  for  his  offense.  Since  Baldwin  had  erred  at  the 
suggestion  of  another  rather  than  on  his  own  impulse,  and  such  con¬ 
duct  was  altogether  foreign  to  his  character,  he  received  pardon  and 
won  back  the  good  will  of  all.^  In  every  other  respect  he  was  praise¬ 
worthy,  nor  was  there  ever  again  any  report  of  a  similar  nature  against 
him. 

^  October  13,  1097.  The  death  of  Baldwin’s  wife  occurred  during  the  three-day  stay 
at  this  place.  See  Book  III,  note  20. 

^  William  has  supplied  this  account  of  Baldwin’s  reconciliation  with  the  leaders  of 
the  crusade  on  the  basis  of  either  oral  tradition  or  personal  conjecture. 


i88 


CRUSADERS  IN  NORTHERN  SYRIA 


He  had  a  friend,  a  noble  Armenian,  Pancratius  [Pakrad]  by  name,^ 
whose  acquaintance  he  had  made  at  Nicaea,  after  the  latter  had  escaped 
from  the  emperor^s  prison.  This  man  was  always  his  comrade  on  his 
marches.  He  was  a  valiant  warrior,  but  very  tricky  and  of  doubtful 
loyalty.  He  was  constantly  urging  Baldwin  to  assemble  troops  and 
join  him  in  an  expedition  into  the  surrounding  country,  which,  he  said, 
might  easily  be  seized  with  a  small  force.  To  this  Baldwin  at  last  con¬ 
sented.  Accompanied  by  two  hundred  knights  and  not  a  few  people  on 
foot,  he  set  out  under  the  guidance  of  this  Pakrad  toward  the  north. 
Soon  they  entered  a  very  rich  country.  The  majority  of  the  people 
living  in  this  region  were  of  the  Christian  faith,  true  worshippers  of 
God.  The  infidel  inhabitants,  however,  though  few  in  number,  were 
still  in  possession  of  the  fortresses.  They  treated  the  true  believers  as 
they  pleased  and  debarred  them  from  military  service. 

The  Christian  cultivators  of  the  land  abhorred  the  overlordship  of 
the  infidels,  and  as  soon  as  Baldwin  entered  the  region  they  turned 
over  the  fortified  places  to  him.  Thus  within  a  few  days  he  had  gained 
possession  of  the  entire  district  as  far  as  the  great  river  Euphrates.  His 
very  name  became  so  formidable  in  the  country  round  about  that, 
though  no  man  pursued,  the  enemy  voluntarily  deserted  the  fortresses 
and  took  to  flight.  The  mere  presence  of  Baldwin  inspired  courage  and 
the  confidence  which  springs  from  courage  in  the  hearts  of  the  faithful 
who  had  received  him.  Thus,  in  the  words  of  the  prophet:  “One 
[could]  chase  a  thousand,  and  two  put  ten  thousand  to  flight.”  ^ 

Nor  was  it  the  people  alone  who  clung  to  him  thus,  for  the  Christian 
princes  in  those  parts  also  allied  themselves  with  him.  They  cooperated 
heartily  with  him  in  his  undertaking,  furnished  him  with  troops,  and 
rendered  him  devoted  obedience. 

®  Armenian  writers  have  very  little  to  say  about  this  person,  who  occupies  so  much 
space  in  the  accounts  of  Albert  and  William.  Iskenderian  regards  him  as  probably  one 
of  those  Armenians  who  had  become  disaffected  in  the  service  of  the  Greeks  and  had 
possibly  been  imprisoned  {Die  Kreuzfa/irer  und  ihre  B eziehungen  zti  den  armenischen 
N achbarfiirsten  bis  zum  Vnter gauge  der  Grafschaft  Edessa^  pp.  32  if.).  Beaumont  be¬ 
lieves  the  account  of  Albert  and  William  about  Pakrad  to  be  substantially  correct 
(see  A.  A.  Beaumont  Jr.,  “Albert  of  Aachen  and  the  County  of  Edessa,”  Munro- 
Crusades^  pp.  105  ff.). 

^  De.  32 :  30. 


CRUSADERS  IN  NORTHERN  SYRIA 


189 


2.  His  jaTne  sfreads  far  and  wide.  He  Is  summoned  hy  the 
citlssens  of  Edessa,  He  crosses  the  Euphrates  and  hastens 
thither  but  falls  into  ambushes  on  the  march.  The  feofle 
of  God  come  out  to  meet  him  and  with  great  rejoicings  es¬ 
cort  him  into  the  city. 

After  some  days  had  elapsed.  Rumor,  issuing  forth,  spread  the  name 
and  deeds  of  this  magnificent  man  far  and  wide  through  the  adjacent 
provinces.  His  valor,  loyalty,  and  persevering  courage  were  lauded  as 
worthy  of  the  highest  praise.  The  report  of  his  fame  reached  the  citi¬ 
zens  of  Edessa.  Soon  the  whole  city  was  filled  with  the  news  that  a 
mighty  leader  had  come  from  the  Christian  army  who  would  be  able 
to  loose  them  completely  from  the  yoke  of  servitude  and  restore  them 
to  freedom.  Thereupon  those  in  charge  of  the  city,  as  well  as  the  elders 
in  whom  the  entire  authority  of  Edessa  was  vested,  sent  an  embassy 
inviting  him  most  earnestly  both  by  letter  and  word  of  mouth  to  come 
to  them. 

Edessa  is  a  famous  city  of  Mesopotamia,  known  also  by  the  name  of 
Rages.  This  is  the  city  to  which  the  elder  Tobit  sent  his  son,  Tobit  the 
Younger,  to  demand  from  Gabelus,  his  kinsman,  ten  talents  of  silver 
which  Tobit  had  loaned  him  as  a  child.  Immediately  after  the  Passion 
of  our  Lord,  the  citizens  of  Edessa  received  the  doctrine  concerning 
salvation  in  Christ  through  Thaddeus,  the  apostle.  They  were  found 
worthy  in  all  respects,  in  accordance  with  the  preaching  of  the  great 
apostle  and  the  letter  of  our  Saviour  which  He  wrote  to  Abgar  their 
king,  as  may  be  read  in  the  first  chapter  of  the  Ecclesiastical  History 
which  Eusebius  of  Caesarea  wrote.®  To  this  teaching  they  held  with 
sincere  faith,  just  as  they  had  received  it  at  first  in  the  time  of  the  apos¬ 
tles.  They  were  under  the  yoke  of  the  infidel  to  this  extent,  that  they 
were  obliged  to  pay  an  annual  tribute  and  tax.  They  were  also  forced 
to  redeem  their  vineyards  and  fields  and  whatever  lands  they  owned 
outside  by  almost  continual  exactions.  Yet  none  except  the  faithful 
dared  to  live  within  the  town.  For  among  all  the  cities  of  that  district 
Edessa  alone  retained  its  original  freedom,  unsullied  by  the  heathen. 
Although  the  enemy  had  long  ago  seized  all  the  surrounding  region, 
Edessa  had  not  been  subjugated,  nor  had  it  suffered  anyone  of  an  alien 
faith  to  dwell  within  its  boundaries.  But  those  living  in  the  neighboring 

®  Eusebius  Hist,  eccl,  1.14. 


CRUSADERS  IN  NORTHERN  SYRIA 


190 

towns  and  fortresses  caused  the  people  of  Edessa  great  annoyance,  for 
they  would  not  permit  the  citizens  to  leave  the  city  or  to  carry  on  busi¬ 
ness  outside, 

A  governor  of  the  Greek  nation  was  in  charge  of  the  city.  He  had 
been  sent  there  as  ruler  at  the  time  when  the  entire  province  had  be¬ 
come  subject  to  the  power  of  Constantinople.®  He  was  now  a  feeble  old 
man,  without  children  of  either  sex.  As  the  Turks  arrived  before  the 
expiration  of  his  term  of  office,  he  was  of  necessity  forced  to  remain 
there.  He  had  continued  to  hold  jurisdiction  over  the  city,  either  be¬ 
cause  he  was  unable  to  return  to  his  own  country  or  because  the  people 
did  not  compel  him  to  give  up  the  government.  He  was,  however,  a 
useless  overlord,  unable  to  protect  his  subjects  from  wrongs  or  to  pro¬ 
cure  them  relief  from  molestation.  By  the  united  action  of  the  citizens, 
therefore,  although  with  the  governor’s  knowledge  and  good  will, 
messengers  were  sent  to  Baldwin,  as  we  have  said,  to  beg  him  to  come 
and  furnish  some  remedy  for  their  ills. 

After  listening  to  the  request  of  both  people  and  elders  and  consult¬ 
ing  with  his  friends,  Baldwin  decided  to  consent  and  made  preparations 
for  the  march.  Accompanied  by  eighty  knights  only,  he  crossed  the 
Euphrates.  The  rest  of  his  followers  were  left  to  guard  the  citadels 
and  towns  on  this  side  the  river,  possessions  which  the  Lord  had 
granted  him. 

Meanwhile,  the  Turks  who  lived  on  the  farther  side  of  the  river  had 
learned  that  he  was  coming  and  had  prepared  ambushes  for  him.  There 
was,  however,  a  fortified  town  on  his  route  ruled  by  a  certain  Arme¬ 
nian,  and  thither  he  withdrew  to  avoid  the  pitfalls  prepared  for  him. 
He  was  kindly  received  by  the  lord  of  the  place  with  gracious  hospi¬ 
tality,  and  there  he  rested  for  two  days,  not  daring  to  proceed.  Then 
the  Turks  who  had  lurked  in  ambush  during  that  time  grew  weary  of 
waiting  longer.  With  standards  raised,  they  suddenly  appeared  with 
a  strong  force  before  the  place  and  began  to  drive  off  cattle  from  the 
pastures  near  by.  As  the  Christians  were  unequal  to  their  adversaries 
both  in  strength  and  numbers,  they  did  not  venture  to  go  out  against 
them  but  remained  in  the  fortress,  and  on  the  third  day  the  Turks 
departed. 

®  Thoros  was  an  Armenian  who  had  governed  Edessa  for  the  Greeks.  When  the 
Turks  captured  the  city,  they  permitted  him  to  continue  as  governor.  With  the  news 
of  the  defeat  of  Qilij  Arslan  and  the  approach  of  the  crusaders,  the  small  garrison 
of  Turkish  troops  was  driven  out,  and  Thoros  ruled  independently.  Both  his  age  and 
the  fact  that  he  was  not  a  military  man  led  him  to  call  in  Baldwin. 


CRUSADERS  IN  NORTHERN  SYRIA 


191 

Baldwin  then  resumed  his  interrupted  march  to  Edessa.  He  was 
received  on  his  arrival  with  much  honor  by  the  governor  of  the  city 
and  with  good  will  by  all.  The  clergy  and  all  the  people  came  out  to 
meet  him,  singing  hymns  and  spiritual  songs  to  the  accompaniment  of 
trumpets  and  drums. 

3.  The  ruler  of  the  city  becomes  jealous  of  Baldwin's  success. 

He  refents  of  Jus  action  and  desires  to  rescind  the  agree¬ 
ment,  OveiTuled  by  the  feoflcy  he  finally  adofts  Baldwin 
as  his  soUy  though  with  treacherous  intent. 

Soon,  however,  the  ruler  who  had  caused  Baldwin  to  be  summoned 
began  to  feel  the  pangs  of  envy.  As  he  silently  pondered  in  his  own 
heart  over  the  honor  and  favor  which  the  people  had  manifested  to¬ 
ward  that  leader  on  his  arrival,  he  longed  to  withdraw  from  the  ar¬ 
rangement  into  which  he  had  entered.  At  the  time  when  the  invitation 
was  sent,  it  had  been  decided  that,  during  the  lifetime  of  the  ruler, 
Baldwin  should  share  equally  with  him  in  all  the  goods,  tribute,  and 
taxes  which  the  city  possessed.  Afterwards,  he  was  to  have  all  without 
reserve.  Now,  however,  the  ruler  desired  to  make  a  different  proposi¬ 
tion.  Baldwin  was  to  furnish  aid  to  the  city  and  its  people  against  the 
oppression  of  the  Turks  and  to  ward  off  their  violence.  In  return,  the 
lord  himself  would  name  what  in  the  opinion  of  an  upright  man  was 
an  honorable  annual  recompense.  Baldwin  scornfully  rejected  this  pro¬ 
posal,  which  seemed  to  imply  that  he  was  to  be  paid  a  wage  for  his 
services  like  any  common  soldier.  He  began  to  make  preparations  to 
return.  But  when  the  citizens  learned  of  this  resolution,  they  hastened 
to  the  governor  and  urgently  insisted  that  he  should  by  no  means  per¬ 
mit  the  departure  of  so  great  a  chief,  a  man  so  essential  to  their  liberty. 
They  demanded  that  he  bind  Baldwin  to  himself  in  accordance  with 
the  provisions  of  the  pact,  that  he  as  well  as  the  whole  city  might  there¬ 
after  enjoy  the  peace  so  greatly  desired. 

In  view  of  the  unanimous  demands  of  both  people  and  elders  and 
the  fervent  affection  which  Baldwin  had  inspired,  the  ruler  felt  that 
it  would  be  dangerous  to  refuse  this  request.  Accordingly,  in  spite  of 
his  misgivings,  he  reluctantly  yielded  assent.  Furthermore,  to  make 
complete  amends  for  his  previous  conduct,  he  adopted  Baldwin  as  his 
son,*^  in  the  presence  of  the  townspeople.  With  due  solemnity  he  de- 

■  ^  Not  all  the  sources  agree  with  this  statement.  Neither  Fulcher  nor  Matthew  of 
Edessa,  who  knew  the  facts,  mentions  this  adoption.  Beaumont,  who  quotes  a  recently 


CRUSADERS  IN  NORTHERN  SYRIA 


192 

dared  him  an  equal  sharer  in  everything  while  he  himself  lived  and 
prodaimed  him  as  his  successor  thereafter.  The  people  rejoiced,  for 
they  felt  that  all  their  hope  of  safety  lay  in  Baldwin.  From  that  time 
they  began  to  wax  bold  under  the  protection  of  their  new  lord.  As  they 
looked  back  with  greater  freedom  on  the  injuries  which  they  had  suf¬ 
fered  from  their  ruler,  they  planned  to  take  revenge,  if  ever  a  suitable 
place  and  time  should  present  itself.  This  the  subsequent  course  of 
events  very  clearly  showed. 

4.  At  the  request  of  the  towns f eo fie y  Baldwin  lays  siege  to 
Samosata,  In  revenge  for  the  great  wrongs  which  he  had 
brought  ufon  theniy  the  citizens  consfire  against  their  in’- 
efficient  lord. 

Near  Edessa  was  the  very  ancient  city  of  Samosata,  famous  for  its 
strong  fortifications.  It  was  ruled  by  an  infidel  of  the  Turkish  race 
called  Balduk,  a  valiant  warrior  but  a  tricky  and  wicked  man.  He  in¬ 
flicted  many  woes  upon  the  citizens  of  Edessa  by  doubling  the  tribute 
and  taxes  on  their  fields  and  burdening  them  with  services.  To  insure 
the  accomplishment  of  these  tasks,  he  was  in  the  habit  of  holding  their 
children  as  hostages.The  latter  were  forced  under  conditions  of  ex¬ 
treme  inhumanity  to  serve  him  like  slaves  with  bricks  and  clay.  Ac¬ 
cordingly,  the  entire  population,  embracing  Baldwin’s  knees  tearfully, 
implored  him  that  he  would  deign  to  protect  them  from  the  tyranny 
of  this  man  and  bring  about  the  restoration  of  their  children  who  were 
thus  forcibly  detained.  Baldwin  listened  graciously  to  this,  the, first 
request  of  his  people,  for  he  hoped  thereby  to  win  their  full  regard. 
He  called  them  together,  furnished  them  with  arms,  and  moved  with 
a  strong  force  against  Samosata. 

For  several  days  he  kept  up  persistent  assaults  upon  the  city.  The 
Turks  within,  however,  confident  in  the  strong  fortifications  of  the 
place,  resisted  strenuously,  and  Baldwin  soon  perceived  that  he  was 
not  accomplishing  anything.  Accordingly,  he  returned  to  Edessa.  He 
left  behind,  however,  knights  in  an  adequately  fortified  place  near  by 
who  were  ordered  to  keep  up  a  continual  warfare  which  would  leave 
the  people  of  Samosata  no  respite. 

The  citizens  of  Edessa  soon  discovered  that  Baldwin  was  a  man  of 

discovered  contemporary  Syrian  history  o£  the  period,  is  inclined  to  doubt  the  adoption 
(Beaumont,  in  Munro-CrusadeSy  pp.  107-8). 


CRUSADERS  IN  NORTHERN  SYRIA 


193 

energy,  successful  in  all  he  undertook.  They  perceived  the  injustice  of 
the  arrangement  by  which  he,  the  liberator  of  the  city  and  the  founder 
of  peace,  a  man  worthy  to  possess  the  whole  and  to  dispose  of  every¬ 
thing  according  to  his  own  pleasure,  was  on  a  par  with  a  man  who  was 
utterly  useless  to  the  city.  They  summoned  Constantine,  a  powerful 
noble  who  possessed  several  well-fortified  castles  on  a  mountain  near 
by,  and,  with  the  consent  of  all  the  people,  proposed  to  kill  their  lord 
and  make  Baldwin  their  ruler  and  sole  master.  They  hated  their  gov¬ 
ernor,  as  he  well  deserved.  He  was  said  to  have  extorted  gold,  silver, 
and  many  precious  objects  from  them  and  to  have  wronged  them 
greatly.  If  anyone  attempted  to  resist,  he  roused  the  hostility  and 
hatred  of  the  Turks  against  that  person  by  bribes  so  that  the  unlucky 
man  had  reason  to  fear  not  only  that  his  vineyards  and  gardens  and 
growing  crops  would  be  cut  down,  his  flocks  and  herds  driven  off,  but 
even  that  his  very  life  might  be  endangered. 


5.  They  slay  the  aforesaid  lord  of  Edessa  and  make  Baldwin 
ruler  over  them*  He  buys  Samosata  at  a  great  frice  from 
Balduky  the  ruler. 

The  citizens  of  Edessa,  in  whose  minds  the  evil  deeds  of  their  ruler 
were  ever  present,  realized  that  through  the  guest  whom  they  had 
received  a  favorable  opportunity  had  come  for  obtaining  the  freedom 
so  long  desired.  In  accordance  with  plans  previously  arranged,  there¬ 
fore,  they  flew  to  arms,  boldly  attacked  the  tower  in  which  their  ruler 
had  his  residence,  and  with  resolute  courage  endeavored  to  overthrow 
it.  The  fury  of  the  populace  and  their  righteous  indignation  against 
him  caused  the  governor  to  fear  for  his  life.  He  summoned  Baldwin, 
and  pouring  out  his  treasures  before  him,  begged  him  to  intercede  on 
his  behalf  with  the  people.  Although  Baldwin,  in  good  faith, ^  willingly 
tried  to  protect  the  ruler  from  harm  at  the  hands  of  the  citizens  and 
to  turn  them  from  their  purpose,  he  soon  perceived  that  his  efforts 
would  be  in  vain,  for  the  people  were  becoming  more  and  more  angry. 
He  returned  to  the  governor,  therefore,  and  earnestly  advised  him  to 
take  whatever  measures  he  could  for  his  life  and  safety.  The  latter,  in 
desperation  vainly  seeking  a  remedy  where  none  existed,  lowered  a 

®  All  the  sources  seem  to  agree  that  Thoros  was  dethroned  and  killed  by  the  Ar¬ 
menians  but  not  all  are  agreed  that  Baldwin  was  not  privy  to  the  conspiracy  (see  dis¬ 
cussion  by  Beaumont,  in  Munro -Crusades,  pp.  109—12,  and  by  Iskenderian,  Die  Kreuz- 
fahrer,  pp.  46-48). 


CRUSADERS  IN  NORTHERN  SYRIA 


194 

rope  from  a  window  and  entrusted  himself  to  it.  Before  he  reached 
the  ground,  however,  he  perished,  pierced  by  a  thousand  arrows.  The 
people  dragged  his  lifeless  body  through  the  place  and  cut  off  his  head, 
but  even  these  measures  scarcely  satisfied  their  animosity.  The  next 
day,^  notwithstanding  Baldwin's  reluctance  and  in  spite  of  his  protesta¬ 
tions,  they  made  him  ruler  over  them  and  took  the  oath  of  fealty  to 
him.  They  then  led  him  with  much  pomp  and  solemnity  into  the 
citadel  of  the  city  and  bestowed  upon  him  all  the  treasures  and  the 
vast  riches  which  their  former  ruler  had  accumulated  during  many 
years.  Thus  the  city  was  restored  to  a  state  of  tranquillity. 

Now  Balduk,  who,  as  we  have  said,  was  the  ruler  of  Samosata,  per¬ 
ceived  that  Baldwin  was  uniformly  successful  and  that  he  was  sub¬ 
jugating  all  the  region.  He  therefore  offered  his  city  for  sale  at  the 
price  of  ten  thousand  pieces  of  gold.  Baldwin  realized  that  the  place 
could  not  easily  be  taken  by  storm  because  of  its  strong  fortifications. 
Therefore,  after  much  deliberation  he  paid  the  huge  sum  demanded 
and  received  the  town.  The  hostages  belonging  to  Edessa  were  also 
recovered,  a  fact  which  added  greatly  to  his  prestige. 

In  accomplishing  this  feat  at  the  very  beginning,  he  won  such  high 
favor  from  the  citizens  of  Edessa  that,  thenceforward,  they  regarded 
him  not  only  as  lord  but  as  father  and  were  ready  to  fight  to  the  death 
for  his  welfare  and  glory. 

6.  He  lays  siege  to  the  city  of  Seruj  and  takes  it  by  storm^ 
thereby  earning  untold  thanks  from  his  feofle. 

There  was  in  the  same  province  near  Edessa  a  city  called  Seruj,  which 
was  likewise  filled  to  overflowing  with  infidels.  The  ruler  of  this  place 
was  a  Turkish  satrap  named  Balas.  He  was  continually  harassing  the 
city  of  Edessa  and  inflicting  grievous  wrong  upon  it.  For  this  reason, 
Baldwin  readily  assented  to  the  entreaties  of  the  citizens  that  he 
should  gather  an  army  and  move  against  it.  On  the  appointed  day  he 
marched  thither  and,  in  accordance  with  the  wish  of  his  people,  laid 
siege  to  the  place.  He  first  established  his  camp  in  a  circle  round  about. 
Then,  after  stationing  his  engines  to  the  best  advantage,  he  boldly 
opened  the  attack  on  the  city.  Stricken  with  fear  at  the  resolute  purpose 
of  the  man  and  doubtful  of  their  own  strength,  the  citizens  sent  en¬ 
voys  to  him  to  beg  for  peace.  They  agreed  to  surrender  the  city  if  he 

^  Probably  March  8,  1098. 


CRUSADERS  IN  NORTHERN  SYRIA 


195 

would  guarantee  their  lives  and  safety  and,  on  these  terms,  the  place 
was  delivered  to  him.  A  garrison  of  his  own  men  sufficient  for  the  pro¬ 
tection  of  the  city  was  left  there  in  command  of  one  of  the  men  who 
had  conducted  the  negotiations.  He  then  imposed  an  annual  tribute 
upon  the  citizens  and  returned  to  Edessa  covered  with  glory.  The 
occupation  of  Seruj  by  the  Christians  opened  free  communication  be¬ 
tween  Antioch  and  Edessa.  Up  to  this  time,  its  position  midway  on  the 
route  between  Edessa  and  the  Euphrates  had  acted  as  an  obstacle  to 
those  who  wished  to  go  to  and  fro. 

Now  with  these  explanations  about  Baldwin’s  affairs,  let  us  return 
to  the  story  of  the  main  army. 

7.  Certain  men  sent  jrom  the  main  army  seize  by  force  the 
city  of  Artah,  Roused  by  news  of  thisy  the  feofle  of  Antioch 
hasten  thither  with  a  large  force.  They  lay  an  ambush  for 
our  feofle  and  attack  the  city.  Their  efforts  meet  with  no 
successy  however ;  sOy  after  fortifying  the  bridgey  they  re¬ 
turn  home. 

While  Baldwin  was  thus  actively  engaged  in  the  country  of  Edessa 
beyond  the  Euphrates,  the  main  army,  after  marching  over  steep 
mountains  and  through  winding  valleys,  as  has  already  been  related, 
had  arrived  at  Marash.  With  a  few  exceptions,  the  inhabitants  of  this 
city  were  Christians.  The  infidels  were  in  possession  of  the  citadel,  how¬ 
ever,  and  treated  the  rest  of  the  population  according  to  their  own 
good  pleasure.  As  soon  as  they  learned  that  our  army  was  approach¬ 
ing,  however,  the  Turks  secretly  fled  in  great  terror,  and  thus  the  faith¬ 
ful  were  left  in  complete  possession  of  the  city. 

When  the  army  dedicated  to  God  arrived  at  this  place  it  encamped 
before  the  walls  of  the  city  in  green  pastures.  Orders  were  given  that 
no  violence  be  done  to  the  townspeople  j  therefore,  at  that  place,  an 
abundant  market  was  furnished  without  disturbance.  Here  the  Chris¬ 
tians  were  informed  by  trustworthy  natives  that  the  Turks  held  an¬ 
other  city  in  the  vicinity,  called  Artah  [Artasium].  This  place  lay  in 
much  more  fertile  country  and  abounded  in  all  good  things. 

Accordingly,  by  common  consent.  Count  Robert  of  Flanders  with 
a  force  of  a  thousand  mailed  knights  at  once  speedily  marched  thither. 
Certain  nobles  accompanied  him,  namely,  Robert  de  Rozieres  and 
Goscelon,  son  of  Conon,  count  of  Montague.  As  soon  as  he  reached 


CRUSADERS  IN  NORTHERN  SYRIA 


196 

the  place,  Robert  at  once  began  siege  operations.  Thereupon,  the  Turks 
abandoned  the  city  and  retired  to  the  citadel,  in  whose  strength  they 
felt  confidence. 

When  the  Armenians  and  other  true  believers  dwelling  in  Artasium 
learned  that  these  warriors,  clad  in  such  glittering  armor,  had  come 
from  the  army  so  long  and  eagerly  awaited,  the  hope  of  liberty  awak¬ 
ened  within  them.  Seizing  their  weapons,  they  turned  against  the 
Turks  who  had  so  long  held  them  under  harsh  and  oppressive  rule 
and  slew  all  without  delay.  They  flung  the  heads  outside  the  walls, 
threw  open  the  gates,  and  with  pious  affection  invited  the  Christians 
without  to  enter  the  city  and  quarter  there.  Moreover,  in  true  ob¬ 
servance  of  the  laws  of  hospitality,  they  furnished  all  that  was  needful 
for  both  warriors  and  horses. 

Artasium,  also  called  Chalcis,  is,  like  Marash  just  mentioned,  one 
of  the  suffragan  cities  which  owes  allegiance  to  the  [patriarchal] 
throne  of  Antioch,  from  which  it  is  fifteen  miles  distant. 

The  report  of  this  event  spread  far  and  wide  through  the  land  and 
roused  the  people  of  Antioch.  Zealously  they  armed  and  made  ready 
to  destroy  the  invaders  who  had  made  themselves  masters  of  Artah  by 
the  slaughter  of  its  citizens.  About  ten  thousand  picked  men  from  the 
number  who  assembled  at  Antioch  for  the  defense  of  that  city  set  forth 
in  all  haste  for  Artasium.  As  they  approached  the  city,  they  sent  ahead 
a  detachment  of  thirty  light-armed  knights  mounted  on  swift  chargers. 
The  rest  of  the  force  remained  in  a  retired  spot,  hidden  in  ambush.  In 
the  hope  that  the  Christians  would  incautiously  venture  out  to  attack 
them,  the  advance  guard  of  skirmishers  now  began  to  ride  up  and 
down  before  the  city,  as  if  with  the  object  of  driving  off  booty.  The 
insolence  of  these  men,  as  they  rode  freely  to  and  fro,  proved  too  much 
for  the  patience  of  the  faithful  within  the  walls.  Eagerly  they  flew  to 
arms.  As  they  pursued  without  due  regard  for  caution,  however,  they 
followed  the  foe  too  far  and  soon  fell  into  the  ambushes  so  carefully 
placed.  The  enemy  immediately  emerged  from  their  hiding  places 
and  made  desperate  efforts  to  prevent  the  Christians  from  retreating, 
for,  if  they  succeeded  in  reaching  the  city,  it  would  afford  them  a  refuge 
from  the  larger  forces  which  were  about  to  follow.  In  spite  of  all  their 
efforts,  however,  our  people,  by  the  will  of  God,  valiantly  repulsed 
them  and  retired  safely  into  the  city  with  all  their  following. 

The  enemy  now  perceived  that  to  get  possession  of  the  city  so  quickly 


CRUSADERS  IN  NORTHERN  SYRIA 


197 

was  no  easy  task.  Consequently  they  began  to  establish  a  blockade.  For 
one  entire  day  they  stormed  the  place  without  success,  while  the 
Christians  within  the  walls  put  up  a  valiant  defense.  When  news  came 
that  our  main  army  was  approaching,  however,  the  enemy  deemed 
it  hazardous  to  remain  longer.  Following  saner  advice,  they  returned 
to  Antioch,  leaving  a  strong  force  of  soldiers  to  guard  the  bridge  be¬ 
tween  the  two  cities.  Thus  the  count  and  his  comrades  zealously  pro¬ 
tected  the  city  which  the  Lord  had  granted  them,  until  the  arrival  of 
the  main  army. 

During  this  time,  Goscelon,  a  youth  of  unusual  promise,  a  son  of 
Conon,  count  of  Montague,  of  whom  I  spoke  before,  was  seized  with  a 
serious  illness  and  died.  He  was  buried  in  that  place  with  the  usual  rites 
of  honor. 

8.  The  main  army  arrives  at  Artasium,  From  that  flace  scouts 
are  sent  on  ahead  to  investigate  the  roads.  They  affroach 
the  bridge  andy  in  sfite  of  the  enemy^s  effortSy  cross  the 
river. 

Barely  had  the  Turks  who  had  come  from  Antioch  left  Artasium  about 
daybreak,  when  it  was  reported  that  the  main  Christian  army  had  en¬ 
tered  the  outskirts  of  the  city  and  made  camp  not  far  from  the  town. 
With  a  natural  solicitude  for  the  brethren  reported  to  be  suffering 
under  siege  at  Artasium,  the  chiefs,  by  common  advice,  had  sent  fif¬ 
teen  hundred  mailed  knights  to  their  aid.  The  orders  were  that,  if  the 
siege  had  been  raised  and  there  was  free  access  to  the  city,  the  count  of 
Flanders  and  the  other  nobles  who  were  with  him  should  leave  a  garri¬ 
son  sufficient  to  guard  the  place  and  return  to  the  army.  Similar  orders 
had  been  sent  to  Tancred,  who  had  returned  from  Cilicia,  where  he 
had  brought  the  whole  district  under  his  control.  All  the  other  leaders, 
who  had  scattered  in  various  directions  as  their  own  interests  dictated, 
had  also  returned,  with  the  exception  of  Baldwin,  the  duke’s  brother, 
whose  power  in  the  vicinity  around  Edessa,  was,  by  the  will  of  God, 
growing  stronger  day  by  day.  The  various  divisions  of  the  army  were 
thus  reassembled  and  the  strength  of  the  host  once  more  intact.  Proc¬ 
lamation  was  now  made  by  public  edict  that  thereafter  no  one,  unless 
ordered,  should  venture  to  separate  himself  from  the  main  body  of 
the  army. 

They  then  broke  camp  and  directed  the  line  of  march  toward  Anti- 


igS  CRUSADERS  IN  NORTHERN  SYRIA 

och,  taking  advantage  of  the  shortest  roads.  Midway  on  their  route 
was  a  river  spanned  by  a  bridge  which  was  said  to  be  very  strongly  for¬ 
tified.  To  prevent  the  possibility  of  any  hindrance  at  that  point,  Robert, 
count  of  Normandy,  with  his  division  was  sent  on  in  advance  to  in¬ 
vestigate  the  route.  If  any  difficulty  seemed  likely  to  arise,  he  was  to 
notify  the  legions  following  and  to  give  definite  information  thereon 
to  the  chiefs.  At  the  head  of  this  contingent,  with  standards  unfurled, 
as  chiefs  of  the  legions  were  Evrard  du  Puiset  and  Roger  de  Barneville, 
illustrious  noblemen  well  proved  in  the  use  of  arms. 

Separating  from  the  army,  therefore,  the  count  and  his  cohorts  ar¬ 
rived  in  advance  of  the  main  army  at  the  bridge  mentioned  above.  This 
was  a  stone  structure  of  massive  construction,  at  each  end  of  which  rose 
a  well-fortified  tower  of  the  same  solid  work  as  the  bridge  itself.  In 
these  were  stationed  a  hundred  strong  and  valiant  warriors,  expert 
archers  well  trained  in  the  use  of  the  bow.  Their  duty  it  was  to  guard 
the  towers  and  to  prevent  anyone  from  approaching  by  the  fords  of  the 
river.  In  addition,  seven  hundred  knights  had  arrived  from  Antioch. 
These  had  taken  a  position  on  the  farther  bank  and  had  seized  the  fords 
in  order  to  prevent,  against  all  odds,  the  crossing  of  our  forces. 

The  river  which  this  bridge  spans  is  called  the  Orontes,  known  in 
the  speech  of  the  people  as  the  Far  river.  From  this  bridge  it  flows  on 
past  Antioch  and  descends  to  the  sea.  Some  people,  therefore,  imagine 
it  to  be  the  river  Farfar  of  Damascus,  but  we  have  ascertained  definitely 
that  those  who  make  this  assertion  are  wrong.  The  Farfar  and  the 
Albana  have  their  origin  in  the  Lebanon  mountains.  After  flowing 
through  the  country  in  the  vicinity  of  Damascus  and  past  the  city  itself, 
they  hasten  to  the  east,  where  they  are  supposed  to  be  lost  in  the  sands 
of  the  desert.  The  Orontes,  on  the  contrary,  has  its  origin  in  the  vicin¬ 
ity  of  Heliopolis,  called  also  Malbec  [Baalbec],  whence  it  flows  past 
Shayzar  and  Antioch  into  the  Mediterranean  sea.^^ 

When  the  count  of  Normandy  arrived  with  his  forces  at  this  bridge, 
he  was  prevented  from  crossing,  not  only  by  the  guards  in  the  towers 
on  the  bridge,  but  also  by  the  defenders  stationed  on  the  opposite  bank 
of  the  river.  The  result  was  that  a  very  sharp  encounter  took  place  here, 
for  our  people  were  trying  to  force  a  passage  while  the  enemy,  by  send- 

William’s  more  intimate  and  extended  knowledge  of  the  geography  of  the  Holy 
Land  is  reflected  here  and  elsewhere.  He  does  not  use  the  ancient  form,  Baalbec,  though 
he  later  (Book  XXI,  chap.  6)  refers  to  “Baalbeth”  as  the  Arabic  name  for  the  town. 


CRUSADERS  IN  NORTHERN  SYRIA  199 

ing  forth  dense  showers  of  arrows,  were  doing  their  utmost  to  prevent 
it  and  to  keep  them  away  from  the  fords. 

While  both  sides  were  thus  exerting  themselves  to  the  utmost,  the 
main  army  was  approaching.  For  when  it  became  known  that  the  count 
and  the  advance  guard  were  being  held  back  by  a  fight  at  the  bridge, 
the  legionaries  quickened  their  pace  to  render  aid  to  their  struggling 
comrades.  By  driving  off  the  foe,  they  hoped  to  open  the  way  so  that 
the  army  might  cross  without  delay. 

As  soon  as  all  the  legions  had  arrived,  the  sound  of  the  trumpet  and 
the  voice  of  the  herald  gave  the  signal  to  take  arms.  Pressing  on  with 
all  their  might,  they  seized  the  bridge  by  force  and  put  the  enemy  to 
flight.  Those  who  could  not  find  room  to  fight  on  the  bridge,  scorning 
to  stand  idly  by,  discovered  the  ford  and  so  crossed  to  the  other  side. 
Here  they  dislodged  the  enemy  and,  without  opposition,  took  posses¬ 
sion  of  the  farther  bank.  When  the  whole  army  had  crossed,  with 
chariots  and  wagons  and  baggage  of  every  description,  camp  was  made 
in  wide-spreading  green  pastures,  about  five  or  six  miles  distant  from 
the  city.  On  the  next  day,  the  march  was  again  resumed  along  the  royal 
highway  between  the  mountains  and  the  river,  and  again  camp  was 
made,  this  time  about  a  mile  away  from  the  city  walls. 

9,  A  descriftion  of  the  city  of  Antioch  and  its  dignity, 

Antioch  is  a  noble  and  glorious  city.  To  it  has  been  ascribed  the  third 
or  possibly  the  second  place  of  dignity  (for  there  is  much  controversy 
over  this  question)  after  Rome  itself.  It  stands  at  the  head  and  is  the 
governor  of  all  the  region  of  the  East.  In  early  times  this  city  was 
called  Reblata.  It  was  here  that  Zedekiah,  king  of  Judah,  was  brought 
with  his  sons  into  the  presence  of  Nebuchadnezzar,  king  of  Babylon, 
when,  by  the  latter’s  orders,  the  sons  were  slain  before  the  eyes  of  their 
father,  and  then  Zedekiah  himself  was  blinded.  After  the  death  of 
Alexander  of  Macedon,  Antiochus  succeeded  him  as  ruler  of  a  part  of 
this  region.  He  surrounded  this  city  by  a  very  high  wall  with  towers, 
had  it  restored  to  a  better  condition,  and  commanded  that  it  be  called 
Antioch  from  his  own  name.  He  then  made  it  the  capital  of  his  realm 
and  designated  it  as  the  royal  residence  for  himself  and  his  successors 
for  all  time.  In  this  city  the  prince  of  the  apostles  had  his  sacerdotal  see 
and  was  the  first  to  hold  the  office  of  bishop  there,  for  the  venerable 


200  CRUSADERS  IN  NORTHERN  SYRIA 

Theophilus,  a  very  influential  citizen  of  Antioch,  dedicated  a  church 
in  his  own  house.  It  was  for  this  Theophilils  that  Luke,  also  a  native  of 
Antioch,  wrote  both  his  Evangel  and  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  and  it 
was  Luke  who  later  succeeded  the  blessed  Peter  in  that  same  church 
as  the  seventh  in  the  list  of  bishops. 

In  this  city  the  first  gathering  of  the  faithful  was  held  and  here  also 
the  name  of  Christians  was  adopted.  Before  this  time,  those  who  fol¬ 
lowed  the  teachings  of  Christ  were  called  Nazarenes.  Afterwards,  by 
authority  of  that  synod,  all  the  faithful  were  known  as  Christians,  a 
name  derived  from  that  of  Christ.  This  city  voluntarily  and  eagerly 
received  the  preaching  of  the  apostle  and  was  converted  as  one  body  to 
the  Christian  faith.  She  was  the  first  to  embrace  and  to  teach  the  Name 
which,  like  precious  ointment,  diffuses  its  fragrance  far  and  wide. 
Hence  a  new  name  was  appointed  for  her  and  she  was  called  Theopo- 
lis.  Thus  the  city  which  formerly  bore  the  name  of  a  wicked  and  im¬ 
pious  man  received  a  well-deserved  reward  from  the  Lord  and  was 
thereafter  known  as  the  home  and  city  of  Him  who  had  summoned 
her  to  faith.  For  this  city,  which  as  mistress  of  the  former  error  had 
ruled  over  so  many  regions  subject  to  her,  in  later  time  when  she  was 
leading  an  upright  life  in  the  way  of  the  Lord  still  retained  the  same 
suffragans.  The  patriarch  of  that  city  beloved  of  God  is  said  to  have 
under  his  jurisdiction  twenty  provinces.  Of  these,  fourteen  have  their 
own  metropolitans  and  suffragans.  The  remaining  six  are  under  two 
primates,  commonly  called  catholicu  One  of  these  pertains  to  Ani  and 
the  other  to  Hirinopolis  or  Bagdad.  Each  has  his  own  suffragans.  All 
these  provinces  are  comprised  under  the  one  name,  Orient,  as  is  plain 
from  the  report  of  the  synod  of  Constantinople.  This  reads  as  follows: 
“Let  the  bishops  of  the  Orient  have  charge  of  the  Orient  only  and 
let  the  honor  of  priority  be  retained  by  the  church  of  Antioch,  as  is  con¬ 
tained  in  the  regulations  of  the  synod  of  Nicaea.” 

10.  O]  the  frovince  in  which  it  is  located.  Also  a  description 
of  its  site. 

The  city  of  Antioch  is  most  delightfully  and  advantageously  situated 
in  the  province  of  Coelesyria,  which  is  a  part  of  Greater  Syria.  It  ex- 

Canon  VI  of  the  Council  of  Nicaea  and  Canon  II  of  the  Council  of  Constantinople 
(J.  D.  Mansi,  Sacrorum  conciliorum  nova  et  amflisskna  collection  Vol.  II,  col.  672, 
and  Vol  III,  col.  560). 


201 


CRUSADERS  IN  NORTHERN  SYRIA 

tends  along  a  valley  of  unusual  beauty  with  fertile  soil  and  rich  fields, 
practically  all  of  which  are  well  watered  by  rivulets  and  streams.  This 
valley  lies  in  the  midst  of  mountains  which  slope  toward  the  west.  It 
is  about  forty  miles  in  length  and  from  four  to  six  in  width,  varying 
according  to  the  place.  In  the  upper  part  Is  a  lake  formed  from  the  in¬ 
flux  of  water  from  adjacent  springs  which  are  here  brought  together. 
It  abounds  in  fish.  One  mile  distant  from  it  is  the  river  which  flows 
through  the  valley  past  the  city  to  the  sea.  From  the  lake  also  emerges 
a  little  stream  which  presently,  lower  down  near  the  city,  joins  this 
same  river. 

The  mountains  which  encircle  Antioch  on  both  sides,  although  very 
high,  give  rise  to  sweet  and  limpid  waters,  and  their  sloping  sides  to 
the  very  summits  are  particularly  well  adapted  to  agriculture.  The 
mountain  on  the  south  is  called  Orontes  as  is  also  the  river  which  flows 
past  the  city,  according  to  Jerome,  who  says  that  Antioch  lies  between 
the  Orontes  river  and  the  mountain  of  the  same  name.  A  part  of  this 
mountain  lower  down  along  the  sea  rises  to  a  great  height.  It  has  the 
distinction  of  a  special  designation,  being  known  commonly  as  Mt. 
Parlier.  Some  authorities  think  that  this  is  the  Mt.  Parnassus  sacred  to 
Bacchus  and  Apollo,  and  this  opinion  seems  to  be  supported  by  the  fact 
that  there  is  a  fountain  of  Daphne  near.  For  this  is  regarded  by  some  as 
the  Castalian  spring  of  the  old  myths,  which  was  sacred  to  the  Muses 
and  which  was  also  celebrated  in  the  schools  of  the  philosophers.  This 
is  said  to  spring  up  at  the  so-called  staircase  of  Bohemond,  near  the  city 
and  at  the  base  of  Mt.  Orontes.  But  this  idea  is  far  from  the  truth.  It  is 
certain  that  Mt.  Parnassus  lies  in  Boeotia,  which  is  a  part  of  Thessaly. 
Ovid  described  it  as  follows,  in  the  first  book  of  the  Metamorf  hoses : 

^^The  land  of  Phocis  separates  the  Boeotian  fields  from  those  of 
Attica  j  a  fertile  country  when  dry  landj  but  at  that  time  a  part  of  the 
sea  and  a  broad  expanse  of  waters  suddenly  poured  forth.  There  a  lofty 
mountain  seeks  the  sky,  with  its  twin  peaks,  Parnassus,  whose  summits 
tower  above  the  clouds.’’ 

In  the  forty-first  chapter  of  his  Polyhistor^^  however,  Solinus  calls 
this  Mt.  Cassius.  He  writes  as  follows:  “Near  Antioch  and  close  to 
Seleucia  is  Mt.  Cassius.  From  the  top  of  this  the  sun’s  disk  may  be  seen 
till  the  fourth  watch  of  the  night  j  and,  by  turning  slightly  as  the  light 
scatters  the  darkness,  one  may  see  on  this  side  night  and  on  that  day.” 

Ovid  Meta.  i.  313— 317.  Solinus  Polyhistor  xxxvi  (ed.  Mommsen). 


202 


CRUSADERS  IN  NORTHERN  SYRIA 


That  the  reader  may  not  be  confused  by  the  ambiguous  word  Seleu- 
cia,  he  should  be  informed  that  there  are  two  cities  of  that  name.  The 
first  of  these  is  the  capital  of  Isauria  rather  more  than  a  five  days  jour¬ 
ney  from  Antioch.  The  other  is  close  by  that  city,  scarcely  ten  miles 
away,  near  the  mouth  of  the  Orontes  river.  This  latter  city  is  now  called 
the  port  of  St.  Simeon.  The  spring  mentioned  above  is  known  as  the 
fountain  of  Daphne  or  the  Castalian  spring.  It  is  said  that  there  was 
once  at  this  place  a  temple  dedicated  to  Apollo,  to  which  the  Gentiles, 
in  their  superstitious  belief,  were  wont  to  resort  to  consult  the  oracle  in 
matters  of  doubt.  After  Julian  the  Apostate  fell  away  from  Christ  and 
the  teachings  of  true  religion,  he  stayed  for  a  time  near  Antioch.  He 
was  about  to  make  a  campaign  against  the  Persians  and  used  frequently 
to  go  to  this  shrine  to  consult  Apollo  in  regard  to  his  course.  Theodori- 
tus  mentions  this  fact  in  the  thirty-first  chapter  of  the  Historia  trifar- 
titay  as  follows,  “When  Julian  sought  an  answer  from  the  Pythian 
shrine  at  Daphne  as  to  the  probable  success  of  his  war  with  the  Parthi- 
ans,  the  priest  rebuked  him  because  the  body  of  the  martyr  Babylas 
was  buried  near  by.  Thereupon  Julian  ordered  that  it  be  removed.” 

The  same  circumstance  is  related  with  even  more  detail  in  the  tenth 
book  of  the  Ecclesiastical  History “Julian  gave  still  another  evi¬ 
dence  of  his  folly  and  levity.  When  he  attempted  to  propitiate  Apollo 
in  the  wood  of  Daphne  near  the  Castalian  spring,  in  the  suburbs  of  Anti¬ 
och,  he  was  unable  to  obtain  a  reply  to  his  question.  He  inquired  what 
this  silence  meant,  whereupon  the  priests  of  the  demon  answered  that 
the  tomb  of  the  martyr  Babylas  was  near  by  and  therefore  no  answer 
could  be  given.” 

Although  this  fountain  is  known  as  the  Castalian  spring,  it  must  not 
be  confused  with  that  other  Castalian  spring  which  is  also  called  the 
fountain  of  Pegasus  or  of  Hippocrene  and  Aganippe.  This  latter  is  in 
Boeotia,  according  to  Solinus,^®  who  writes  as  follows:  “Near  Thebes 
are  Mt.  Helicon,  the  wood  of  Cytheron,  and  the  river  Ismenus.  Here 
also  are  the  fountains  of  Arethusa  and  Hypodea,  of  Salmace  and  of 
Dirce,  and  most  important  of  all,  those  of  Aganippe  and  Hippocrene. 

Hist,  trifart.  vi.  31. 

Rufinus  Hist.  eccL  i.  35.  In  William’s  copy  of  the  Ecclesiastical  History y  the  first 
book  by  Rufinus  followed  nine  books  by  Eusebius.  Hence  William’s  reference  to  the 
tenth  book. 

Solinus  Polyhistor  vii  (ed.  Mommsen). 


CRUSADERS  IN  NORTHERN  SYRIA 


203 

^^Since  it  was  Cadmus,  the  inventor  of  letters,  who  first  found  these 
springs,  while  he  was  exploring  the  region  in  search  of  a  place  to  set¬ 
tle,  the  fervent  imagination  of  the  poets  gave  rise  to  two  legends, 
namely,  that  this  fountain  was  opened  by  the  hoof  of  the  winged  horse 
and  that  drinking  thereof  was  the  inspiration  of  letters.” 

On  the  north  of  Antioch  is  a  height  commonly  known  as  Black 
mountain.  This  abounds  in  springs  and  is  also  well  watered  by  rivulets. 
It  affords  the  inhabitants  of  the  region  many  advantages  in  the  way  of 
woods  and  pastures.  In  early  times  there  are  said  to  have  been  nu¬ 
merous  monasteries  in  this  vicinity,  and,  even  now,  many  venerable 
places,  the  abode  of  those  vowed  to  the  service  of  God,  are  cherished 
here  with  loving  care. 

Through  the  middle  of  this  valley  flows  the  river  already  men¬ 
tioned  on  its  way  to  the  sea.  The  city  is  built  on  the  nearer  and  steeper 
slope  of  the  mountain,  toward  the  south,  between  it  and  the  river. 
The  wall  starts  from  the  top  of  the  height  and  runs  down  along  the 
slope  to  the  river.  Within  its  circuit  is  enclosed  a  very  wide  area  of 
mountainside  and  plain,  the  latter  extending  from  the  base  of  the 
mountain  to  the  river.  Two  very  high  peaks  also  lie  within  the  wall.  On 
the  summit  of  the  higher  of  these  was  the  citadel  of  Antioch,  a  strongly 
fortified  place  regarded  as  impregnable.  A  deep  and  narrow  ravine 
separates  these  two  peaks,  and  through  it  rushes  a  mountain  torrent. 
In  its  passage  through  the  center  of  the  city,  this  stream  is  a  source  of 
many  benefits  to  the  citizens.  There  are  several  other  springs  in  the 
city,  the  principal  one  being  the  eastern  or  gate  of  St.  Paul.  The  foun¬ 
tain  of  Daphne,  three  or  four  miles  away,  has  also  been  artificially  con¬ 
ducted  thither  by  means  of  an  aqueduct.  By  a  skilful  device  this  fur¬ 
nishes  water  at  stated  times  to  many  different  places. 

On  the  heights  and  the  slopes  as  well  as  in  the  plain,  the  city  is  sur¬ 
rounded  by  walls  of  solid  masonry,  very  thick  and  proportionately 
high.  Above  these  rise,  at  equal  distances  apart,  numerous  towers  well 
adapted  for  defense.  On  the  west,  lower  down,  around  the  more  mod¬ 
ern  part  of  the  city,  the  river  runs  so  close  to  the  walls  and  the  moun¬ 
tain  that  the  bridge  which  spans  it  forms  a  continuation  of  the  wall  and 
the  city  gate.  According  to  some  authorities  the  extent  of  the  city 
lengthwise  is  two  miles 5  others  say  three.  It  is  ten  or  twelve  miles 
from  the  sea. 


204 


CRUSADERS  IN  NORTHERN  SYRIA 


II.  Who  the  ruler  of  this  city  was;  and  of  hozVy  on  hearing  of 
our  affroachy  he  first  fortified  the  city  strongly y  and  then 
mustered  within  its  walls  troofs  from  the  surrounding 
towns. 

The  lord  of  this  famous  city  was  a  certain  Acxianus  [Yaghi  Siyan]  of 
the  Turkish  nation.  He  belonged  to  the  household  of  a  great  and  pow¬ 
erful  potentate,  Malik  Shah,  the  sultan  of  Persia,  to  whom  we  have 
alluded  before.  By  force  of  arms  this  prince  had  brought  all  these 
provinces  under  his  power.  At  length,  however,  after  he  had  con¬ 
quered  all  nations  and  tribes,  he  wished  to  return  to  his  own  land. 
Accordingly,  he  divided  his  conquests  among  his  nephews  and  servants 
in  the  belief  that  the  memory  of  his  many  benefactions  would  always 
bind  them  loyally  to  him.  In  this  distribution,  Nicaea  with  its  adjacent 
provinces  was  conferred  upon  Qilij  Arslan,  as  mentioned  above.  The 
city  of  Damascus,  also  with  its  tributary  cities  and  the  surrounding 
country,  was  given  to  another  nephew,  Duqaq.^'^ 

On  both  of  these  nobles  [Malik  Shah]  conferred  the  dignity  and 
title  of  sultan^  on  Qilij  Arslan  because,  since  his  kingdom  lay  on  the 
boundaries  of  Greece,  he  was  continually  at  strife  with  the  empire  of 
Constantinople  3  and  on  Duqaq  because  constant  conflict  and  obstinate 
warfare  was  ever  going  on  with  the  Egyptians,  whose  increase  and 
formidable  strength  [Malik  Shah]  viewed  with  great  suspicion. 

Another  of  the  sultan’s  servants,  Aqsunqur,  who  was  the  father  of 
Zangi  and  the  grandfather  of  Nureddin,  received  the  very  famous 
city  of  Aleppo. With  the  same  equal  liberality,  he  gave  Antioch  to 
this  Yaghi  Siyan,  whom  we  are  now  considering,  with  a  somewhat  lim¬ 
ited  territory,  however,  for  the  caliph  of  Egypt  held  all  the  country 
as  far  as  Laodicea  of  Syria. 

When  Yaghi  Siyan  learned  that  a  great  army  under  Christian  lead¬ 
ers  was  on  the  way,  he  sent  out  repeated  messages,  both  by  letter  and 
the  spoken  word,  to  all  the  princes  of  the  entire  East,  begging  for  aid. 

William’s  uncertainty  about  the  early  Saljuqs  is  again  revealed.  Qilij  Arslan  was 
a  cousin,  not  a  nephew,  of  Malik  Shah.  Duqaq  was  a  nephew  and  ruled  Damascus 
1095— I ^04* 

Aleppo  was  ruled  from  1095  to  1113  by  Ridwan,  a  brother  of  Duqaq.  Aqsunqur 
was  at  this  time  associated  with  Mosul,  of  which  he  ultimately  became  ruler.  It  was 
not  until  the  time  of  his  son,  Zangi,  that  the  family  also  acquired  Aleppo. 


CRUSADERS  IN  NORTHERN  SYRIA 


205 

Above  all  he  besought  the  help  of  the  caliph  of  Bagdad  and  of  the 
illustrious  sultan  of  Persia,  more  powerful  than  all  the  rest.  To  per¬ 
suade  them  to  acquiesce  in  his  plans  was  a  quick  and  easy  task,  for  these 
potentates  had  long  ago  received  intimation  of  our  coming.  Qilij 
Arslan,  who  knew  by  actual  experiences  as  an  eyewitness  how  vast  were 
the  numbers  and  how  insuperable  the  valor  of  these  Christian  armies, 
had  given  them  an  accurate  description  of  these  forces. 

Accordingly,  the  two  sultans  with  earnest  entreaties  and  profuse 
tears,  begged  for  aid  j  the  one  that  he  might  avenge  his  own  wrongs, 
and  the  other  that  he  might  make  his  country  safe  from  the  inroads  of 
the  Christians  and  at  the  same  time  defend  himself  against  their  vio¬ 
lence,  The  potentates  promised  the  forces  and  the  assistance  asked,  and 
later,  as  the  result  showed,  they  faithfully  carried  out  their  word. 

In  the  meantime,  Yaghi  Siyan,  very  uneasy  over  the  coming  of  the 
Christians,  diligently  levied  and  assembled  troops  from  the  neighbor¬ 
ing  provinces  and  cities.  In  daily  expectation  of  a  siege,  he  collected 
food  supplies  and  got  together  arms.  With  ardent  zeal  he  encouraged 
the  townspeople  to  bring  in  materials  for  the  construction  of  various 
machines:  iron,  steel,  and  all  other  things  which  are  customarily  of  use 
at  such  times.  They  too,  fired  by  an  equally  keen  desire  for  the  safety 
of  the  city  and  the  general  welfare,  strove  diligently  that  nothing 
might  be  wanting  which  might  be  of  assistance  to  the  citizens  in  a  state 
of  siege.  Roving  over  the  entire  region,  they  despoiled  the  surround¬ 
ing  country  and  carried  off  with  them  grain,  wine,  oil,  and  all  the  other 
necessaries  of  life.  They  drove  off  flocks  and  herds  and  filled  the  city 
to  overflowing  with  every  necessary  commodity.  Thus,  with  great  fore¬ 
sight  and  no  small  labor,  they  strengthened  their  position  against  the 
importunity  of  the  advancing  army. 

From  the  entire  country  through  which  the  Christian  army  passed, 
there  came  hither  many  noble  and  powerful  men,  flying  before  the 
advance  of  our  troops.  In  the  sole  hope  of  gaining  safety,  without  wait¬ 
ing  for  summons  from  anyone  they  betook  themselves  to  Antioch, 
whose  fortifications  and  strength  seemed  impregnable.  The  population 
of  the  city  was  greatly  increased  by  these  fugitives.  Including  both  citi¬ 
zens  and  the  assembled  auxiliaries,  there  were  said  to  be  six  or  seven 
thousand  knights  and  rather  more  than  fifteen  or  twenty  thousand  foot 
soldiers  armed  for  fighting. 


2o6 


CRUSADERS  IN  NORTHERN  SYRIA 


12.  The  consultation  of  our  leaders  and  the  advance  of  the 
army  to  the  city. 

When  our  people  saw  that  they  were  approaching  Antioch,  they  as¬ 
sembled  to  deliberate  on  the  task  that  lay  before  them.  Since  the  winter 
season  was  at  hand,  some  of  the  chiefs  advocated  postponing  the  siege 
till  the  beginning  of  spring.  It  would  be  a  difficult  matter,  they  rea¬ 
soned,  to  reassemble  the  army  before  that  time,  since  it  was  now  dis¬ 
persed  in  various  cities  and  fortresses.  It  was  said,  moreover,  that  the 
emperor  of  Constantinople  intended  to  send  a  large  contingent  of 
troops  to  their  aid  and  that  a  new  army  was  on  the  way  from  the  coun¬ 
tries  beyond  the  Alps.  It  would  be  advisable  to  wait  for  the  arrival  of 
both  these  armies,  they  said,  for,  with  the  greatly  increased  numbers, 
the  desired  end  would  be  more  easily  attained.  During  the  period  of 
inactivity,  the  forces  could  be  divided  and  sent  in  separate  detachments 
to  winter  in  less  arid  surroundings.  Then  when  spring  returned,  the 
army  could  be  brought  together  again,  recuperated  and  refreshed  bod¬ 
ily  for  the  work  before  them.  The  horses  also  would  be  improved  by 
the  winter^s  rest  and  feeding. 

Others,  however,  felt  that  it  would  be  wiser  to  invest  the  city  at 
once  with  an  unexpected  movement.  If  there  were  an  interval  of  delay, 
the  citizens  would  have  more  time  to  strengthen  their  defenses  and  to 
assemble  the  great  forces  already  invited  to  their  aid.  In  this  impor¬ 
tant  conference,  the  view  of  the  side  which  maintained  that  the  siege 
ought  to  be  pressed  at  once,  that  delay  was  dangerous,  and  that  the 
expeditionary  forces  ought  not  to  be  separated  carried  the  day.  It  was 
unanimously  decided  to  advance  on  the  city  and  begin  siege  operations 
at  once. 

Accordingly,  on  October  i8,  they  broke  camp,  advanced  to  Antioch, 
and  established  themselves  before  the  city.  Although  the  Christian 
forces  who  could  wield  the  sword  were  said  to  number  three  hundred 
thousand  besides  women  and  children,  yet  it  was  impossible  for  the 
camp  to  surround  the  town  completely.  For,  in  addition  to  the  peaks, 
which,  as  we  have  already  said,  lay  within  the  circuit  of  the  walls  and 
which  no  attempt  was  made  to  surround,  that  part  of  the  city  which 
extended  from  the  base  of  the  mountain  to  the  river  on  more  level 
ground  could  not  be  completely  enclosed  by  a  continuous  siege  line. 

The  arrival  of  the  Christian  host  and  the  work  of  establishing  the 


CRUSADERS  IN  NORTHERN  SYRIA 


207 

camp  were  accompanied  by  much  noise.  The  blare  of  horns,  the  neigh¬ 
ing  of  horses,  and  the  crash  of  arms,  intermingled  with  the  shouts  of 
men,  seemed  to  rise  to  the  very  heavens.  Yet  during  that  entire  day 
and  for  several  days  following  our  army’s  arrival,  an  utter  silence  pre¬ 
vailed  in  the  city.  Not  a  sound  or  noise  of  any  kind  was  heard  from  it. 
It  might  reasonably  have  been  supposed  empty  of  defenders,  although 
in  reality  it  was  well  garrisoned  with  large  numbers  and  abundantly 
supplied  with  provisions. 

I3«  T^he  commanders  are  stationed  around  Antioch  in  strategic 
fositions  and  the  city  is  blockaded.  The  towns feo fie  are 
overwhelmed  with  terror. 

In  that  section  of  Antioch  which  lay  in  the  plain  there  were  five 
gates.  In  the  upper  part  on  the  east  was  situated  that  one  which  is  now 
called  the  gate  of  St.  Paul,  from  the  fact  that  on  the  slope  of  the  height 
above  it  is  the  monastery  dedicated  to  the  apostle  of  that  name.  Directly 
opposite  this  and  separated  from  it  by  the  whole  length  of  the  city  was 
the  second  or  west  gate.  This  is  now  called  the  gate  of  St.  George,  be¬ 
cause  it  lies  near  the  basilica  of  that  martyr.  On  the  north  side  are  three 
gates,  all  of  which  open  toward  the  river.  The  upper  one  of  the  three 
is  the  gate  of  the  Dog,  and  directly  in  front  of  this  is  a  bridge  leading 
across  the  marsh  which  is  continuous  with  the  wall.  The  second  of  these 
is  now  called  the  gate  of  the  Duke.  These  two  gates  are  about  a  mile 
from  the  river.  The  third  is  the  gate  of  the  Bridge,  so  called  because 
here  is  located  the  bridge  by  which  the  river  is  crossed.  For  between 
the  gate  of  the  Duke,  referred  to  above,  which  is  in  the  middle,  and 
the  last  gate  on  that  side,  the  river  actually  washes  the  walls  and  does 
not  recede  from  the  city. 

Since  it  was  impossible  for  the  army  to  approach  either  this  gate  or 
that  of  St.  George  without  crossing  the  river,  they  were  left  unblock¬ 
aded,  but  the  upper  three  were  surrounded.  The  highest  gate  was  be¬ 
sieged  by  Bohemond  with  those  who  had  followed  his  camp  from  the 
beginning.  Around  him  but  lower  down  were  the  camps  of  Robert  of 
Normandy,  Robert,  count  of  Flanders,  Stephen,  count  of  Blois,  and 
Hugh  the  Great.  These  leaders  with  their  Norman,  Frankish,  and 
Breton  troops  continued  the  blackade  from  Bohemond’s  camp  to  the 
gate  of  the  Dog.  Around  this  gate  were  Raymond,  count  of  Toulouse, 
the  bishop  of  Puy,  and  other  nobles  who  had  followed  their  leader- 


2o8  crusaders  in  NORTHERN  SYRIA 

ship,  with  a  great  host  of  Gascons,  Provengals,  and  Burgundians  j  this 
camp  occupied  the  entire  space  as  far  as  the  next  gate.  At  this  latter 
point  Duke  Godfrey  had  placed  his  camp.  With  him  were  his  brother 
Eustace  and  Baldwin  of  Hainault,  Reinard  of  Toulj  and  Conon  de 
Montague,  counts  and  warriors  of  high  renown,  together  with  other 
nobles  who  had  followed  his  camp  from  the  first.  They  and  their 
troops,  Lotharingians,  Frisians,  Swabians,  Saxons,  Franks,  and  Ba¬ 
varians,  occupied  all  the  rest  of  the  space  almost  up  to  the  gate  of  the 
Bridge.  These  forces  were  stationed  in  a  triangle,  as  it  were,  between 
the  city,  the  river  which  laved  its  walls,  and  the  camps  of  the  other 
leaders.  There  were  orchards  in  this  vicinity.  These  our  army  cut  down 
entirely,  and  from  the  material  thus  obtained  made  for  themselves  and 
their  horses  a  protecting  barricade. 

Through  the  openings  in  the  towers  and  walls  the  townspeople 
watched  the  camp.  They  marvelled  at  the  flashing  armor,  the  steady 
diligence  with  which  the  work  was  carried  on,  the  method  of  lodging 
the  people,  the  placing  of  the  camp.  The  number  and  strength  of  the 
vast  throngs  filled  them  with  apprehension.  As  they  compared  the 
present  time  with  that  of  the  past,  the  peril  of  their  present  situation 
with  their  former  tranquil  state,  they  were  filled  with  terror  for  their 
wives  and  children,  their  ancestral  homes,  and  for  liberty  itself,  man¬ 
kind’s  most  precious  possession.  Those  whom  friendly  death  had  re¬ 
moved  from  the  midst  of  such  perils  were  regarded  as  indeed  for¬ 
tunate,  since  they  were  no  longer  in  danger  of  being  overwhelmed  by 
like  disasters. 

Thus,  in  suspense,  they  awaited  from  day  to  day  the  taking  of  the 
city  and  the  destruction  of  their  people,  for  they  regarded  it  as  certain 
that  a  siege  of  such  magnitude,  prosecuted  with  such  ardent  vigor, 
would  not  be  concluded  without  Involving  the  destruction  of  the  city 
and  the  loss  of  its  liberty. 

14*  The  Christians  erect  a  wooden  bridge  over  the  river  that 
they  may  issue  jorth  more  freely  on  foraging  exf editions. 

The  towns feofle  make  sudden  sallies  ufon  the  camf  of 
the  count  of  Toulouse ^  by  way  of  the  nearest  gate. 

In  order  to  procure  fodder  for  their  horses  and  the  necessary  supplies 
for  themselves,  the  people  in  camp  were  forced  to  make  frequent  trips 
across  the  river  and  often  ventured  too  far.  Again  and  again  they  came 


CRUSADERS  IN  NORTHERN  SYRIA 


209 

back  from  these  forays  safe  and  sound,  for  as  yet  the  citizens  remained 
within  the  city  and  did  not  dare  to  roam  about  outside.  Gradually  the 
troops  became  accustomed  to  cross  over  many  times  a  day,  although  this 
was  attended  with  much  difficulty,  for,  as  the  stream  was  not  fordable, 
it  could  only  be  crossed  by  swimming.  The  besieged  soon  became  aware 
of  this  custom.  Sometimes  openly,  but  more  often  stealthily,  they 
began  to  cross  over  by  the  bridge.  As  a  result  they  often  killed  or 
wounded  many  of  our  people,  for  the  latter  were  accustomed  to  roam 
about  Incautiously  in  separate  bands  in  search  of  what  they  needed. 
The  enemy  gained  a  special  advantage  from  the  fact  that  the  obstacle 
of  the  river  made  the  return  trip  very  difficult  for  the  Christians.  This 
same  reason  made  it  difficult  for  those  in  camp  to  lend  aid  when  they 
saw  their  friends  roughly  handled  before  their  very  eyes.  To  obviate 
this  situation,  the  leaders  deemed  It  advisable  to  build  a  bridge  of 
whatever  material  was  available.  This  would  help  them  to  combat  the 
enemy’s  wiles  more  readily  and  would  enable  the  troops  to  regain  the 
camp  with  less  trouble.  Moreover,  it  would  afford  a  safe  and  con¬ 
venient  road  for  the  infantry  when  they  were  called  out  on  necessary 
errands,  especially  down  to  the  coast. 

A  number  of  boats  were  found  on  the  river  and  on  the  lake  above. 
These  were  lashed  firmly  together.  Planks  and  other  wooden  material 
suitable  for  the  purpose  were  laid  above  and  bound  together  securely 
with  wicker  fastenings.  Thus  a  solid  bridge  was  furnished  large  enough 
to  accommodate  at  one  time  several  persons  crossing  abreast.  This 
wooden  structure  was  a  great  convenience  to  our  people.  It  was  located 
near  the  duke’s  camp  over  against  the  gate  which  had  been  assigned  to 
him  to  guard  and  about  a  mile  distant  from  the  stone  bridge  which  was 
contiguous  to  the  city.  The  gate  just  mentioned  is  still  called  the  gate 
of  the  Duke  from  his  connection  with  it.  His  camp  occupied  without 
interruption  all  the  space  between  this  gate  and  the  bridge  just  built. 

Danger  threatened  the  Christians  not  alone  at  this  bridge  and  at  the 
gate  connected  with  it.  At  the  upper  gate  also,  which  was  the  third  be¬ 
yond  and  known  today  as  the  gate  of  the  Dog,  our  troops  were  exposed 
to  many  perils.  Here,  as  has  been  stated,  there  was  a  stone  bridge.  This 
extended  over  a^marsh  which  reached  out  from  the  city,  formed  by  the 
constant  overflow  from  the  spring  at  the  east  gate  or  gate  of  St.  Paul 
as  well  as  from  a  continual  influx  from  other  rivulets.  By  way  of  this 
bridge,  frequent  midnight  sallies  and  sudden  day  attacks  were  made 


210 


CRUSADERS  IN  NORTHERN  SYRIA 


upon  the  camp  of  the  count  of  Toulouse,  who  had  been  assigned  to 
guard  that  gate.  It  was  the  enemy’s  practice  to  throw  open  the  gate  and 
let  fly  a  sudden  shower  of  arrows  like  hail.  The  result  of  this  was  that 
many  of  the  count’s  men  were  killed  or  wounded.  The  enemy  relied 
much  on  this  kind  of  attack,  for  after  the  sally  had  been  accomplished 
and  the  slaughter  perpetrated  they  could  make  good  their  escape  over 
the  bridge  into  the  city,  whither  the  Christians  could  pursue  them  only 
by  the  same  way.  Hence  it  was  that  the  count  of  Toulouse,  the  bishop 
of  Puy,  and  the  other  nobles  who  were  stationed  in  that  vicinity  lost 
far  more  mules  and  horses  than  did  the  legions  of  the  other  leaders. 

15.  The  count  tries  various  devices  against  them.  Finally  the 
gate  is  closed  by  heafing  masses  of  rock  against  it. 

The  losses  in  the  ranks  caused  by  this  situation  occasioned  much  dis¬ 
tress  to  the  count  and  the  reverend  bishop.  Accordingly,  they  sum¬ 
moned  their  people  and  directed  them  to  procure  mallets  and  iron 
implements  for  the  purpose  of  making  a  concerted  effort  to  demolish 
the  bridge.  On  the  day  fixed,  mailed  knights,  protected  by  helmets 
and  shields,  assembled  at  the  bridge  and  tried  with  all  their  might  to 
destroy  it.  But  the  solid  masonry,  harder  than  any  iron,  offered  effec¬ 
tive  resistance.  The  citizens  also  hindered  their  attempts  by  hurling 
forth  stone  missiles  and  showers  of  arrows.  Perceiving,  therefore,  that 
they  were  not  succeeding,  the  Christians  gave  up  the  attempt  and 
adopted  a  different  plan.  They  determined  to  set  up  a  machine  over 
against  the  bridge  and  place  on  constant  guard  therein  armed  men 
whose  duty  it  should  be  to  restrain  the  sallies  made  by  the  besieged. 
Proper  materials  of  the  kind  needed  were  accordingly  assembled, 
workmen  were  summoned,  and  quickly  within  a  few  days  the  work 
was  carefully  finished  in  all  its  parts.  With  much  toil  as  well  as  danger 
to  the  workers,  it  was  drawn  to  its  position  and  set  up  like  a  lofty  tower 
before  the  bridge.  It  was  then  put  under  the  watchful  care  of  the  count. 

When  the  townspeople  saw  this  engine  close  to  the  walls,  they  has¬ 
tened  to  the  point  of  danger.  Again  they  aimed  their  hurling  engine 
thither  and  tried  to  weaken  it  by  constant  volleys  of  huge  stones.  Those 

1 

stationed  on  the  walls  and  towers  also  sent  forth  arrows  and  every  kind 
of  dart  against  those  in  and  around  the  engine  in  a  vigorous  attempt  to 
keep  them  away  from  the  bridge. 

Thus  the  defenders  on  the  walls  kept  up  the  attack  from  all  direc- 


CRUSADERS  IN  NORTHERN  SYRIA 


21 1 


ions,  hurling  dense  showers  of  arrows  and  rocks  again  and  again  in 
he  hope  of  driving  the  Christians  back  even  a  little.  Meanwhile  others 
hrew  open  the  gate  and,  with  an  impetuous  charge,  rushed  forth  and 
jeized  the  bridge  by  force.  Swords  in  hand,  they  fought  their  way  in 
Jose  combat  to  the  machine.  Those  who  had  been  detailed  to  protect  it 
ivere  driven  off  ^  it  was  set  on  fire  and  speedily  reduced  to  ashes. 

Our  leaders  now  perceived  that  they  could  make  no  headway  by  this 
method  against  their  troubles  at  the  bridge.  On  the  following  day, 
therefore,  they  set  up  three  engines.  By  hurling  constant  showers  of 
missiles  from  these,  they  hoped  to  succeed  in  at  least  weakening  the 
walls  and  gate  so  as  to  prevent  the  citizens  from  sallying  forth  with 
hostile  intent.  The  result  was  that,  as  long  as  the  engines  continued 
their  work,  not  a  citizen  dared  to  emerge  through  that  gate.  As  soon  as 
these  efforts  were  relaxed,  however,  the  besieged  recommenced  their 
usual  sallies  and  caused  much  trouble  to  those  of  the  camp  nearest 
them. 

When  this  plan  also  proved  to  be  without  result,  the  Christians 
adopted  a  method  suggested  by  some  of  their  number.  Immense  rocks 
and  massive  tree  trunks,  so  heavy  that  a  hundred  hands  could  scarcely 
move  them,  were  rolled  against  the  gate.  Under  the  protection  of  the 
whole  army,  a  thousand  mailed  knights  lent  their  strength  to  the  work. 
The  material  was  carried  over  the  bridge  and  piled  up  in  such  a  mass 
before  the  gate  that  all  attempts  of  the  citizens  to  move  it  were  futile. 
These  tactics  checked  the  charge  of  the  foe  through  that  gate  and  the 
sudden  sallies  ceased. 

1 6.  The  enemy  attacks  'parties  %vho  are  j  or  aging  for  fodder, 

■ 

A  furious  fight  results.  Many  fall  on  both  sides.  Some 

perish  by  the  swordy  others  are  drowned  In  the  river. 

It  happened  one  day  that  a  party  of  infantry  and  cavalry  from  our 
army,  numbering  about  three  hundred,  went  out  beyond  the  bridge  to 
seek  fodder.  According  to  their  custom,  they  began  to  scatter  over  the 
country  to  look  for  the  necessary  supplies.  The  imperative  necessity  of 
seeking  provisions  had  led  them  to  adopt  this  as  a  customary  practice, 
and  as  a  rule  they  had  hitherto  returned  in  safety  from  their  frequent 
foraging  trips,  even  when  heavy  laden  with  the  needful  supplies. 
Consequently,  secure  in  the  belief  that  they  would  continue  to  be  for¬ 
tunate  and  that  no  untoward  accident  such  as  often  occurs  on  warlike 


212 


CRUSADERS  IN  NORTHERN  SYRIA 


forays  would  befall  thenij  they  had  gradually  lost  sight  of  due  caution. 

The  citizens  saw  this  band  from  the  city  and  suddenly  issued  forth 
in  numbers  far  greater.  Crossing  by  the  stone  bridge/®  they  hurried 
with  all  speed  against  the  Christians  who  were  roaming  about  without 
due  caution.  They  attacked  them  suddenly,  killed  a  good  many,  and 
put  the  rest  to  flight. 

The  Christians  fled  to  the  bridge  of  boats,  with  the  intention  of  gain¬ 
ing  the  camp,  but  the  bridge  was  already  filled  with  those  who  had 
reached  it  first.  Consequently,  many  tried  to  cross  by  the  ford  but  met 
death  in  the  waves  where  they  had  thought  to  find  safety.  Others,  in 
spite  of  their  efforts,  were  pushed  from  the  bridge  by  the  dense  throngs 
and  plunged  headlong  into  the  river.  The  majority  of  these  unfor¬ 
tunates  were  overwhelmed  by  the  force  of  the  waves  and  swept  away 
together  into  the  deep,  which  greedily  swallowed  them  up  and  refused 
to  restore  them  again. 

When  the  news  of  this  disaster  reached  the  army,  thousands  of 
knights  rushed  to  arms.  On  crossing  the  river,  they  encountered  the 
foe  who  were  returning  from  the  massacre  of  the  Christians  and  exult¬ 
ing  in  the  spoils.  Our  men  at  once  attacked  them  and  pursued  them 
with  great  persistence  even  to  the  city  gate.  Much  havoc  was  wrought 
upon  them. 

When  the  townspeople  saw  their  fellow  citizens  in  this  desperate 
peril,  wounded  and  dying,  their  hearts  were  moved  with  compassion. 
They  unbarred  the  gate  and,  with  unusual  courage,  swarmed  across  the 
stone  bridge  in  great  numbers  to  lend  assistance  to  their  friends.  Val¬ 
iantly  they  attacked  our  forces,  who  at  first  made  a  sturdy  resistance. 
Soon,  however,  overwhelmed  by  the  violence  of  the  multitude,  they 
turned  and  fled,  pursued  by  the  infidels  as  far  as  the  bridge  of  boats.  In 
this  skirmish,  many  of  our  foot  soldiers  fell  by  the  sword  and  many 
others  were  drowned  in  the  river.  Some  of  the  knights  also,  while  flee¬ 
ing  from  the  pursuing  foe,  became  so  jammed  together  on  the  bridge 
that  they  were  thrown  headlong  into  the  river.  Burdened  with  shields, 
breastplates,  and  helmets,  they  were  swallowed  up  with  their  horses 
by  the  waters  and  never  again  appeared. 

Thus  our  people  suffered  from  siege  no  less  than  those  who  were 
within  the  walls.  They  were  unable  to  conceal  their  excursions  into 

This  chapter  appears  to  be  misplaced — possibly  by  William  himself  in  his  hasty 
closing  of  the  work.  It  would  help  to  explain  the  action  of  the  crusaders  described  in 
the  previous  chapter.  Chapters  15  and  16  should  be  transposed. 


CRUSADERS  IN  NORTHERN  SYRIA 


213 

the  country  round  about  from  the  townspeople,  who  in  turn  used  every 
effort  to  check  them.  At  the  same  time,  other  hostile  forces,  lurking 
in  the  woods  and  fields,  were  laying  ambushes  to  entrap  them — snares 
which  were  too  often  successful.  As  a  result  our  soldiers  did  not  ven¬ 
ture  to  go  out  from  their  camp  or  to  wander  very  far  in  search  of  food. 
Nor  was  the  camp  itself  a  place  of  safety,  for  all  were  in  terror  lest  the 
mighty  force  which  the  enemy  was  said  to  be  levying  in  many  quarters 
might  descend  suddenly  upon  them.  A  wise  man  might  well  question, 
then,  which  condition  was  the  better  and  which  the  more  to  be  dreaded, 
that  of  the  besieging  host  or  that  of  those  who  were  supposed  to  be  in  a 
state  of  siege. 

4 

17*  the  frovisions  are  exhausted  and  the  j amine  becomes 
worse  and  worse.  The  feofle  struggle  against  hunger.  The 
violent  rains  cause  the  tents  to  rot.  The  army  is  in  danger 
of  ferishing. 

To  relate  in  detail  the  disasters  which  occurred  almost  daily  in 
various  places  during  the  progress  of  this  great  and  long-continued 
siege  would  take  far  too  long  and  would  be  out  of  place  in  the  histori¬ 
cal  summary  which  I  am  attempting  to  give  with  great  accuracy.-^ 
Passing  over  particular  incidents,  therefore,  let  us  follow  the  general 
course  of  events. 

When  the  siege  had  been  carried  on  into  the  third  month  with  the 
varied  fortunes  attending  continual  warfare,  it  happened  that  food 
began  to  fail  in  the  camp  and  the  army  suffered  from  a  lack  of  provi¬ 
sions.  At  first  there  had  been  the  greatest  abundance  of  all  things  need¬ 
ful  for  the  use  of  man  as  well  as  plenty  of  fodder  for  the  horses  j  there¬ 
fore,  as  is  the  habit  of  thoughtless  men,  the  people  concluded  that  the 
same  condition  of  prosperity  would  continue  without  exertion  on  their 
part.  Hence,  they  abused  their  privileges  and  wasted  in  a  short  time 
the  food  that  should  have  sufiiced  for  many  days  if  it  had  been  appor¬ 
tioned  with  proper  moderation.  There  was  no  limit  to  the  extravagance 
in  camp,  nor  was  economy,  the  friend  of  the  wise  man,  present.  Every¬ 
where  was  luxury,  everywhere  superfluity  3  not  only  was  this  true  of 
those  things  which  are  necessary  for  the  nourishment  of  man,  but  even 

William  succeeded  remarkably  well  in  bringing  together  material  from  at  least 
four  Latin  chronicles,  some  Arabic  sources,  and  oral  tradition.  The  order  of  events 
which  he  includes  follows  the  accepted  chronological  order.  He  omits  some  details 
and  expands  others,  as  will  be  noted. 


214 


CRUSADERS  IN  NORTHERN  SYRIA 


in  respect  to  fodder  for  the  horses  and  draft  animals.  All  idea  of  mod¬ 
eration  was  lacking.  Consequently,  it  happened  that,  as  the  stress  of 
famine  increased,  the  army  was  reduced  to  such  destitution  that  prac¬ 
tically  the  entire  host  was  in  danger  of  perishing.  A  general  assembly 
of  the  people  was  thereupon  called,  and  it  was  determined  under  oath 
that  all  booty  which  was  taken  should  be  divided  in  good  faith  into 
equal  portions.  Detachments  of  three  and  four  hundred  men  were 
formed.  These  went  out  together  and  roamed  over  the  whole  district 
in  the  attempt  to  procure  food  in  any  way  possible. 

Before  the  townspeople  formed  the  habit  of  sallying  forth  to  attack 
these  bands  and  to  lay  ambushes  for  them  and  while  the  surrounding 
country  was  still  full  of  flocks  and  herds,  grain,  wine,  and  other  prod¬ 
ucts,  these  foragers  used  to  return  with  rich  spoils,  much  booty,  and  a 
great  supply  of  provisions.  This  was  the  reason  for  the  abundance 
mentioned  before  as  existing  in  the  camp.  But  now  the  resources  of  the 
country  near  by  had  become  exhausted.  Moreover,  the  Turks,  who  had 
formerly  languished  in  abject  terror,  had  now  regained  their  strength 
and  acquired  courage  to  defend  their  possessions.  Hence,  the  foragers 
came  back  empty-handed,  or,  as  more  often  happened,  were  slain  to  a 
man,  so  that  not  one  survived  to  tell  the  camp  of  their  fate. 

Day  by  day  the  shortage  of  provisions  continued,  and  the  famine 
grew.  Bread  sufficient  to  provide  one  meal  a  day  for  one  person  could 
with  difficulty  be  obtained  for  two  shillings.  A  cow  or  heifer  which  ear¬ 
lier  sold  for  five  shillings  brought  two  marks.  A  lamb  or  kid  which 
might  have  been  bought  once  for  three  or  four  pennies  now  cost  five 
or  six  shillings  and  could  scarcely  be  found  at  that.  Eight  shillings  was 
barely  enough  to  purchase  the  food  necessary  for  a  horse  for  one  night. 
The  army  had  brought  with  it  more  than  seventy  thousand  horses,  but 
now  there  were  scarcely  two  thousand  left  in  the  camp.  The  rest  had 
perished  from  cold  and  hunger,  while  those  which  still  survived  were 
gradually  failing  and  wasting  away  daily  because  of  hunger  and  the 
severe  cold. 

In  addition,  the  pavilions  and  tents  in  the  camp  had  rotted.  Thus 
many  who  still  had  food  perished  because  they  could  not  endure  the 
rigorous  cold  without  protection.  Floods  of  water  fell  in  torrents,  so 
that  both  food  and  garments  moulded  and  there  was  not  a  dry  place 
where  the  pilgrims  might  lay  their  heads  or  store  their  necessary 
effects. 


CRUSADERS  IN  NORTHERN  SYRIA 


215 

As  a  result  of  these  conditions,  a  pestilence  broke  out  among  the 
legions  in  the  camp,  so  fatal  that  now  there  was  scarcely  room  to  bury 
the  dead,  nor  could  funeral  rites  be  performed.  Those  who  were  appar¬ 
ently  still  in  vigorous  health  secretly  fled  that  they  might  not  fall 
victims  to  the  same  dread  pest.  They  fled  either  to  Lord  Baldwin  at 
Edessa,  or  into  Cilicia  to  those  who  were  ruling  over  cities  there,  or  to 
any  other  place  which  had  come  under  the  power  of  the  Christians.^ ^ 
By  the  departure  of  these,  together  with  the  loss  of  those  who  had 
wasted  away  through  hunger  and  disease  and  of  others  who  had  per¬ 
ished  by  the  sword,  the  army  was  diminished  to  such  an  extent  that  it 
seemed  as  if  barely  half  survived. 

18.  Bohemond  and  the  count  of  Flanders  depart  on  a  foraging 
expedition  with  a  large  force.  Meanwhile y  the  cithsens  make 
a  surreptitious  attack  upon  the  campy  causing  loss  and  in¬ 
jury  to  the  Christians, 

As  the  leaders  devoted  to  God  looked  upon  the  affliction  of  the  people 
and  witnessed  the  woes  by  which  they  were  continually  beset,  they 
were  filled  with  compassion  and  sorrow  for  the  perishing  army.  As  was 
their  usual  custom,  they  came  together  to  consult  as  to  a  remedy  for 
these  desperate  calamities.  After  various  suggestions  had  been  offered, 
it  was  decided  that  some  of  the  more  important  chiefs  should  take  part 
of  the  troops  and  make  an  expedition  through  the  enemy^s  country  to 
drive  off  cattle  and  seize  the  necessary  food.  While  they  were  away,  the 
others  were  to  remain  in  camp  and  use  diligent  care  to  protect  the 
army.  It  happened  that  the  duty  of  foraging  devolved  upon  Bohe¬ 
mond  and  the  count  of  Flanders,  the  count  of  Toulouse  and  the  bishop 
of  Puy  being  left  as  guardians  of  the  camp.  The  count  of  Normandy 
was  absent,^^  and  Godfrey,  the  duke  of  Lorraine,  was  confined  to  his 

Neither  at  this  point,  nor  on  later  occasions  when  he  speaks  of  desertions  from  the 
army  at  Antioch,  does  William  mention  the  attempted  flight  of  Peter  the  Hermit  and 
William  Carpenter,  which  was  regarded  as  highly  dishonorable  to  both  of  them  and 
was  prevented  by  Tancred. 

Robert  of  Normandy  was  at  Laodicea  on  the  coast,  where  he  had  gone  in  response 
to  the  plea  of  English  sailors  who  needed  protection.  Since  their  arrival  opposite 
Antioch,  the  English  fleet  had  been  busy  in  bringing  much-needed  supplies  from  the 
Greek  islands  and  mainland  to  the  crusaders.  They  did  need  military  escort  while  on 
land.  Despite  the  suspicions  which  Robertas  lingering  in  the  relative  ease  and  luxury 
of  Laodicea  aroused  then  and  ever  since,  he  managed,  unlike  Stephen  of  Blois,  to  be 
back  at  Antioch  when  the  fighting  was  hardest  (see  C.  W.  David,  Robert  Curthose^  pp. 
105—8). 


2i6 


CRUSADERS  IN  NORTHERN  SYRIA 


bed  with  a  serious  illness.  The  two  leaders  took  with  them  a  sufficient 
force  of  knights  and  foot  soldiers,  as  many  as  the  exhausted  army  could 
furnish,  and  marched  forth  into  the  enemy’s  land. 

As  soon  as  the  besieged  learned  that  Bohemond  and  the  count  of 
Flanders  had  departed,  that  the  count  of  Normandy  was  away  and  the 
duke  sick,  with  unusual  courage  they  seized  the  opportunity  to  attack 
our  camp,  for  all  agreed  that  the  opportunity  afforded  by  the  absence 
of  the  leaders  should  not  be  neglected.  A  large  force  of  all  sorts  of 
people  was  convoked  from  the  city  and  assembled  at  the  gate  of  the 
Bridge.  The  entrance  was  unbarred.  In  eager  emulation  of  one  an¬ 
other,  they  crossed  the  river,  some  by  the  bridge  and  some  by  the  ford 
lower  down,  and  tried  to  rush  upon  our  camp.  But  the  count  met  them 
with  a  squadron  of  cavalry,  and  they  were  compelled  to  retreat  into 
the  city  with  the  loss  of  two  men. 

During  this  skirmish,  it  happened  that  some  of  our  knights  tried  to 
catch  a  riderless  horse  whose  master  had  been  thrown.  The  thought¬ 
less  and  unlucky  throng,  seeing  this,  supposed  that  the  knights  were 
fleeing  through  fear.  Accordingly,  they  also  turned  in  flight  and 
crowded  each  other  so  closely  together  in  their  panic  that  they  became 
the  cause  of  their  own  death. 

The  citizens  soon  perceived  that  the  pilgrims  were  fleeing  though 
no  man  pursued.  Again  pouring  forth  over  the  bridge,  they  attacked 
the  fugitives  with  their  swords  in  a  hand-to-hand  fight  and  pursued 
them  from  the  stone  bridge  as  far  as  the  bridge  of  boats.  Great  was  the 
havoc  wrought.  For  our  people  crowded  against  each  other  and  so 
blocked  the  way  that  fifteen  knights  and  twenty  foot  soldiers  perished, 
some  by  the  sword  and  others  by  falling  into  the  river.  Much  elated 
by  this  victory,  the  enemy  retired  into  the  city,  covered  with  glory. 

19.  The  jor aging  farty  discovers  the  joe  and  defeats  them. 

They  return  with  booty  and  abundant  s foils. 

During  this  time,  Bohemond  and  the  count  of  Flanders  had,  with  the 
consent  of  all,  led  out  a  company  of  troops  on  a  foraging  expedition. 
They  hoped  to  relieve  the  stringency  in  camp  by  bringing  back  a  goodly 
supply  of  provisions.  Their  more  fortunate  exploits  in  the  enemy’s  land 
made  amends  for  our  mishap,  for  they  captured  a  villa  belonging  to 
the  enemy  and  found  it  filled  to  overflowing  with  all  sorts  of  good 
things. 


1 


CRUSADERS  IN  NORTHERN  SYRIA  217 

Bohemond  had  sent  out  scouts  in  different  directions  to  gather  in¬ 
formation  concerning  the  condition  of  the  country  and,  if  possible,  to 
bring  back  abundant  booty.  On  their  return,  some  of  these  men  re¬ 
ported  that  a  large  number  of  Turks  had  established  themselves  in  that 
vicinity.  He  at  once  dispatched  the  count  of  Flanders  against  them 
with  a  strong  escort,  and  he  himself  followed  with  the  main  body  to 
assist  if  it  should  be  necessary.  But  the  count,  a  valiant  and  noble 
fighter,  boldly  attacked  the  foe  and  did  not  return  to  Bohemond  until 
he  had  slain  a  hundred  infidels  and  put  the  rest  to  flight.  As  he  was 
returning  victorious  to  the  larger  force,  other  scouts  brought  the  news 
that  a  much  stronger  body  of  enemies  was  advancing  from  another 
direction.  Bohemond  at  once  sent  the  count  against  these  foes  with  a, 
larger  force  and  an  additional  escort,  and  he  with  the  rest  of  his  troops 
followed  behind,  ready  to  go  to  their  aid  if  need  be. 

Thanks  to  God’s  mercy,  which  was  leading  our  forces,  it  happened 
that  the  enemy  were  caught  in  some  of  the  narrow  defiles.  Realizing 
that  this  fight  would  not  be  waged  with  bows  and  arrows,  but  rather 
with  swords  in  close  combat,  a  kind  of  fighting  with  which  they 
were  not  familiar,  they  turned  and  fled.  The  Christians  followed  them 
for  about  two  miles  and  killed  a  great  many.  Then  safe  and  sound, 
our  men  returned  to  camp.  They  brought  with  them,  as  trophies,  horses 
and  mules  and  other  spoils  in  the  greatest  abundance — in  short,  booty 

I 

of  all  kinds  which  had  been  taken  from  the  entire  surrounding  country. 

The  success  of  their  brethren  brought  great  joy  to  the  pilgrims  and 
furnished  them  a  slight  respite  from  their  hardships.  Yet,  after  all,  the 
booty  had  not  been  very  large  and  was  barely  sufficient  to  supply  the 
multitude  for  a  few  days.  Consequently,  the  straits  of  the  army  were 
not  greatly  relieved. 

20.  Sveiriy  a  son  of  the  king  of  the  Danes y  who  ivas  hastening 
after  the  army  with  his  troofSy  is  killed  by  the  Turks  near 
the  city  of  Philomelium, 

About  this  time  there  came  from  out  of  the  land  of  Romania  a  dis¬ 
tressing  rumor  fraught  with  grief  and  anxiety.  It  struck  consternation 
to  the  hearts  of  all  and  added  the  culminating  touch  to  the  sorrows  of 
their  wretched  condition. 

The  report,  which  subsequently  proved  to  be  true,  was  as  follows.^^ 

This  story  of  Svend  or  Svein,  one  of  the  most  pathetic  episodes  of  the  crusades, 


f 


2i8 


CRUSADERS  IN  NORTHERN  SYRIA 


A  certain  powerful  man  of  high  rank,  Svein,  son  of  the  king  of  the 
Danes,  famed  alike  for  his  lineage,  character,  and  good  looks,  had 
been  fired  with  a  desire  to  undertake  this  same  pilgrimage.  At  the  head 
of  fifteen  hundred  splendidly  armed  youths  of  the  same  nation,  he  was 
hastening  to  our  aid  at  the  siege  of  Antioch.  He  had  set  out  from  his 
father’s  kingdom  later  than  the  others  and  therefore  made  great  haste 
in  order  that  with  his  entire  retinue  he  might  join  the  legions  that  had 
preceded  him.  He  was  hindered  by  private  affairs,  however,  and  was 
unable  to  overtake  them  as  he  had  hoped. 

Consequently,  he  had  taken  the  road  alone  at  the  head  of  his  own 
troops,  without  the  escort  of  any  of  the  other  commanders.  Following 
in  the  track  of  the  others,  he  reached  Constantinople,  where  he  was  re¬ 
ceived  with  much  honor  by  the  emperor.  He  arrived  at  Nicaea  in  safety, 
and  from  there,  hastening  on  toward  the  army,  he  went  down  into  the 
land  of  Romania  with  all  his  company.  While  he  was  encamped,  per¬ 
haps  without  using  proper  precaution,  between  the  cities  of  Philo- 
melium  and  Terma,  a  large  force  of  Turks  attacked  him  suddenly 
by  night  and  killed  him  in  his  own  camp.  Roused  by  the  noise  of  the 
approaching  enemy — although,  alas,  too  late — his  people  flew  to  arms. 
Before  they  were  fully  prepared  to  receive  the  foe,  however,  the  host 
fell  upon  them  suddenly  and  practically  annihilated  them.  Neverthe¬ 
less,  they  made  a  long  and  valiant  resistance  and  left  behind  them  a 
bloody  victory  for  the  enemy,  so  that  their  lives  seemed  not  to  have 
been  sacrificed  in  vain. 

21.  On  the  f retext  of  ay'rangmg  for  a  market  and  of  entreat¬ 
ing  the  emferor  to  come  to  their  aldy  the  crafty  Taticms 
leaves  the  armyy  with  no  intention  of  returning. 

The  emperor  had  appointed  Taticius  as  his  deputy  to  guide  the  pil¬ 
grims  on  their  way,  as  has  already  been  related,  and  to  this  time  he 


has  appealed  to  the  literary  and  artistic  fancy  of  later  ages.  By  it  the  young  prince 
has  been  provided  with  a  wife,  Fiorina,  who  is  pictured  as  fighting  by  his  side  to  the 
end  of  the  complete  tragedy.  Riant  dismissed  this  account  by  Albert  and  William  as 
pure  legend,  because  he  could  find  no  contemporary  Scandinavian  sources  to  confirm 
it  (P.  Riant,  Les  Scandina<ues  en  Terre  Sainte).  J.  C.  H.  Steenstrup  and  his  collab¬ 
orators,  however,  have  identified  the  young  prince  as  one  of  the  numerous  sons  of 
the  Danish  king,  Svend,  and  accept  the  story  of  his  crusade  (see  Danmarks  Riges 
Historie^  I,  473,  505  j  see  also  K.  Gjerset,  A  History  of  the  Norwegian  Peofle^  I,  311). 

Philomelium  was  the  first  considerable  town  after  Nicaea  on  the  road  followed 
by  the  main  body  of  crusaders. 


CRUSADERS  IN  NORTHERN  SYRIA  219 

had  accompanied  the  legions.  Now,  however,  seeing  the  troubles  by 
which  they  were  encompassed,  he  began  to  fear,  like  the  coward  he 
was,  that  the  leaders  would  not  persevere  in  their  pilgrimage  and  that 
some  day  the  entire  army  would  be  cut  down  by  the  swords  of  the 
enemy.  He  came,  therefore,  to  the  assembly  of  the  leaders  and  with 
great  earnestness  tried  to  persuade  them  to  give  up  the  siege  and  move 
the  entire  army  to  the  cities  and  fortresses  near  by.  There  they  would 
find  the  necessities  of  life  in  greater  abundance,  and  from  them  as  bases 
they  could  continually  harass  the  people  of  Antioch.  From  various  na¬ 
tions  the  emperor  had  levied  for  their  aid  an  army  of  untold  thousands, 
which  would  arrive  about  the  beginning  of  spring.  He  added  that,  as 
he  had  determined  from  the  beginning  to  share  their  hardships  and 
desired  to  participate  both  in  their  prosperity  and  adversity,  so  now  he 
wished  to  assume  an  even  greater  task  on  behalf  of  the  common  good 
and  the  general  welfare.  It  was  his  purpose  to  go  at  once  to  the  emperor 
in  order  to  hasten  the  movements  of  the  imperial  army  and  to  arrange 
that  the  necessary  food  supplies  be  brought  together  from  the  country 
on  this  side  of  the  city.  Although  our  leaders  had,  from  the  very  first, 
recognized  Taticius’s  crafty  and  treacherous  character,  yet  no  one  op¬ 
posed  his  words  or  objected  to  his  proposal.  In  order  to  conceal  his 
treachery  and  guilt  under  some  show  of  truth,  he  left  his  tents  and  the 
greater  part  of  his  following,  either  because  he  was  regardless  of  their 
welfare  or  because  he  had  secretly  instructed  them  to  follow  him  on 
a  fixed  day  to  a  certain  meeting  place. 

Thus  he  departed,  as  if  intending  to  return  in  the  near  future,  but 
never  afterwards  appeared,  a  wicked  and  faithless  man  who  deserves 
to  be  condemned  to  everlasting  death.  His  departure  established  a 
pernicious  precedent, ‘for  from  that  day  all  who  could  stealthily  stole 
away  from  the  camp,  regardless  of  their  oaths  and  the  public  profession 
which,  with  ardent  vows,  they  had  made  in  the  beginning. 

In  the  meantime,  the  famine  was  increasing,  nor  could  the  leaders 
find  any  effective  relief  for  this  great  evil.  Again  and  again,  chosen 
chiefs  with  large  forces  took  turns  in  going,  two  by  two,  into  the  land 
of  the  enemy  and  frequently  returned  victorious  to  their  own  people. 

This  interpretation  of  the  departure  of  Taticius  which  occurred  about  the  be¬ 
ginning"  of  February,  1098,  is  definitely  partisan,  though  shared  by  most  of  the  Latin 
chroniclers.  Anna  believed  that  he  was  artfully  intimidated  by  Bohemond,  who  al¬ 
ready  had  designs  on  Antioch  despite  the  agreement  with  Alexius.  Modern  authorities 
are  almost  as  widely  separated  in  their  views  of  the  matter.  The  best  recent  summary 
of  the  controversy  is  that  by  R.  B.  Yewdale,  Bohemond  /,  Prince  of  Antioch^  pp.  58-63. 


220 


CRUSADERS  IN  NORTHERN  SYRIA 


Yet  they  came  back  without  bringing  booty  or  the  food  which  was  so 
necessary.  For  the  report  had  gone  forth  that  the  Christians  were  in 
the  habit  of  making  excursions,  and  the  enemy  had  moved  their  flocks 
and  herds  and  any  other  animals  they  owned  into  the  inaccessible 
mountains.  To  these  remote  retreats  the  Christians  could  not  penetrate, 
and  even  had  they  succeeded  in  reaching  them  it  would  not  have  been 
an  easy  matter  to  drive  away  the  spoils. 


22.  The  \ amine  increases y  and  a  deadly  flague  lays  hold  on  the 
feofle,  T he  bishofs  ordain  a  fast  of  three  days,  Duke  God- 
frey^s  health  is  comfletely  restored y  and  the  army  is  com¬ 
forted  because  of  his  recovery. 

During  this  time  the  famine  in  the  army  was  growing  worse  from 
day  to  day.  Pestilence  and  many  other  ills  arising  from  the  famine 
were  also  on  the  increase.  The  elders  and  others  of  wide  experience 
perceived  that  these  troubles  arose  from  the  sins  of  the  people,  and  that 
it  was  the  Lord  who,  justly  provoked  to  anger,  was  visiting  this  chas¬ 
tisement  upon  His  stiff-necked  children.  They  met,  therefore,  to  take 
counsel  together,  and  with  the  fear  of  the  Lord  before  their  eyes,  began 
to  deliberate  anxiously  how  they  might  speedily  atone  for  their  sins 
with  due  penitence.  By  making  amends  for  their  faults  of  the  past  and 
avoiding  similar  ones  in  the  future,  they  hoped  to  appease  the  wrath  of 
the  Lord. 

By  the  authoritative  mandate  of  the  bishop  of  Puy,  who  was  the 
legate  of  the  apostolic  see,  and  by  the  other  pontiffs  beloved  of  God, 
with  the  full  concurrence  and  demand  of  the  lay  princes  and  the  whole 
army,  it  was  therefore  decreed  that  a  fast  of  three  days  be  held,  that,  by 
scourging  the  body,  they  might  strengthen  their  souls  for  more  effec¬ 
tive  prayer.  When  this  had  been  done  with  all  devotion,  they  deter¬ 
mined  in  like  manner  to  put  away  from  the  camp  all  the  light  women 
of  ill  repute.  Adultery  and  fornication  of  every  description  was  forbid¬ 
den  under  penalty  of  death,  and  an  interdict  was  also  placed  on  all 
revelling  and  intoxication.  Dangerous  games  of  chance,  heedless  oaths, 
fraud  in  weights  and  measures,  chicanery  of  every  kind,  theft  and 
rapine  were  also  placed  under  the  ban. 

When  these  rules  had  been  decreed  and  ratified  by  general  consent, 
judges  were  named  who  were  to  be  responsible  for  keeping  track  of 
these  offenses,  and  upon  them  was  conferred  full  power  of  investigating 


CRUSADERS  IN  NORTHERN  SYRIA 


221 


and  punishing  the  same.  Nevertheless,  some  violators  of  these  laws 
were  afterwards  found.  These  sinners  were  solemnly  accused  and  con¬ 
victed  by  the  judges  and  were  sentenced  to  punishment  with  the  full 
severity  of  the  law,  according  to  the  kind  of  crimes  committed.  Their 
fate,  therefore,  deterred  others  from  committing  the  same  offenses. 

Thus,  through  the  abounding  grace  of  God,  the  people  were  recalled 
to  the  fruit  of  a  better  life  and  the  terrible  anger  of  the  Lord  was  some¬ 
what  lessened.  For  Lord  Godfrey,  who  was,  as  it  were,  the  one  and  only 
prop  of  the  whole  army,  at  once  began  to  recover  fully  from  the  seri¬ 
ous  illness  which  had  long  troubled  him,  the  result  of  the  wound  which 
he  suffered  from  a  bear  in  the  vicinity  of  Antioch  in  Pisidia.-®  His  con¬ 
valescence  was  a  source  of  the  greatest  consolation  to  the  entire  army 
in  their  affliction. 

23.  Lord  Bohemond  devises  a  noteworthy  scheme  to  remove 
the  annoyance  caused  hy  scouts  sent  out  by  the  enemy. 

During  this  time,  constant  rumors  and  reports  were  spreading 
throughout  the  entire  Orient,  nor  had  it  escaped  the  notice  even  of  the 
kingdoms  of  the  South  and  other  outside  nations,  that  great  forces  of 
Christians  had  arrived  before  the  city  of  Antioch  and  were  besieging 
it  with  a  strong  hand.  Each  monarch,  therefore,  much  concerned  about 
his  own  country,  was  continually  sending  spies  to  our  army  to  obtain 
through  them  accurate  details  concerning  the  manners,  valor,  and  in¬ 
tentions  of  this  vast  host.  There  were  many  of  these  people  in  our 
camp.  Almost  every 
Christian  army  to  those  who  had  sent  them  and  others  were  arriving 
for  the  same  purpose.  Nor  was  it  difficult  for  men  of  this  sort  to  pass 
unknown  among  our  troops,  for  they  possessed  much  facility  in  vari¬ 
ous  languages.  Some  pretended  to  be  Greeks,  some  Syrians,  and  others 
Armenians,  and  all  could  easily  assume  the  characteristics  of  such  na¬ 
tions  in  idioms,  manners,  and  dress. 

The  leaders  accordingly  met  to  consider  what  measures  ought  to 
be  taken  for  the  public  safety  in  this  matter.  To  expel  these  spies  from 
the  camp  would  not  be  an  easy  task,  since  in  language,  habit,  and  man¬ 
ners  they  differed  but  little  from  the  nations  just  mentioned.  There- 

Strictly  contemporary  evidence  does  not  accord  Godfrey  the  all-important  role 
which  William  here  ascribes  to  him.  William  at  this  point  reflects  the  influence  of 
later  legend  about  the  man  who  became  the  first  Latin  ruler  of  Jerusalem. 


lay  some  were  leaving  to  report  conditions  in  the 


222 


CRUSADERS  IN  NORTHERN  SYRIA 


fore,  until  it  could  be  fully  determined  what  measures  must  be  taken 
against  them,  the  leaders  thought  best  to  confide  their  plans  to  a  few 
persons  only.  There  was  reason  to  fear  that,  if  this  information  were 
known  to  many,  it  might  reach  the  ears  of  those  who  would  impart  it 
to  the  enemy  for  the  sake  of  injuring  the  Christians.  When  it  seemed 
impossible  to  discover  any  way  of  preventing  these  machinations,  Bohe- 
mond,  a  man  of  unusually  keen  and  clear-sighted  mind,  is  said  to  have 
addressed  the  chiefs  as  follows,  ^^My  lords  and  brethren,  leave  all  re¬ 
sponsibility  in  this  matter  to  mej  for  with  the  help  of  God,  I  will  find 
a  fitting  remedy  for  this  malady.”  Then  the  conference  of  leaders  broke 
up  and  each  returned  to  his  own  camp. 

As  the  shades  of  evening  began  to  come  on  apace  and  throughout 
the  camp  the  usual  preparations  for  dinner  were  in  progress,  Bohe- 
mond,  mindful  of  his  promise,  caused  certain  Turkish  prisoners  to  be 
brought  forth.  He  handed  them  over  to  the  headsman  with  orders 
that  they  be  strangled.  He  then  had  a  huge  fire  built  as  if  for  preparing 
dinner  and  directed  that  the  bodies,  after  being  prepared  with  care, 
should  be  roasted.  His  people  were  instructed  that  if  any  question  arose 
about  the  meaning  of  such  a  meal,  they  were  to  answer  that  thence¬ 
forward,  by  decision  of  the  chiefs,  the  bodies  of  all  enemies  or  spies 
seized  should  furnish  meat  for  the  tables  of  the  leaders  and  the  people 
in  the  same  fashion. 

The  news  that  these  measures  were  being  taken  in  Bohemond’s 
camp  spread  through  the  army.  All  the  members  of  the  expedition 
ran  thither  in  wonder  at  the  novelty  of  the  idea.  The  spies  who  were  at 
that  time  in  the  camp  were  terrified.  They  believed  that  what  was 
rumored  to  have  been  decreed  was  actually  so,  and  without  pretense, 
and  drew  their  own  conclusions  from  it.  Apprehending  that  a  similar 
fate  might  overtake  them  also,  they  left  the  camp  at  once  and  returned 
to  their  own  land.  To  the  chiefs  who  had  sent  them  they  reported  that 
this  people  surpassed  every  other  nation  and  even  beasts  in  cruelty.  To 
seize  the  cities  and  castles  of  their  enemy,  together  with  all  property  of 
every  description,  to  cast  into  prison,  to  torture  cruelly  in  enemy  fash¬ 
ion,  or  even  to  kill  did  not  satisfy  them.  These  Christians  must  also  fill 
their  stomachs  with  the  flesh  of  their  enemies  and  feast  on  the  fat  of 
their  foes. 

Such  were  the  rumors  which  penetrated  to  the  farthest  parts  of  the 
Orient  and  terrified,  not  merely  neighboring  nations,  but  even  those 


CRUSADERS  IN  NORTHERN  SYRIA  223 

far  remote.  The  entire  city  of  Antioch  trembled  also,  frightened  at 
the  novelty  and  cruelty  of  the  measure.  Thus  the  zealous  efforts  of 
Bohemond  brought  about  the  elimination  of  this  pest  of  spies,  and  our 
plans  were  less  often  divulged  to  the  enemy.^"^ 

24*  The  calif h  of  Egyft  sends  envoys  to  the  chiefs.  He  asks 
for  a  treaty  and  seeks  to  win  their  good  will. 

t 

Moreover,  the  caliph  of  Egypt,  the  most  powerful  of  all  infidel  po¬ 
tentates  because  of  his  riches  and  military  forces,  had  sent  his  envoys 
to  our  leaders.  The  reason  for  this  embassy  was  as  follows.  For  many 
years,  a  deep  and  inveterate  enmity  had  existed  between  the  Orientals 
and  the  Egyptians,  arising  out  of  differences  in  their  religious  beliefs 
and  their  opposite  dogmas.  This  hatred  has  persisted  without  interrup¬ 
tion  to  the  present  day.  Thus  these  two  kingdoms,  often  at  war  with 
each  other,  were  in  constant  rivalry,  each  striving  to  extend  its  own 
boundaries  and  to  reduce  the  limits  of  the  other,  as  was  carefully  ex¬ 
plained  in  the  first  book  of  this  history.^®  At  different  periods,  accord¬ 
ing  as  the  prowess,  now  of  the  former  and  now  of  the  latter,  gained 
the  upper  hand,  each  kingdom,  with  the  success  of  its  arms,  expanded 
its  territory.  The  result  was  that  whatever  increased  the  domains  of 
one  kingdom  decreased  that  of  the  other. 

At  this  period,  the  prince  of  Egypt  held  possession  of  all  the  coun¬ 
try  from  the  land  of  Egypt  even  to  Laodicea  of  Syria — a  journey  of 
thirty  days.  But  a  short  time  before  the  Christians  arrived,  as  we  have 
already  stated,  the  sultan  of  Persia  had  seized  Antioch,  which  lies  on 
the  frontiers  of  the  Egyptian  kingdom,  and  had  occupied  all  the  coun¬ 
try  as  far  as  the  Hellespont.  The  Egyptian  monarch  regarded  with 
suspicion  any  increase  of  the  Persians  or  Turks.  Accordingly  the  news 
that  Qilij  Arslan  had  lost  Nicaea,  where  his  army  was  reported  to  have 
been  badly  treated,  and  also  that  the  Christians  had  laid  siege  to  An¬ 
tioch  pleased  him  greatly.  He  regarded  the  losses  of  the  Turks  as  a 
gain  for  himself  and  their  troubles  as  affording  peace  and  safety  for 

Bohemond’s  reputation  as  a  master  of  guile  and  courage  had  taken  on  legendary 
proportions  before  the  crusade  was  completed.  He  was  the  “crafty  Ulysses’’  of  this 
journey.  Several  legends  of  Bohemond’s  feats  of  craft  and  courage  appear  in  the 
earliest  of  the  chronicles  of  the  crusade,  the  Anonymi  gesta  (A.  C.  Krey,  The  First 
Crusade y  pp.  i66— 67). 

This  cross  reference  suggests  the  probability  that  William  wrote  this  chapter 
when  he  was  making  his  final  revision  of  the  work,  presumably  in  1182. 


224  CRUSADERS  IN  NORTHERN  SYRIA 

himself  and  his  subjects.  Fearing,  therefore,  that  weariness  of  the  long- 
continued  siege  might  cause  our  people  to  fail,  he  sent  envoys,  mem¬ 
bers  of  his  own  household  staff,  to  beg  the  leaders  to  continue  the  siege. 
The  deputies  were  commissioned  to  assure  the  Christians  that  the  sul¬ 
tan  would  aid  them  with  military  support  and  resources.  They  were 
also  to  try  to  win  the  hearts  and  favor  of  the  leaders  and  to  close  a 
treaty  of  friendship  with  them.^® 

In  loyal  obedience  to  the  commands  of  their  lord,  the  messengers 
set  sail  and  arrived  at  the  camp  of  the  Christians,  very  anxious  over 
the  task  entrusted  to  them.  They  were  received  with  fitting  hospitality 
and  honor  by  the  chiefs  of  our  army  and  were  admitted  to  frequent 
conferences  with  them,  that  they  might  have  opportunity  to  deliver 
their  message.  Yet  while  they  marvelled  at  the  endurance  of  our  peo¬ 
ple,  their  numbers  and  arms,  their  patience  under  hardships,  their 
hearts  were  filled  with  apprehension  before  the  mighty  host,  for  they 
had  a  presentiment  of  what  was  to  happen  in  the  future.  For  that  which 
their  master  was  now  surreptitiously  trying  to  bring  about,  by  sup¬ 
planting  another,  he  was  later  to  experience  in  his  own  case. 

In  a  word,  after  Antioch  had  been  conquered  and  restored  to  the 
Christian  faith  and  its  pristine  freedom,  the  Christians,  aided  by  the 
grace  of  omnipotent  God,  wrested  from  his  violent  rule  by  force  of 
arms  all  the  country  from  that  city  to  the  river  of  Egypt,  which  is  near 
Gaza — a  journey  of  fifteen  days  in  extent — ^just  as  the  people  of  the 
faithful  hold  it  today. 

This  chapter  reflects  William’s  superior  knowledge  of  oriental  affairs,  for  none 
of  the  contemporary  Latin  chroniclers  gives  as  full  an  account  of  the  reason  for  the 
presence  of  this  embassy  from  Egypt.  The  presence  of  the  Egyptian  envoys,  however, 
is  noted  by  many  of  the  Latin  chroniclers. 


HERE  ENDS  THE  FOURTH  BOOK 


THE  FIFTH  BOOK  BEGINS 


SIEGE  AND  CAPTURE  OF  ANTIOCH 

I.  The  Citizens  of  Antioch  call  on  their  neighbors  for  aid. 

They  resfond  to  the  affeal  and  encamf  around  Harenc, 

In  the  meantimej  the  citizens  of  Antioch  and  their  lord  were  greatly 
alarmed  over  their  condition.  They  marked  the  steadfast  endurance 
of  the  pilgrims,  their  perseverence  under  hardships,  and  the  fact  that 
neither  hunger  nor  severe  cold  caused  them  to  swerve  from  their 
undertaking.  On  the  contrary,  though  surrounded  by  so  many  difficul¬ 
ties,  the  Christians  continued  to  press  on  steadily  toward  the  goal  set 
before  them. 

In  view  of  this  situation,  the  citizens  again  and  again  sent  letters  and 
messages  to  invoke  the  aid  of  the  neighboring  princes.  With  earnest 
entreaties  they  endeavored  to  rouse  sympathy  and  begged  these  lords  to 
hasten  without  delay  to  the  aid  of  their  brethren.  They  even  suggested 
the  best  method  of  rendering  that  assistance.  Let  their  allies  repair  to 
the  city  and  lie  hidden  in  ambush  until  the  citizens,  as  was  their  custom, 
should  engage  the  enemy  by  the  bridge  and  keep  them  occupied  in 
fighting  at  that  place.  Then,  when  those  both  within  and  without  An¬ 
tioch  should  be  fully  engrossed  in  that  skirmish,  the  men  in  ambush 
should  rush  forth  suddenly  and  fall  upon  the  Christians  while  they 
were  off  guard.  It  was  hoped  that,  when  they  were  attacked  both  in 
front  and  rear  simultaneously,  not  a  man  would  be  able  to  escape  death. 

In  response  to  this  earnest  pleading,  a  large  body  of  troops  was  as¬ 
sembled  from  Aleppo,  Shayzar,  Hama,  Emesa  [Hims],  Hierapolis, 
and  other  neighboring  cities.^  Secretly  and  in  absolute  silence,  as  their 
orders  directed,  they  drew  near  Harenc  [Harim],  barely  fourteen 
miles  from  Antioch,  and  stealthily  pitched  their  tents  around  it.  As  the 
citizens  had  advised,  they  intended  to  fall  suddenly  upon  the  Chris¬ 
tians  while  they  were  engaged  with  the  assault  on  the  city.  But  the 

^  Ridwan  of  Aleppo  was  in  command  of  these  forces,  which  were  drawn  chiefly 
from  his  own  territories.  Though  William  refuses  to  accept  the  full  figure  used  by 
Albert,  his  own  statement  of  the  numbers  in  that  army  is  much  too  high.  Stephen  of 
Blois,  writing  to  his  wife  Adele  at  the  time,  estimated  the  number  at  twelve  thousand, 
which  in  itself  must  be  considered  a  generous  exaggeration  (see  H.  Hagenmeyer, 
ChronologUy  no.  233). 


1 


226 


CAPTURE  OF  ANTIOCH 


faithful  who  dwelt  in  the  vicinity  and  who  had  often  rendered  great 
assistance  to  our  people  informed  the  leaders  of  the  approach  and  status 
of  these  troops.  Our  chiefs,  thus  forewarned,  met  together  to  consult 
over  the  situation.  It  was  finally  decided  that,  at  the  first  dusk  of 
evening,  all  knights  in  the  army  who  had  horses  fit  for  service  should 
stealthily  and  noiselessly  leave  the  camp  in  battle  array  behind  the 
standards  of  their  individual  leaders.  The  infantry,  meanwhile,  were 
to  remain  to  protect  the  camp  until  the  return  of  their  superiors,  who 
had  gone  forth  at  the  command  of  the  Lord. 

2.  Our  commanders  leave  the  infantry  to  'protect  the  cam'p 
and  march  out  with  the  cavalry  against  the  enemy.  They 
return  victorious. 

Accordingly,  at  early  nightfall,  as  had  been  arranged,  the  chiefs 
left  the  city  by  the  bridge  of  boats.  With  barely  seven  hundred  knights, 
they  proceeded  to  a  place  between  the  lake  (mentioned  before  in  de¬ 
scribing  the  city)  and  the  Orontes  river,  which  at  this  point  were  about 
a  mile  apart.  There  the  troops  rested  that  night.  Meanwhile,  the 
enemy,  entirely  ignorant  of  our  advance,  had  also  crossed  the  river 
the  same  night  by  the  upper  bridge. 

On  the  following  day,  as  soon  as  the  first  rays  of  light  appeared,  the 
Christians  took  arms  and  drew  up  their  forces  in  six  squadrons  under 
the  special  leaders  already  assigned.  The  Turks,  however,  had  already 
taken  a  position  in  the  vicinity,  for  they  had  learned  from  their  scouts 
that  our  people  were  advancing  against  them.  Two  detachments  had 
been  sent  on  as  an  advance  guard,  and  the  main  body  of  troops  was 

As  we  have  said,  the  Christians  had  only  about  seven  hundred  men. 
Divine  will  ordained,  however,'  that  when  these  were  arranged  in 
squadrons  according  to  the  rules  of  military  science,  they  appeared  to 
be  unnumbered  thousands.  It  was  as  if  additional  forces  had  been  given 
from  on  high. 

As  the  enemy’s  legions  moved  gradually  forward,  those  in  the  fore¬ 
most  ranks  began  to  make  a  violent  charge  upon  our  lines.  They  let  fly 
a  shower  of  arrows  like  hail  and  immediately  retreated.  Our  men  paid 
no  attention  to  their  onslaught,  however,  and  advanced  close  upon 
them.  Brandishing  their  lances  with  their  usual  energy,  they  fell  upon 
.  the  infidels  with  swords  and  forced  them  to  crowd  together  in  a  mass. 


CAPTURE  OF  ANTIOCH  227 

Thus  hemmed  into  a  confined  space  with  the  lake  on  one  side  and  the 
river  on  the  other,  the  Turks  had  no  freedom  of  movement  and  hence 
were  unable  to  employ  their  usual  tactics  of  sending  forth  arrows  and 
then  retreating.  Crowded  together  in  fear  of  the  swords,  they  could 
not  endure  the  pressure  exerted  by  the  Christians  and  soon  decided 
that  their  only  chance  of  safety  lay  in  flight.  Accordingly,  they  turned 
and  fled.  Our  men  pursued  them  zealously  as  far  as  the  town  of  Harim, 
just  mentioned,  ten  miles  away  from  the  field  of  battle.  Terrible 
slaughter  was  wrought  upon  them  as  they  retreated. 

When  the  townspeople  saw  that  their  forces  had  been  routed  and 
that  nearly  all  had  fallen  under  the  swords  of  the  victorious  Chris- 
tians,  they  feared  to  remain  in  the  citadel  after  such  a  disaster  to  their 
friends.  They  therefore  set  fire  to  the  place  and  fled. 

But  the  Armenians,  inhabitants  of  the  region,  and  other  Christians — 
a  large  number  of  whom  dwelt  in  the  vicinity — took  possession  of  the 
place  and  at  once  delivered  it  into  the  hands  of  our  leaders  before  the 
latter  returned  to  camp. 

About  two  thousand  of  the  enemy^s  men  fell  that  day.  Greatly  en¬ 
couraged  and  exultant  over  the  double  victory  won,  the  Christians  gave 
thanks  to  the  Lord  and  returned  to  the  camp.  They  carried  back  with 
them  the  heads  of  five  hundred  slain  enemies  and  an  immense  quan¬ 
tity  of  spoils,  including  a  thousand  strong  horses,  which  were  of  the 
greatest  use  to  them. 

3.  The  citizens  are  thrown  into  great  consternation  at  the 
news  of  the  disaster  to  their  allies. 

In  the  meantime,  throughout  that  entire  night,  the  people  of  Antioch 
were  waiting  for  the  promised  aid.  Eagerly  they  looked  forward  to 
the  coming  of  dawn  when,  supported  by  the  attack  of  their  allies  from 
without,  they  intended  to  sally  forth  from  the  city  and  make  a  sudden 
assault  upon  the  Christians.  They  hoped  that  the  latter,  unprepared 
for  such  tactics,  would  be  taken  by  surprise  and  routed. 

It  was  toward  the  last  hour  of  the  night  and  the  sky  was  beginning 
to  grow  bright,  yet  no  sign  of  the  coming  of  their  allies  appeared.  The 
scouts  reported,  however,  that  some  of  the  Christian  leaders  had  gone 
out  as  if  to  meet  them,  so  the  citizens  gathered  their  forces  and  eagerly 
issued  forth  from  the  gates.  For  the  greater  part  of  that  day,  they 
waged  fierce  warfare  with  the  Christians.  Finally,  lookouts  posted  in 


228 


CAPTURE  OF  ANTIOCH 


elevated  positions  in  the  city  notified  them  that  our  army  was  approach¬ 
ing.  They  then  retired  within  the  walls  and  stationed  themselves  on 
the  towers  and  ramparts  and  other  high  places  in  the  city  to  await  the 
coming  of  the  legions,  for  they  were  uncertain  whether  the  approach¬ 
ing  host  was  that  of  allies  or  enemies.  As  the  troops  came  nearer,  how¬ 
ever,  the  besieged  recognized  their  armor  and  saw  that  they  were  laden 
with  booty  and  spoils.  With  consternation,  they  realized  that  these 
were  Christian  forces  returning  as  conquerors  from  a  victory  over  the 
allies  for  whom  they  themselves  had  been  anxiously  looking.  There¬ 
upon  they  gave  way  to  grievous  lamentations  over  the  failure  of  their 
great  hopes. 

Our  troops  approached  the  city  and  proceeded  to  their  camp.  There, 
in  sign  of  victory  and  further  to  increase  the  anguish  of  the  infidels, 
they  caused  the  heads  of  two  hundred  Turks  who  had  been  slain  to  be 
hurled  into  the  city  by  the  engines.  The  remaining  heads  were  to  be 
impaled  upon  stakes  and  set  up  before  the  city.  It  was  hoped  that  these 
dreadful  spectacles  would  serve,  like  a  thorn  in  the  eye,  to  intensify 
the  manifold  sorrows  of  the  besieged.  From  the  story  of  the  captives 
taken,  it  was  learned  with  some  degree  of  accuracy  that  the  number  of 
allies  who  had  determined  to  come  to  the  aid  of  Antioch  was  about 
twenty-eight  thousand.  This  happened  on  February  7,  in  the  year  of 
the  Incarnation  of  the  Lord  1097.“ 

4.  Our  leaders  build  a  stronghold.  Shifs  from  Genoa  arrive  at 
the  fort.  The  feofle  hurry  down  to  the  seashore.  Some 
fall  into  ambush  and  ferish. 

Our  leaders  determined,  at  this  time,  to  build  a  stronghold  on  a  cer¬ 
tain  hill  above  Bohemond’s  encampment.  If,  at  any  time,  the  Turks 
should  attempt  to  attack  our  forces,  the  new  fortress  would,  it  was 
hoped,  act  as  an  obstacle  to  them  and  at  the  same  time  form  a  kind  of 
outwork  for  the  camp.  When  this  was  finished,  it  was  put  in  charge  of 
a  vigilant  garrison,  and  the  position  of  the  whole  army  was  as  safe  as 
if  it  had  been  protected  by  the  walls  of  a  fortified  city.  On  the  east  was 

^  The  date  was  usually  stated  as  the  first  day  of  Lent,  which  according  to  chrono¬ 
logical  tables  would  be  February  9,  William^s  deliberate  translation  of  the  date  as 
given  by  Albert  and  other  chroniclers  into  the  form  here  given  raises  several  interesting 
questions.  Did  his  Easter  tables  yield  February  7  as  the  first  day  of  Lent  in  that  year? 
Is  the  year  1097  a  copyist’s  error,  or  was  William  reckoning  March  25  as  the  be¬ 
ginning  of  the  year,  the  practice  of  some  of  the  cities  of  Italy  and  elsewhere?  The 
correct  date  of  this  battle  was  February  9,  1098. 


CAPTURE  OF  ANTIOCH 


229 

the  newly  built  fort  ^  on  the  south  the  city  wall  and  the  adjacent  marsh  j 
while  on  the  west  and  north  was  the  river,  which  flowed  obliquely 
around  Antioch. 

The  siege  had  already  lasted  five  months,  when  some  ships  of 
Genoa,^  carrying  pilgrims  and  provisions,  sailed  into  the  mouth  of  the 
river  from  the  sea.  There  they  waited,  while  frequent  messengers  were 
dispatched  to  the  camp  to  ask  that  some  of  the  leaders  be  sent  to  con¬ 
duct  them  safely  thither.  For  the  enemy  knew  that  the  members  of 
our  expedition  were  in  the  habit  of  wandering  freely  down  to  the  shore 
and  also  that  the  sailors  were  eager  to  go  to  the  camp.  They  had  there¬ 
fore  blocked  all  the  roads  and  laid  ambushes  for  unwary  passers-by, 
which  resulted  in  many  deaths.  So  no  one  dared  to  go  to  the  camp  with¬ 
out  a  strong  escort. 

The  leaders  resolved,  at  this  same  time,  to  erect  a  redoubt  at  the 
head  of  the  bridge  where  there  was  a  chapel  dedicated  to  the  super¬ 
stitious  belief  of  the  infidels.^  It  was  hoped  that  this  would  in  some 
measure  hinder  the  enemy’s  power  to  go  forth  by  way  of  this  bridge. 
It  happened  that  large  numbers  of  Christians  had  gone  down  to  the 
shore  and  were  intending  to  return  after  their  business  was  finished. 
Bohemond  and  the  count  of  Toulouse,  with  Lord  Evrard  du  Puiset 
and  Count  Gamier  de  Grey,  had  been  chosen  from  the  leaders  to  escort 
the  Egyptian  envoys  to  the  coast.  On  the  return  trip,  they  were  to  act 
as  a  safeguard  for  the  pilgrims  who  had  recently  arrived  at  the  port 
and  also  for  those  of  our  people  who  had  come  down  thither  from  the 
camp.  When  the  citizens  of  Antioch  learned  that  these  nobles  had  left 
for  the  shore,  they  sent  against  them  four  thousand  light-armed  sol¬ 
diers  with  orders  to  prepare  ambushes.  If  the  Christians  should  chance 
to  risk  the  return  trip  without  taking  due  precautions,  the  soldiers  were 
to  attack  them  boldly. 

Accordingly,  as  the  escort  was  returning,  on  the  fourth  day,  accom¬ 
panied  by  a  large  number  of  unarmed  people  and  a  train  of  pack  ani- 

®  This  fleet  was  probably,  according  to  the  date,  the  English  fleet  on  which  Bruno, 
the  citizen  of  Lucca,  reached  Antioch.  A  fleet  from  Genoa  had  arrived  several  months 
earlier.  Such  an  error,  however,  must  be  considered  pardonable,  because  fleets  were 
arriving  from  the  Channel  ports  and  from  Italy.  After  arrival,  many  of  the  ships  en¬ 
gaged  in  transporting  provisions  from  neighboring  Christian  lands  to  the  crusading 
army,  so  that  there  were  constant  goings  and  comings.  Doubtless  also  each  fleet,  what¬ 
ever  its  origin,  picked  up  additional  ships  on  the  way  (see  H,  Chron.y  no.  240,  and 
C.  W.  David,  Robert  Curthose,  App.  E). 

^  Hence  called  Machumeria  or  Mahumaria  or,  in  the  French,  Mahomeriey  after 
Muhammad.  The  name  was  later  changed  to  St.  Mary. 


CAPTURE  OF  ANTIOCH 


230 

mals  laden  with  food  and  all  kinds  of  equipment,  the  enemy  suddenly 
fell  upon  them  in  some  of  the  narrow  defiles.  The  count  of  Toulouse 
was  marching  at  the  head  with  the  advance  guard,  and  Lord  Bohe- 
mond  was  protecting  the  rear.  Although  these  leaders  were  valiant 
men,  worthy  of  praise  in  every  respect,  yet  they  could  not  control  the 
heedless  throng  as  they  wished  or  supply  strength  or  other  virtues 
which  nature  had  denied.  For  a  long  time  they  resisted,  as  well  for 
their  own  honor  as  for  the  protection  of  their  companions^  finally, 
however,  they  perceived  that  further  efforts  were  useless  and  that 
delay  was  merely  endangering  their  own  lives.  Accordingly,  to  take 
measures  for  their  own  safety,  they  left  the  unequal  conflict  and  re¬ 
paired  to  the  camp  with  those  of  the  company  who  were  able  to  follow 
them.  The  people  immediately  left  their  packs  and  the  baggage  and 
fled  in  different  directions,  some  to  the  woods  and  others  to  the  hills. 
Those  who  were  unable  to  escape  fell  by  the  sword  of  the  foe.  Great 
was  the  destruction  wrought  upon  our  people  at  that  place.  Various 
reports  of  the  number  who  perished  there  have  been  given  me,  but 
the  opinion  of  the  majority  is  that  about  three  hundred  of  both  sexes 
and  of  all  ages  perished  in  that  fight. 

5.  The  duke^s  admirable  flan  of  retaliation  for  this  unfortunate 
disaster. 

0 

Meanwhile,  a  report  had  reached  the  camp  that  the  people  who  were 
on  their  way  up  from  the  seashore  had  fallen  into  an  ambush  laid  by 
the  enemy  and  that  all  had  perished  in  an  unexpected  attack.  No  one, 
however,  could  give  definite  tidings  as  to  whether  the  commanders 
were  living  or  dead. 

Duke  Godfrey,  a  man  of  great  energy  and  very  prompt  to  resort  to 
arms,  was  filled  with  solicitude  for  the  people  of  God,  as  for  his  own 
children.  He  summoned  the  chiefs  and  the  legions  as  a  whole  and  com¬ 
manded  them  to  take  arms  immediately.  The  herald  was  sent  forth 
to  proclaim  that  no  one,  under  pain  of  death,  should  absent  himself  in 
so  dangerous  a  crisis,  but  that  all  must  fly  to  arms  to  avenge  the  blood 
of  their  brethren.  Without  delay,  the  troops  gathered  as  one  man  and, 
in  a  united  body,  crossed  the  bridge  of  boats.  The  duke  then  formed 
them  into  companies  and  set  over  them  as  commanders  Robert,  count 
of  Normandy,  the  lord  of  Flanders,  Hugh  the  Great,  and  his  own 


CAPTURE  OF  ANTIOCH 


231 

brother  Eustace.  Each  company  was  assigned  to  its  proper  position 
under  its  own  leader.  The  duke  then  explained  the  situation  to  them 
as  to  sensible  men  and  roused  their  valor  by  his  inspiring  words:  “If 
it  is  true,  as  has  been  reported  to  us,  that  the  enemy  of  the  Christian 
name  and  faith  has  triumphed  over  our  lords  and  our  brethren — the 
Lord  permitting  it  because  of  our  sins — I  perceive  that  nothing  re¬ 
mains  for  us,  illustrious  men,  but  to  avenge  the  great  injury  done  to 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  or  to  die  with  them.  Believe  me,  neither  life  nor 
safety  Is  preferable  to  death  or  any  kind  of  suffering,  if  the  blood 
of  these  great  lords  has  been  poured  forth  upon  the  earth  in  vain,  if 
so  terrible  a  slaughter  of  people  dedicated  to  God  does  not  meet  with 
a  swift  vengeance.  It  seems  to  me  that  the  infidels,  somewhat  elated 
over  this  victory,  will  not  exercise  their  usual  caution.  Confident  of 
their  strength,  they  will  not  hesitate  to  pass  through  our  ranks  as  they 
return  to  the  city  with  booty  and  plunder.  For,  just  as  an  unfortunate 
and  desperate  situation  induces  greater  caution,  so  prosperity  generally 
renders  rather  careless  those  upon  whom  she  is  smiling  for  the  mo¬ 
ment. 

“If  this  seems  good  to  you  also,  let  us  be  prepared  herej  and,  since 
our  cause  is  just,  let  us  cherish  a  confident  hope  of  victory  through  that 
One  for  whom  we  believe  we  are  fighting.  Should  the  enemy  try  to 
return  through  our  ranks,  let  us  receive  him  at  the  point  of  the  sword, 
and,  in  remembrance  of  the  wrongs  inflicted  upon  us,  let  us  not  fall 
short  of  the  valor  of  our  fathers.”  This  speech  was  approved  and 
seemed  good  in  the  eyes  of  all.  While  they  were  still  dwelling  on  his 
words,  lo,  Bohemond  returned  to  the  camp  from  the  shore,  followed 
in  a  short  time  by  the  count. 

The  people  greeted  their  leaders  with  tears  of  deep  affection,  for 
they  realized  that  they  had  narrowly  escaped  losing  the  consolation 
of  these  great  lords.  When  informed  of  the  duke’s  plan,  both  the  chiefs 
approved  the  idea  and  declared  that  it  ought  to  be  put  into  execution. 

Meanwhile,  Yaghi  Siyan,  aware  that  his  forces  had  won  the  victory, 
nevertheless  felt  concerned  about  their  safe  return,  especially  since  he 
knew  that  the  legions  had  left  the  camp  in  larger  numbers  than  usual. 
He  therefore  issued  a  general  edict  that  all  in  the  city  who  had  experi¬ 
ence  in  arms  should  assemble  immediately  at  the  gate  by  the  bridge, 
ready,  if  it  should  be  necessary,  to  render  timely  aid  to  the  returning 
townspeople. 


232 


CAPTURE  OF  ANTIOCH 


Our  leaders,  on  their  part,  had  sent  out  scouts  to  make  a  careful 
examination  of  the  route  by  which  the  enemy  would  probably  return, 
for  they  felt  confident  that  the  Lord  would  grant  them  the  victory. 

6.  The  enemy  return  In  triumfhy  but  at  the  city  gate  they  are 
slcnn  by  the  swords  of  the  ChAstians.  Two  thousand  fall. 

The  duke  cleaves  an  Infidel  knight  throi^gh  the  middle. 

Without  delay  the  lines  were  drawn  up  and  the  standards  raised. 
But  while  they  were  waiting  for  the  Turkish  army  to  appear,  messen¬ 
gers  arrived  in  great  haste  with  the  intelligence  that  the  enemy  had 
already  taken  a  position  near  by.  With  frantic  shouts,  they  urged  our 
people  to  arm  and  march  out  against  the  foe.  The  legions  accordingly 
advanced  as  far  as  seemed  expedient,  calling  on  heaven  for  aid  and 
shouting  words  of  encouragement  to  each  other.  Their  reputation  for 
valor  ever  in  mind,  the  Christians  brandished  their  spears  and,  as  with 
one  accord,  attacked  the  foe.  According  to  their  usual  custom,  they  per¬ 
sistently  pressed  the  infidels  hard  with  the  sword  in  close  combat  and, 
urged  on  by  the  remembrance  of  their  own  wrongs,  gave  them  no 
respite  even  to  breathe.  Panic-stricken,  the  enemy  lost  courage,  and 
their  hearts  gave  way  within  them.  They  turned  and  fled  toward  the 
bridge  which  led  to  the  city,  each  man  trying  to  outstrip  his  neighbor. 

The  duke  of  Lorraine,  however,  had  experienced  many  such  crises. 
His  troops  had  already  seized  a  position  before  the  bridge  where  there 
was  a  slight  elevation.  Hence,  as  the  Turks  fled  before  the  pursuit  of 
our  revered  leaders,  they  were  either  cut  down  as  they  attempted  to 
escape  to  the  bridge  or  were  forced  to  return  to  certain  death  into  the 
fray  whence  they  had  just  fled. 

The  count  of  Flanders,  a  strenuous  warrior  well  trained  in  the  use 
of  arms,  gave  vigorous  pursuit  with  his  troops.  He  boldly  overthrew 
the  ranks  of  the  enemy  and  repeatedly  visited  upon  them  the  evils  that 
they  had  wrought  upon  our  forces.  The  count  of  Normandy,  no  less 
valiant  than  his  fathers,  likewise  fought  nobly  in  this  combat.  The 
count  of  Toulouse,  afire  with  zeal  for  the  Lord  5  Hugh  the  Great, 
mindful  of  his  royal  blood  and  never  falling  short  of  the  dignity  of 
his  lofty  lineage 5  Count  Eustace,  the  duke’s  brother^  Baldwin,  count 
of  Hainaultj  Hugh  of  St.  Pol^  and  all  the  other  nobles  threw  them¬ 
selves  upon  the  foe  with  fury  and  wrought  such  deeds  of  valor  that 


CAPTURE  OF  ANTIOCH 


233 

the  strength  of  the  infidels  was  exhausted  and  they  were  slain  help¬ 
lessly  like  sheep. 

When  Yaghi  Siyan  sent  his  forces  forth  to  fight,  he  ordered  the  city 
gates  to  be  closed  behind  them.  By  thus  removing  all  chance  of  return, 
he  hoped  to  rouse  them  to  greater  courage  and  to  induce  them  to  fight 
more  valiantly.  He  believed  that  he  was  acting  for  the  best  in  taking 
this  course,  but  he  was,  on  the  contrary,  unwittingly  causing  their  de¬ 
struction.  For  when  they  could  no  longer  sustain  the  charge  and  pres¬ 
sure  of  our  men,  flight  was  their  only  salvation.  Deprived  of  this  hope, 
however,  those  who  might  have  escaped  death  by  this  road  were  cut 
down  by  the  sword  and  perished  in  large  numbers. 

There  was  in  the  camp  such  clashing  of  arms  and  ringing  of  gleam¬ 
ing  swords,  such  neighing  of  horses  and  tumult  of  shouting  men  that, 
if  the  arms  of  the  combatants  had  not  differed  greatly  in  appearance, 
a  fatal  error  might  have  exposed  many  to  imminent  peril  or  even  to 
death. 

The  matrons  of  Antioch,  their  daughters,  and  little  ones  had  gath¬ 
ered  on  the  walls  and  in  the  towers  with  the  old  men  and  all  the  de¬ 
fenseless  population.  From  there,  they  looked  down  upon  the  massacre 
and  with  groans  and  tears  deplored  the  slaughter  of  their  friends. 
^^Happy  the  times  that  are  passed,”  they  cried,  ‘^and  fortunate  those 
to  whom  kindly  death  granted  the  privilege  of  departing  before  they 
looked  upon  calamities  like  these.”  Mothers  of  many  children  who  had 
formerly  been  considered  fortunate  were  now  regarded  as  far  other¬ 
wise,  while  barren  women  were  thought  lucky  and  much  happier  than 
mothers. 

Yaghi  Siyan  now  saw  that  his  people  were  utterly  defeated  and  that 
the  remnant,  exposed  to  the  sword,  must  inevitably  be  slain  in  the 
slaughter  going  on  near  by.  He  therefore  ordered  the  gates  to  be 
opened  as  quickly  as  possible,  that  the  rest  of  the  people  might  reach 
safety.  The  entrance  was  unbarred,  but  a  terrible  congestion  and  tu¬ 
mult  immediately  resulted  3  for  as  the  fugitives,  pursued  by  the  foe, 
tried  to  cross  the  bridge,  they  became  so  massed  together,  in  their 
panic,  that  great  numbers  were  thrown  into  the  river. 

The  duke  of  Lorraine  had  borne  himself  most  valiantly  throughout 
the  entire  engagement,  but,  toward  evening,  in  the  struggle  around 
the  bridge,  he  gave  a  notable  proof  of  the  strength  for  which  he  was 


CAPTURE  OF  ANTIOCH 


234 

so  distinguished.  He  performed  there  a  famous  deed  worthy  of  re¬ 
membrance  forever— a  feat  which  rendered  him  illustrious  in  the  eyes 
of  the  entire  army.  With  his  usual  prowess,  he  had  already  decapitated 
many  a  mailed  knight  at  a  single  stroke.  Finally,  he  boldly  pursued 
another  knight  and,  though  the  latter  was  protected  by  a  breastplate, 
clove  him  through  the  middle.  The  upper  part  of  the  body  above  the 
waist  fell  to  the  ground,  while  the  lower  part  was  carried  along  into 
the  city  astride  his  galloping  horse.  This  strange  sight  struck  fear  and 
amazement  to  all  who  witnessed  it.  The  marvellous  feat  could  not 
remain  unknown,  but  rumor  spread  the  story  everywhere.^ 

It  is  said  that  the  enemy  lost  about  two  thousand  men  that  day,  and, 
if  night,  envious  of  our  honors  and  palms  of  victory,  had  not  come  on 
apace,  the  siege  of  Antioch  would  unquestionably  have  ended  at  that 
time.  Around  the  bridge  and  in  the  river,  the  evidences  of  the  slaugh¬ 
ter  wrought  were  so  apparent  that  the  very  color  of  the  water  became 
changed,  and  it  flowed  into  the  sea  a  torrent  of  blood. 

It  was  said,  and  this  rumor  was  later  fully  confirmed  by  Christian 
citizens  who  came  to  our  camp  from  Antioch,  that  twelve  of  the  prin¬ 
cipal  Turkish  satraps  had  been  slain  in  that  engagement,  an  irreparable 
loss  to  the  city. 

7.  Our  feofle  build  a  redoubt  at  the  head  of  the  bridge »  They 
send  a  token  of  victory  to  the  shlfs. 

When  day  returned  to  the  earth,  in  its  usual  course,  the  leaders  again 
assembled  to  give  thanks  to  Omnipotent  God,  in  return  for  the  victory 
granted  them,  and  also  to  hold  a  conference  on  important  matters.  All 
agreed  that  their  original  plan  should  be  carried  out  and  a  fort  erected 
at  the  head  of  the  bridge.  This  would  hinder  the  citizens  from  leaving 
the  city  and  would  afford  greater  ease  and  safety  to  our  men  when 
they  wished  to  roam  about  in  one  direction  or  another.  There  was  at 
that  place,  as  we  recall  mentioning  before,  a  chapel  devoted  to  the 
religious  rites  of  the  Turks,  where  they  had  also  set  aside  a  place  of 
burial  for  their  people.  During  the  night  just  past  and  a  part  of  the 
day  following,  they  had  borne  the  bodies  of  their  dead  thither  for  in- 

®  This  legend  of  Godfrey's  feat  of  strength  may  have  begun  in  the  description  of 
the  battle  by  Raymond  d^Aguilers,  who  speaks  of  Godfrey  dividing  the  foe  as  they 
came  toward  the  bridge.  Albert  expanded  it,  and  in  this  instance  William  seems  to 
have  carried  it  to  its  full  extent. 


CAPTURE  OF  ANTIOCH 


235 

terment.  Acting  on  reliable  information  of  this  fact,  our  people  broke 
into  the  place  by  force,  in  the  hope  of  finding  spoils  that  had  been 
buried  with  the  dead.  They  opened  the  tombs,  disinterred  the  corpses, 
and  carried  away  not  only  the  gold  and  silver  and  precious  garments, 
but  even  the  very  bodies. 

Through  the  revelation  thus  made,  accurate  knowledge  as  to  the 
losses  of  the  enemy  was  obtained,  a  matter  which  had  been  in  doubt 
heretofore,  because  the  fight  had  ended  at  night.  The  joy  of  the  Chris¬ 
tians  over  the  success  of  the  previous  day  was  greatly  increased  by  this 
knowledge.  In  addition  to  those  who  had  been  drowned  in  the  river 
through  various  mishaps,  those  who  had  been  buried  in  the  city,  and 
those  who,  fatally  wounded,  were  on  the  verge  of  death,  fifteen  hun¬ 
dred  bodies  were  found  in  that  cemetery.  About  three  hundred  heads, 
more  or  less,  were  sent  to  the  port,  which  caused  great  rejoicing  to 
those  of  our  people  who  had  returned  there  after  the  fight  of  the  pre¬ 
vious  day.  It  also  acted  as  a  salutary  warning  to  the  Egyptian  deputies 
who  had  not  yet  left  the  harbor. 

Many  Christians  who  had  escaped  from  the  dangers  of  the  previous 
day  were  hiding  in  the  caves  of  the  mountains  and  in  the  thickets  of 
the  woods.  These  hurried  to  the  camp  as  soon  as  they  heard  the  news 
of  our  victory.  Thus,  by  the  will  of  God,  many  soldiers  who  were  be¬ 
lieved  to  have  fallen  in  battle  returned  safe  and  sound. 

As  soon  as  the  people  who  had  taken  refuge  in  various  places  re¬ 
turned,  a  redoubt  was  built  at  the  head  of  the  bridge  from  the  very 
stones  which  had  been  torn  from  the  tombs.  All  lent  zealous  coopera¬ 
tion  and  aid  in  the  erection  of  this  fort,  which  was  fortified  with  a  solid 
wall  and  a  deep  ditch. 

The  chiefs  then  took  under  consideration  the  matter  of  garrisoning 
this  place.  No  one  was  willing  to  undertake  so  heavy  a  responsibility, 
however,  and  each  alleged  one  reason  or  another  as  an  excuse.  Then 
the  count  of  Toulouse,  that  man  beloved  of  God,  voluntarily  took  it 
upon  himself  and,  for  the  sake  of  the  general  welfare,  assumed  the 
care  of  the  new  fortress.  By  this  act  he  regained  completely  the  good 
will  of  the  whole  expedition,  which  he  had  forfeited  during  the  year. 
For,  throughout  the  previous  summer  and  the  whole  of  the  ensuing 
winter,  he  had  lain  languid  and  practically  useless,  the  victim  of  dis¬ 
ease.  While  all  the  other  leaders  with  unwearied  zeal  were  bearing  the 
responsibility  of  the  army,  he  alone  seemed  indifferent  to  it.  He  was 


CAPTURE  OF  ANTIOCH 


236 

wholly  lacking  in  the  grace  of  affability  and  showed  no  generosity 
toward  anyone.  This  was  all  the  more  noticeable  because  he  had  the 
reputation  of  being  a  man  of  greater  wealth  than  the  rest,  and  for  that 
reason  might  have  done  more.  Hence,  to  make  amends  for  his  laziness 
and  niggardly  conduct,  he,  of  his  own  accord,  assumed  the  burden  of 
this  charge.  It  is  said  also  that  he  gave  into  the  hand  of  the  bishop  of 
Puy  and  some  of  the  other  nobles  five  hundred  marks  of  silver  by 
weight,  for  the  purpose  of  replacing  the  horses  which  had  been  lost 
in  this  engagement. 

As  a  result,  his  own  followers,  confident  that  the  loss  of  their  horses 
would  be  made  good,  showed  unusual  courage  and  initiative  in  fight¬ 
ing  the  enemy.  Thus,  the  feeling  against  the  lord  count  was  softened, 
and  all  called  him  the  father  and  preserver  of  the  army. 

8.  The  city  is  hemmed  in  more  closely  by  a  new  fort  just  built 
over  against  the  west  gate, 

Th  us,  the  gate  of  the  Bridge  was  blocked  by  the  new  fortress  where 
the  count  had  placed  five  hundred  valiant  men.  Henceforth  the  citi¬ 
zens  could  issue  forth  from  it  only  with  extreme  peril,  while  our  people 
were  enabled  to  roam  about  more  freely  on  necessary  business.  In  fact, 
the  enemy  could  no  longer  leave  Antioch  except  by  way  of  the  west 
gate,  which  lay  between  the  base  of  the  mountain  and  the  river. 

This  freedom  of  exit  through  that  gate  did  not  apparently  expose 
our  troops  to  much  danger,  since  our  camps  were  all  located  on  the 
other  side  of  the  river.  Still,  it  was  felt  that  the  besieged  had  too  much 
liberty  to  roam  about,  for  in  that  way  the  supplies  necessary  for  the 
city  were  still  being  carried  in.  To  consider  this  problem,  those  valiant 
leaders  of  immortal  memory  again  met  in  conference.  As  a  solution  of 
the  difficulty,  it  was  decided  to  establish  some  fortifications  on  the 
other  side  of  the  river  in  a  suitable  location.  One  of  the  chiefs  would 
then  be  stationed  there  to  make  it  difficult  for  the  foe  to  pass  back  and 
forth.  While  all  agreed  that  the  fortress  should  be  built,  no  one  volun¬ 
teered  to  undertake  the  task  of  guarding  it.  In  the  face  of  this  difficulty, 
they  hesitated,  undecided  what  course  to  adopt.  Finally,  the  illustrious 
Tancred,  a  man  full  of  energy,  was  chosen  for  this  work.  He  was  about 
to  make  some  excuse  about  his  lack  of  means,  when  the  count  of  Tou¬ 
louse  offered  him  a  hundred  marks  of  silver  for  the  work  of  construc¬ 
tion.  Furthermore,  that  those  to  be  associated  with  Tancred  in  this 


237 


CAPTURE  OF  ANTIOCH 

labor  might  have  an  adequate  recompense,  forty  marks  a  month  were 
set  aside  for  them  from  the  public  treasury. 

As  a  result  of  all  this,  a  fort  was  established  close  to  that  gate  on 
a  hill  where  formerly  a  monastery  had  stood.  Wise  and  sturdy  men 
were  assigned  to  guard  it,  and,  by  the  valiant  and  successful  efforts  of 
Tancred,  it  was  maintained  unimpaired  to  the  end  of  the  siege. 

About  three  or  four  miles  below  Antioch,  along  the  banks  of  the 
Orontes,  there  was  a  retired  place,  delightfully  situated  between  the 
mountains  and  the  river.  There  flocks  of  sheep  grazed  in  luxuriant 
green  pastures.  To  this  place,  the  enemy  had  removed  most  of  their 
horses,  because  there  was  a  scarcity  of  fodder  in  the  city.  When  the 
Christians  discovered  this  fact,  they  quietly  assembled  several  squad¬ 
rons  of  horsemen,  who  hastened  to  the  spot.  They  followed  byways, 
that  their  errand  might  not  be  known.  A  number  of  knights  who  were 
guarding  the  cattle  were  slain,  and  two  thousand  fine  horses,  not  count¬ 
ing  mules  and  she-mules,  were  seized  and  led  back  to  camp.  No  spoils 
of  any  descripition  were  of  more  value  to  the  Christians  at  this  time, 
for  almost  all  their  own  horses  had  perished  in  battle  or  had  died  of 
starvation,  cold,  or  various  other  mishaps. 

> 

9.  The  troofs  which  had  been  scattered  here  and  there  return 
to  the  army,  Baldwin  sends  gifts  from  Edessa  to  each  of 
the  chiefs. 

The  city  was  now  surrounded  on  all  sides,  and  the  inhabitants  could 
not  readily  pass  beyond  the  walls  to  attend  to  their  affairs  outside. 
Hence,  they  were  beset  by  many  difficulties.  Other  troubles  began  to 
menace  them  too,  for  food  was  failing  and  need  suddenly  stared  them 
in  the  face,  a  prospect  which  caused  the  citizens  much  anxiety.  The 
supply  of  fodder  also  was  growing  scarce.  The  horses  were  gradually 
pining  away  through  starvation  and  refused  to  perform  their  tasks. 
On  the  other  hand,  our  people  could  now  go  forth  more  freely  to  the 
seashore,  or  wherever  necessity  called  them.  Consequently,  the  strin¬ 
gency  of  food  in  camp,  which  had  caused  the  whole  army  much  distress 
during  the  winter,  was  in  great  measure  relieved.  For  when  the  rigor 
of  winter  was  past  and  the  pleasant  spring  returned,  the  sea  became 
calm,  and  the  fleet  in  the  harbor  could  sail  in  and  out  without  difficulty. 
Thanks  to  the  increasing  warmth  also,  the  roads  became  passable,  so 
that  those  who  had  private  concerns  could  go  out  with  less  difficulty 


CAPTURE  OF  ANTIOCH 


238 

to  attend  to  their  affairs.  With  the  return  o£  milder  weather  also,  those 
Christians  who  had  been  spending  the  time  in  castles  and  cities  near  by 
to  escape  the  hardships  of  camp  life  came  back  to  the  army.  They  re¬ 
paired  their  arms  and,  with  strength  renewed,  again  made  preparation 
for  fighting. 

At  this  time,  news  reached  Lord  Baldwin,  the  duke’s  brother,  that 
the  army  was  struggling  with  dire  need.  His  heart  overflowed  with 
pious  compassion,  and  he  determined  to  relieve  their  necessities  from 
the  abundance  of  his  own  riches,  which  the  Lord  had  so  liberally  be¬ 
stowed  upon  him.  His  generous  gifts  of  gold,  silver,  silken  stuffs,  and 
fine  horses,  of  much  value,  greatly  relieved  the  circumstances  of  each 
chief.  Not  alone  to  the  more  important  chiefs  did  he  show  this  munifi¬ 
cent  liberality,  but  to  many  of  the  people  as  well — a  course  which  won 
for  him  universal  favor  and  the  love  of  all. 

Moreover,  that  he  might  not  do  less  for  his  own  lord  and  elder 
brother,  he  ordered  that  Godfrey  receive  all  the  revenues  from  the 
lands  in  his  own  possession  on  this  side  of  the  Euphrates,  around  Tur- 
bessel  and  the  neighboring  country.  These  consisted  of  grain,  barley, 
oil,  and  wine,  as  well  as  of  fifty  thousand  pieces  of  gold. 

There  was  a  certain  powerful  Armenian  lord,  Nichosius  by  name,® 
who  was  intimately  associated  with  Baldwin.  Out  of  regard  for  the 
latter,  he  dispatched  some  of  his  own  people  with  a  gift  for  the  duke. 
This  was  a  pavilion  of  great  size  and  admirable  workmanship.  But 
Pakrad  laid  an  ambush  for  the  servants  in  charge  of  this  present.  He 
caused  the  pavilion  to  be  stolen  and  carried  to  Bohemond  as  an  offering 
from  himself.  News  of  this  outrage  came  to  the  ears  of  the  duke,  to¬ 
gether  with  all  the  details  of  the  case  as  related  by  the  servants  of 
Nichosius.  Thereupon,  Godfrey  took  the  count  of  Flanders,  with 
whom  he  had  been  on  terms  of  close  friendship  during  the  whole  cam¬ 
paign,  and  went  to  Bohemond.  He  demanded  the  return  of  the  gift, 
which,  though  destined  for  him,  the  duke,  had  been  stolen  by  force. 
Bohemond,  however,  claimed  it  as  a  present  to  himself  from  the  noble 
Pakrad  and  alleged  that  it  was  lawful  for  him  to  retain  that  which  the 

®  This  story  is  not  supported  by  Armenian  sources.  Iskenderian  considers  it  a  rather 
fanciful  symbol  of  help  actually  g-iven  by  the  Armenians,  while  Beaumont,  thoug-h 
somewhat  skeptical  of  the  specific  embroidery  of  the  tale,  is  inclined  to  follow  Kugler 
in  accepting'  it.  Nichosius,  or  Nichusus,  is  mentioned  by  no  other  chroniclers  (see  Galust 
T.  Iskenderian,  Die  Kreuzfahrer  und.  ihre  Beziehungen  zu  der  armenischen  Nachhar- 
fursten  bis  %um  Untergange  der  Grafschaft  Edessa^  p.  33,  note  looj  A.  A.  Beau¬ 
mont,  Jr.,  ^‘Albert  of  Aachen  and  the  County  of  Edessa,”  Munro-Crusades^  pp. 
114-15). 


CAPTURE  OF  ANTIOCH 


239 

duke  was  demanding.  Finally,  however,  lest  it  should  cause  a  disturb¬ 
ance  among  the  people  or  a  quarrel  among  the  leaders,  he  gave  way 
to  the  urgent  requests  of  the  chiefs  and  restored  the  pavilion,  which 
had  been  ojffered  him  as  a  gift.  Thus,  good  will  was  once  more  fully 
restored  between  the  two  leaders. 

It  seems  very  strange  to  me  that  the  duke,  a  man  distinguished  for 
moderation  and  dignity  of  character,  should  have  shown  such  per¬ 
sistence  in  claiming  so  trivial  and  unimportant  a  thing.  I  can  ac¬ 
count  for  it  in  no  other  way  than  by  quoting  the  proverb,  “No  one  is 
perfect  in  every  respect,”  and  also,  “Sometimes  even  good  Homer 
nods.”  ®  There  is  another  saying  also,  “In  a  long  task  it  is  legitimate 
to  succumb  to  sleep.”  ^  For  the  laws  of  human  nature  ordain  that  only 
too  often  we  perceive  in  ourselves  a  defection  from  the  right. 


10.  The  affroach  of  the  enetny^s  host  is  reforted  in  camf, 
Stefheny  count  of  Blots y  under  the  f retense  of  illnessy  makes 
his  way  to  the  coasty  not  intending  to  return. 

At  this  time  a  widespread  rumor  was  current  that  a  powerful  Persian 
prince,  in  response  to  the  urgent  entreaties  of  the  Antiochenes  and  the 
constant  demands  of  his  own  people  as  well,  was  sending  a  host  of 
troops  from  all  parts  of  his  kingdom  to  the  aid  of  the  city.  He  had  sent 
out  an  imperial  edict  commanding  that  a  mighty  host  of  Turks  go  up 
to  Syria  under  specially  appointed  commanders.  This  rumor  owed  its 
origin  and  increase  not  to  the  outside  world  alone,  for  refugees  from 
the  city  who  came  to  our  camp  were  agreed  in  confirming  the  same 
news.  From  day  to  day  this  report  increased  j  soon  they  were  said  to 
be  already  threatening  the  very  gates.  Thereupon,  fear  laid  hold  of 
our  army. 

At  this  crisis,  Stephen,  count  of  Chartres,  a  distinguished  noble  of 
great  influence,  whom  the  chiefs  had  made  the  head  of  their  counsels, 
like  a  father,  because  of  his  exceptional  good  judgment, took  leave 
of  his  brethren,  under  pretense  of  illness,  and  went  down  to  the  coast. 

^  Horace  Car.  ii.  xvi.  27.  The  cluster  of  quotations  from  Horace  at  this  point  sug¬ 
gests  that  William  may  have  added  this  paragraph  as  he  went  through  the  work  for 
the  final  revision.  Classical  quotations  are  more  common  in  the  later  part  of  his  writing. 

®  Horace  Ars  foet,  359.  ®  Horace  Ars  foet.  360. 

Probably  age  and  an  engaging  personality  were  more  important  than  his  judg¬ 
ment,  for  there  is  no  evidence  that  he  played  a  decisive  part  in  determining  policy.  The 
severity  of  William’s  judgment  upon  Stephen’s  conduct  is  an  accurate  reflection  of 
contemporary  opinion.  His  return  to  France  was  clouded  by  this  act,  and  he  sought 
to  atone  for  it  shortly  (see  Book  X,  chap.  20). 


CAPTURE  OF  ANTIOCH 


240 

He  took  with  him  his  servants  and  followers  and  all  his  possessions, 
which  were  very  great.  His  excuse  was  that  he  wished  to  sojourn  at 
Alexandretta  until  his  health  should  be  fully  restored  and  his  strength 
regained  so  that  he  could  return.  Alexandretta  is  a  place  on  the  sea¬ 
shore,  not  far  from  the  port,  and  forms  the  entrance  to  Cilicia. 

About  four  thousand  men  who  had  come  in  his  train  accompanied 
him  on  this  departure.  Reaching  the  coast,  he  retired  to  Alexandretta  to 
await  the  outcome  of  events.  If  the  hoped-for  success  attended  our 
forces  in  battle  he  meant  to  return  to  the  army,  as  if  he  had  recovered 
from  his  ill-health.  If  fate  was  adverse,  his  plan  was  to  return  to  his 
own  land  in  ships  which  he  had  caused  to  be  in  readiness — a  course 
which  involved  lasting  disgrace  and  loss  of  prestige  forever. 

The  leaders  whom  he  left  in  the  camp  were  appalled  at  this  in¬ 
famous  act,  so  fraught  with  everlasting  disgrace.  At  the  same  time 
they  felt  pity  for  the  illustrious  man  who,  by  such  conduct,  had  dis¬ 
honored  the  glory  of  his  line  and  injured  his  own  reputation.  Anx¬ 
iously  they  discussed  how  to  meet  this  emergency,  for  there  was  dan¬ 
ger  that  others  who  were  still  with  them,  influenced  by  his  dastardly 
example,  would  venture  to  make  a  similar  attempt.  It  was  finally  de¬ 
cided  by  unanimous  agreement  to  proclaim  by  the  voice  of  the  herald 
that  all,  without  exception,  were  forbidden  to  leave  the  city.  If  any¬ 
one,  no  matter  what  his  official  position  or  distinguished  service,  should 
furtively  leave  the  camp  without  permission  from  the  chiefs,  he  should 
lie  under  the  ban  of  perpetual  infamy,  like  a  homicide  or  one  guilty  of 
sacrilege.  In  addition,  he  should  be  compelled  to  undergo  the  most 
extreme  punishment.  As  a  result,  from  that  time,  regard  for  valor  and 
fear  of  punishment  prevented  anyone  from  leaving  the  camp,  even 
for  a  short  time,  without  permission  from  the  leaders.  All,  like  clois¬ 
tered  men,  showed  themselves  obedient  to  their  commanders,  without 
making  difficulty  or  trouble. 

II.  The  condition  of  Antioch  is  described^  The  friendshif 
formed  between  Bohemond  and  a  certain  Christian  of  the 
city  is  described. 

Antioch,  this  city  beloved  of  God,  received  the  doctrine  of  Christ  in 
the  time  of  the  apostles  through  the  preaching  of  the  prince  of  the 
apostles,  as  we  have  said,  and  has  faithfully  and  devoutly  borne  His 
easy  yoke  even  to  the  present  day.  While  all  the  East  was  shaken  and 


CAPTURE  OF  ANTIOCH 


241 

the  successors  of  Muhammad  were  subjugating  by  force  entire  prov¬ 
inces  to  their  impious  superstition  and  perverse  dogma,  this  city  re¬ 
jected  with  scorn  the  prophets  and  their  poisonous  doctrine  and,  as 
long  as  possible,  refused  to  bear  the  domination  of  an  infidel  nation. 
For  although  the  heresies  of  this  seducer  had  taken  firm  hold  on  all 
lands  from  the  Persian  gulf  to  the  Hellespont,  and  from  India  to  the 
Spains,^  ^  this  city,  unique  and  alone,  preserved  the  faith  intact  and 
stood  staunchly  for  its  own  liberty  in  the  midst  of  erring  nations. 

Finally  the  noble  citizens,  enfeebled  by  long  sieges  and  distressed 
by  intolerable  attacks  of  the  enemy,  were  unable  to  resist  longer,  and, 
scarcely  fourteen  years  before  the  time  of  which  we  are  speaking,  they 
had  been  forced  to  surrender  Antioch  to  the  foe  of  the  Christian  name 
and  faith.  Accordingly,  when  our  army  arrived  before  the  walls,  nearly 
the  entire  population  were  true  believers,  but  they  were  without  power 
in  the  city.  They  were  wholly  employed  in  trade  and  in  the  practice  of 
mechanical  arts.  Only  the  Turks  and  infidels  were  permitted  to  make 
war  and  to  hold  the  more  important  offices  of  the  city.  The  Christians 
were  not  allowed  to  possess  arms  or  to  have  anything  to  do  with  mili-. 
tary  affairs.  When  the  rumor  of  the  approach  of  pilgrims  from  the 
West  reached  the  chief  men  of  Antioch,  the  faithful  were  held  in  even 
more  suspicion.  Thus,  particularly  after  the  city  was  in  a  state  of  siege, 
they  were  not  even  allowed  to  leave  their  homes  and  go  forth  in  public 
except  at  certain  hours. 

There  were  among  the  people  in  the  city  certain  very  noble  families, 
inheritors  of  the  ancient  dignity  of  race  from  distinguished  ancestors. 
Among  these  was  a  family  notable  for  its  high  lineage,  by  name  Beni- 
Zerra,  which  means,  in  the  Latin  tongue,  sons  of  the  makers  of  breast¬ 
plates.^^  For  thus  they  were  called,  either  from  the  fact  that  their 

It  is  not  clear  whether  William  has  in  mind  here  only  the  Spanish  peninsula  or 
also  Ispahan,  the  region  northeast  of  Armenia  which  the  chroniclers  of  the  time  like¬ 
wise  called  Spain. 

This  incident  of  the  betrayal  of  Antioch  seems  to  have  appealed  strongly  to 
William’s  fancy.  He  not  only  drew  upon  all  his  Latin  sources  but  upon  Arabic  sources 
as  well  for  information,  and  then  allowed  his  imagination  to  carry  his  pen  beyond 
all  of  them.  Indeed,  Tiedau  would  credit  him  with  a  substantial  addition  to  the  poetic 
legend  used  by  the  successive  authors  of  the  Chanson  3? Antioche  (W.  Tiedau,  Geschichte 
der  Chanson  d^Antioche  des  Richard  le  Pelerin  und  des  Graindor  de  Dotuiy).  His  ac¬ 
count  of  Firuz  is  the  most  complete  to  be  found  among  the  chronicles  of  the  period. 
The  connection  of  Firuz  with  the  making  of  armor  is  supported  by  Arabic  writers  in¬ 
cluding  Qalanisi  (see  Gibb,  trans.,  The  Damascus  Chronicle^  p.  45).  Iskenderian 
believes  that  Firuz  was  closely  associated  with  Philaret,  the  Armenian  governor  of 
Antioch  under  Greek  rule,  who  is  known  to  have  accepted  Islam  in  hopes  of  retaining 


CAPTURE  OF  ANTIOCH 


242 

original  ancestor  practiced  this  art,  or  because  they  themselves  carried 
on  that  trade.  It  seems  quite  probable  indeed  that  some  of  this  family 
still  followed  that  craft  and  exercised  the  art,  which  had  been  handed 
down  through  successive  generations  and  to  which  they  owed  their 
hereditary  name.  A  tower  commonly  known  as  the  tower  of  the  Two 
Sisters,  in  the  western  part  of  the  city  by  the  gate  which  today  is  called 
the  gate  of  St.  George,  had  been  assigned  to  them  in  order  that  they 
might  in  tranquillity  carry  on  their  trade,  which  was  of  great  impor¬ 
tance  to  the  lord  and  to  the  city. 

There  were  two  brothers  in  that  family,  the  elder  of  whom,  Firuz, 
a  man  of  much  influence,  was  the  chief  of  his  tribe  and  family.  He  was 
on  terms  of  intimate  friendship  with  the  lord  of  Antioch,  who  distin¬ 
guished  him  by  many  honors.  He  held  the  position  of  secretary  in  the 
palace  and  enjoyed  many  other  dignities.  He  was  a  man  of  great 
energy  and  withal  very  subtle.  He  had  heard  that  Bohemond  was  an 
illustrious  prince  of  great  renown,  who  was  very  prominent  in  all  that 
was  going  on  outside.  Accordingly,  as  soon  as  the  siege  began,  he  suc¬ 
ceeded  in  winning  Bohemond’s  favor  through  the  services  of  faithful 
go-betweens.  During  the  entire  progress  of  the  siege,  he  had  continued 
faithful  and  devoted  to  that  friendship,  and  nearly  every  day  informed 
Bohemond  in  detail  about  the  state  of  the  city  and  the  plans  of  Yaghi 
Siyan.  A  wise  and  discreet  man,  he  was  careful  to  hide  this  intercourse 
with  Bohemond,  as  far  as  possible,  for  he  feared  that,  if  it  became 
known  to  others,  he  and  his  family  might  be  in  danger.  Bohemond,  on 
his  part,  was  also  reticent  about  his  intimacy  with  this  good  man  and 
kept  it  secret  within  his  own  heart.  Consequently,  not  the  slightest  sus¬ 
picion  of  their  friendship  or  of  the  messengers  going  back  and  forth 
between  them  was  betrayed,  even  to  the  servants  or  household  of 
either. 


12.  The  'plot  contrived  through  messengers  between  Bohemond 
and  that  jaithjul  man. 

The  secret  understanding  between  these  two,  which  we  have  just  men¬ 
tioned,  had  continued  for  about  seven  months.  During  this  time,  there 
had  been  much  intimate  discussion  between  them  as  to  the  method  by 

his  position  when  the  Turks  captured  the  city.  Firuz  may  have  done  likewise  (see 
Iskenderian,  Die  Kreuzfahrery  pp.  34—36,  and  H.  Hag'enmeyer,  ed.,  Anonynti  gesta 
Francorumy  et  aliorum  Hierosolymitanorumy  pp.  293  ff.). 


CAPTURE  OF  ANTIOCH 


243 

which  the  city  might  be  restored  to  Christian  liberty.  Bohemond  fre¬ 
quently  reminded  Firuz  of  the  matter,  and  at  last  the  latter  is  said  to 
have  sent  the  following  answer  through  his  son,  who  acted  as  the  bearer 
of  these  private  messages:  “Well  do  you  know,  O  best  of  men,  who  art 
dearer  to  me  than  life  itself,  how  sincerely  I  have  loved  you,  from  the 
time  when,  by  the  will  of  God,  we  entered  into  this  common  friend¬ 
ship.  I  call  to  mind,  moreover,  that  I  have  ever  found  in  your  words 
the  true  firmness  worthy  of  a  good  man.  Hence  it  is  that,  day  by  day, 
you  have  crept  deeper  and  deeper  into  my  heart  and  have  become  ever 
more  dear  to  me.  Over  the  matter  which  you  have  so  often  brought  to 
my  attention  I  have  pondered  with  earnest  care  more  than  once  and 
have  given  due  consideration  to  all  its  various  aspects.  I  am  convinced 
that  if  I  can  restore  my  native  country  to  its  former  state  of  freedom, 
drive  out  these  unclean  dogs  under  whose  rule  we  are  oppressed,  and 
introduce  a  people  who  worship  God,  I  shall  not  fail  of  eternal  reward 
and  shall  be  permitted  to  enjoy  the  society  of  the  blessed  saints  forever. 
On  the  other  hand,  if  I  undertake  this  difficult  and  dangerous  task  and 
then  fail  to  carry  it  through  successfully,  no  one  can  doubt  that  inevita¬ 
bly  my  house  and  the  memory  of  my  distinguished  race  will  be  utterly 
destroyed,  so  that  not  even  the  name  of  it  will  thereafter  be  remem¬ 
bered.  Nevertheless,  the  hope  of  reward  is  ever  wont  to  attract  the 
mind  of  mortals  to  such  risks.  Wherefore,  if  your  comrades  will  con¬ 
cede  that  this  city  when  surrendered  to  you  through  my  zealous  efforts 
shall  belong  to  you  alone,  with  the  help  of  the  Lord,  who  has  joined 
us  in  the  close  bonds  of  friendship,  I  will  undertake  the  task,  however 
difficult.  This  I  will  do  through  love  of  you,  for  whom,  as  for  my  own 
children,  I  desire  every  good  thing.  This  strongly  fortified  tower,  over 
which,  as  you  see,  I  have  full  power,  I  will  surrender  to  you  without 
hindrance  that  through  this  you,  with  all  your  people,  may  gain  free 
entrance  into  the  city.  If,  however,  since  you  are  all  equal,  you  propose 
to  share  the  city  taken  under  such  circumstances  with  the  others  on 
equal  terms,  I  will  not  involve  myself  in  such  danger  for  the  sake  of 
those  in  whom  I  have  no  interest.  On  behalf  of  the  welfare  and  safety 
of  all,  therefore,  make  every  effort  to  obtain  this  concession  from  the 
leaders  associated  with  you  and  rest  assured  that,  as  soon  as  I  shall  re¬ 
ceive  definite  information  that  you  have  secured  that  promise,  I  will 
not  delay  to  open  to  you  the  entrance  into  the  city — ^the  end  to  which 
you  are  endeavoring  to  persuade  me. 


244  CAPTURE  OF  ANTIOCH 

^^Know,  moreoverj  that  unless  this  action  is  taken  very  soon  it  may 
possibly  be  deferred  forever.  Nearly  every  day,  the  lord  of  this  city 
receives  messengers  and  dispatches  indicating  that  reinforcements  as¬ 
sembled  from  the  entire  Orient  for  his  assistance  have  encamped 
around  the  Euphrates  river  with  a  force  of  two  hundred  thousand 
cavalry.  If  these  armies  find  you  still  outside  the  city,  you  will  scarcely 
be  able  to  withstand  the  combined  forces  of  citizens  and  the  advancing 
host  of  their  allies.” 

13.  Bohemond  futs  forth  strenuous  efforts  that  the  city  when 
surrendered  he  conceded  to  him-.  The  count  of  Toulouse 
alone  refuses. 

From  that  time,  Bohemond  began  with  great  earnestness  to  test  the 
sentiments  of  the  individual  leaders  in  an  effort  to  discover  what  each 
man  had  in  mind  and  what  disposition  would  probably  be  made  of  the 
besieged  city  in  the  event  of  its  capture.  He  carefully  concealed  his  own 
design,  however,  except  from  those  who  would,  he  believed,  readily 
assent  to  his  desires.  When  he  found  that  he  would  have  little  prospect 
of  success  with  certain  of  the  leaders,  he  put  off  the  matter  to  a  more 
convenient  season.  Yet  Duke  Godfrey  and  the  count  of  Normandy, 
as  well  as  the  count  of  Flanders  and  Hugh  the  Great,  agreed  to  his 
demands  and  gave  him  a  willing  assent.  They  approved  the  secret  of 
the  noble  man  and  admired  his  wisdom.  They  kept  his  intention  hid¬ 
den  in  their  own  hearts  as  something  that  should  not  be  made  known 
to  anyone.  The  count  of  Toulouse  alone  was  at  odds  with  the  others  in 
this  matter.  As  a  result  of  his  attitude,  a  delay  ensued  which  came  near 
being  fatal,  for  that  familiar  friend  of  Bohemond  was  reluctant  to 
undertake  a  task  involving  so  much  danger  to  himself  for  the  sake  of 
the  others.  Nor  did  Bohemond  work  as  earnestly  for  the  common  good 
as  for  his  own  personal  advantage.  Yet  he  continued  to  maintain  his 
friendship  with  Firuz  by  presents  and  attentions,  thus  fulfilling  the 
obligations  of  a  sincere  friendship.  Frequent  messages  passed  between 
them,  and  the  friendship  once  begun  was  strengthened  and  fostered 
by  both . 


CAPTURE  OF  ANTIOCH 


245 


14*  The  allies y  marching  to  the  relief  of  Antiochy  lay  siege  to 
Edessa,  Baldwin  makes  a  strong  resistancey  however y  and 
they  are  forced  to  retire  without  success  across  the 
Eufhrates* 

During  this  time,  the  deputies  whom  Yaghi  Siyan  and  the  citizens  of 
Antioch  had  sent  to  Persia  to  beg  for  aid  had  returned  to  their  own 
land.  They  had  successfully  completed  their  mission  and  obtained  the 
requests  which  they  had  made.  For  the  magnificent  prince  of  Persia 
had  heard  of  the  troubles  of  Antioch  and  was  moved  with  compassion. 
It  was  to  his  interest  to  check  the  attempts  of  the  Christians  and  to  cut 
off  their  strength  betimes,  lest  they  aspire  to  conquer,  by  their  arms, 
some  parts  of  his  own  kingdom.  He  therefore  sent  into  Syria  countless 
hosts  of  Persians,  Turks,  and  Kurds  under  the  command  of  an  intimate 
friend  of  his,  on  whose  valor,  loyalty,  and  diligence  he  could  entirely 
rely.^^  Under  this  man  as  general  were  centurions,  captains  of  fifties, 
and  other  lesser  officers,  all  of  whom  were  to  obey  and  be  ruled  by  the 
word  of  that  commander.  To  the  latter  the  prince  also  gave  letters 
having  the  force  of  law,  addressed  to  the  governors  of  all  regions  sub¬ 
ject  to  his  own  sway.  In  these  letters  the  prince  enjoined  on  all  peoples 
and  nations,  tribes,  and  tongues  that,  without  making  excuses,  they 
follow  his  beloved  son  Corbagath  [Karbuqa],  whom  he  had  placed  in 
command  of  his  armies  by  reason  of  his  services.  All  were  to  be  subject 
to  the  power  of  this  man  and  must  obey  him  in  whatever  he  pleased 
to  direct  according  to  his  own  free  will. 

At  the  command  of  his  lord,  Karbuqa  took  charge  of  the  legions 
just  named.  He  reinforced  the  number  of  these  by  troops  which  he 
levied  on  his  progress  through  the  land,  entered  Mesopotamia  with 
two  hundred  thousand  men,  and  encamped  in  the  vicinity  of  Edessa. 
There  he  learned  through  various  reports  that  this  city  and  all  the 
surrounding  country  was  held  by  one  of  the  Frankish  leaders  against 
whom  he  was  marching.  He  determined,  therefore,  before  crossing  the 
Euphrates  to  attack  that  city  and  take  it  by  force. 

Baldwin,  however,  had  already  received  notice  of  his  advance.  He 
had  brought  together  valiant  men  from  all  around  to  aid  him  and  had 
carefully  supplied  his  city  with  food  and  arms.  He  was  therefore  only 

These  forces  came  chiefly  from  Mosul  and  were  led  by  Karbuqa,  a  Turkish  ad¬ 
venturer  who  had  driven  out  the  Arab  rulers  in  1096  and  become  an  amir  under  the 
Sal  j  uqs. 


CAPTURE  OF  ANTIOCH 


246 

slightly  alarmed  by  the  terrible  threats  of  Karbuqa.  The  latter  ordered 
his  heralds  to  proclaim  that  the  cohorts  were  to  attack  Edessa  and 
carry  on  the  siege  with  all  their  might.  The  place  made  a  stubborn  re¬ 
sistance,  however,  and  it  soon  became  apparent  that  Karbuqa  could 
make  but  little  headway  in  that  attempt.  Men  of  practical  common 
sense  finally  went  to  their  leader  and  after  many  arguments  persuaded 
him  to  abandon  this  attempt,  which  was,  after  all,  merely  incidental, 
and  proceed  to  his  main  objective — namely,  to  cross  the  Euphrates  and 
hasten  to  the  relief  of  Antioch,  the  purpose  for  which  he  had  been  sent. 
They  reminded  him  that,  on  his  return,  after  he  had  raised  the  siege 
of  Antioch,  it  would  require  hardly  more  than  a  day  to  take  Edessa 
and  capture  Baldwin. 

After  time  and  effort  had  been  wasted  before  Edessa  for  three  suc¬ 
cessive  weeks, Karbuqa  ordered  the  legions  to  cross  the  river.  He 
himself  followed  and  began  to  push  on  with  energy  toward  his  goal. 
But  that  delay  of  the  infidel  host  at  Edessa  was  the  reason  why  Bald¬ 
win  could  not  be  present  at  the  siege  of  Antioch,  and  it  was  also  the 
salvation  of  our  people.  For  if  Karbuqa  had  marched  directly  to  An¬ 
tioch  before  the  Christians  had  gained  the  city,  the  pilgrims  would 
have  been  in  a  critical  situation,  as  Bohemond’s  friend  had  predicted. 
By  the  grace  of  God,  Antioch  was  taken  before  the  infidels  arrived  j 
even  so,  however,  it  was  with  difficulty  that  they  were  able  to  with¬ 
stand  Karbuqa’s  coming. 

15.  The  Christians  exferience  much  anxiety  over  the  aff roach 
of  the  enemy.  They  send  out  scouts. 

In  the  meantime,  the  report  of  the  advance  of  such  great  armies  ran 
throughout  the  camp.  Since  the  report  was  confirmed  as  true  by  many, 
it  was  regarded  as  certain  that  the  enemy  was  already  in  the  vicinity. 
Greatly  worried  over  the  matter,  the  leaders  dispatched  in  various 
directions  experienced  men  on  whose  fidelity  and  diligence  they  justly 
placed  entire  dependence.  These  were  instructed  to  interview  [per¬ 
sons]  of  unquestioned  loyalty  so  that  it  might  be  judged  whether  the 
reports  as  generally  given  out  were  true.  Valiant  warriors  of  high  rank 
were  chosen  for  this  mission:  Drogo  de  Nesle,  Clarebold  de  Vendeuil, 
Gerard  de  Cherisi,  Reinald,  count  of  Toul,  and  others  whose  names 
we  do  not  recall.  These  men  dispersed  in  various  directions  with  their 

May  4—25. 


CAPTURE  OF  ANTIOCH  247 

followers.  They  made  very  careful  investigations  and,  in  their  turn, 
sent  out  scouts  to  more  remote  sections.  In  this  way,  they  gathered 
reliable  information  that  troops  were  being  levied  from  all  directions 
and  concentrated  into  one  host,  as  rivers  are  wont  to  flow  into  the  sea. 
Finally  at  the  proper  time,  they  returned  and  assured  the  leaders  who 
had  sent  them  that  the  report  could  no  longer  be  doubted.  Thus  seven 
days  before  Karbuqa  arrived  before  Antioch  with  his  forces,  the  greater 
chiefs  of  the  Christian  army  had  received  warning.  They  enjoined 
upon  the  spies,  however,  not  to  allow  this  information  to  reach  the 
people.  There  was  reason  to  fear  that  the  host  of  common  folk,  en¬ 
feebled  by  hunger  and  long-continued  hardships,  might  be  overpow¬ 
ered  by  fear  and  plan  flight — a  course  which  had,  indeed,  been  taken 
shortly  before  this  by  some  of  the  greater  chiefs. 

16.  The  chiejs  meet  for  consultation.  Bohemond  makes  known 

I 

the  secret  which  his  friend  had  intrusted  to  him. 

The  chiefs  assembled,  therefore,  to  consult  on  a  situation  which 
seemed  to  be  the  crisis  of  the  whole  campaign.  In  a  spirit  of  humility 
and  with  contrite  hearts,  they  began  to  consider  what  measures  should 
be  taken  in  such  an  emergency.  It  was  suggested  by  some  that  the 
entire  force  engaged  in  the  siege  should  sally  forth  against  the  coming 
multitude,  to  a  distance  of  two  or  three  miles  from  the  city.  There, 
after  invoking  the  assistance  of  heaven,  they  should  try  the  fortune  of 
war  with  the  haughty  commander  who  presumed  so  much  on  the 
strength  of  his  thousands.  Others  thought  it  would  be  wiser  to  leave 
a  part  of  the  army  in  camp  to  keep  the  citizens  from  going  out  to  unite 
with  the  oncoming  host.  The  more  powerful  part  of  the  Christian  army 
and  those  of  more  experience  in  the  use  of  arms  should  then,  according 
to  the  first  suggestion,  go  out  about  two  miles  against  the  infidels  and, 
if  so  it  seemed  good  to  the  Lord,  there  engage  them  with  the  help  of 
the  Omnipotent. 

While  they  were  discussing  this  question  carefully  with  free  inter¬ 
change  of  opinion,  Bohemond  quietly  drew  the  chief  leaders  aside: 
Duke  Godfreys  Robert,  count  of  Flanders j  Robert,  count  of  Nor¬ 
mandy^  and  Raymond,  count  of  Toulouse.  When  they  were  by  them¬ 
selves  in  a  retired  spot,  apart  from  the  rest,  he  addressed  them  as 
follows:  “I  perceive,  beloved  brethren,  fellow  workers  in  the  service 
of  God,  that  you  are  tormented  with  anxiety  over  the  approach  of  this 


CAPTURE  OF  ANTIOCH 


248 

chief  who  is  said  to  be  close  at  hand.  In  the  conference  just  held,  each 
has  had  a  different  opinion  according  as  his  own  desires  directed  j  yet 
neither  proposition  has  struck  at  the  root  of  the  matter.  For  whether 
we  all  go  out,  as  some  of  you  wish,  or  a  part  remain  in  camp,  it  is  evi¬ 
dent  that  our  zealous  efforts  and  outlay,  so  long  continued,  will  have 
been  expended  in  vain.  For  if  we  all  go,  the  siege  will  be  ended  and 
our  aims  defeated^  the  citizens  will  recover  their  liberty,  and,  with 
egress  free,  will  either  join  the  enemy  or  will  bring  the  troops  of  their 
allies  into  the  city. 

^^On  the  other  hand  if  a  part  of  the  troops  remain  in  the  camp,  I  fore¬ 
see  that  the  same  result  will  be  inevitable.  Even  now,  the  united  and 
undivided  strength  of  our  entire  force  can  scarcely  restrain  the  citizens, 
although  they  are  in  desperate  straits  and  utterly  without  hope  of  aid. 
How,  then,  is  it  possible  that  a  part  only  of  our  army  can  keep  them 
within  the  walls  after  their  allies  have  arrived?  It  is  apparent  to  me 
that  one  of  two  things  will  presently  happen.  Either  they  will  join 
their  allies  and  with  united  forces  attack  us  with  superior  numbers,  or 
they  will  at  any  rate  introduce  into  the  city  the  troops  of  the  allies  and 
will  carefully  fortify  Antioch  with  arms  and  provisions.  In  that  case, 
even  if,  by  God’s  help,  we  should  defeat  the  foe  outside,  we  should 
still  have  no  assurance  of  gaining  the  city.  It  seems  to  me,  therefore, 
most  revered  fathers,  that  we  ought  to  exert  ourselves  to  the  utmost 
to  bring  Antioch  under  our  power  before  the  arrival  of  this  great  com¬ 
mander.  Do  you  ask  me  by  what  means  and  how  such  a  plan  can  be 
carried  into  effect?  In  order  that  I  may  not  seem  to  be  suggesting  an 
impossible  achievement,  I  will  state  that  I  can  open  a  way  by  which 
speedily  and  easily  we  may  accomplish  our  desired  end.  I  have  in  An¬ 
tioch  a  loyal  friend,  a  man  of  much  wisdom,  as  far  as  human  eyes  can 
judge.  As  I  believe  I  have  stated  to  some  of  you  already,  this  man 
holds  in  his  power  a  strongly  fortified  tower.  This,  under  certain  con¬ 
ditions,  he  has  agreed  in  good  faith  to  surrender  to  me,  as  I  have  often 
begged  him  to  do.  In  return  for  this  favor,  I  have  pledged  my  word 
to  give  him  a  large  sum  of  money  and  to  insure  to  him  and  his  heirs, 
in  perpetuity,  extensive  estates  and  privileges  of  all  kinds,  as  the  price 
of  his  work,  if  the  affair  turns  out  as  we  desire. 

“If  then,  it  seems  good  to  you,  dear  sirs,  that  the  city,  when  taken 
by  my  zealous  efforts,  should  pass  under  my  jurisdiction,  to  be  held 
by  hereditary  right  forever,  I  am  prepared  to  carry  out  my  arrange- 


CAPTURE  OF  ANTIOCH 


249 

ment  with  my  friend.  But  if  not,  let  each  one  of  you  try  to  find  a  better 
way  to  bring  the  city  under  his  power  j  and  let  him  who  succeeds  pos¬ 
sess  it  for  himself,  in  peace  and  quiet.  I  yield  in  his  favor  and  am  ready 
to  surrender  to  him  whatever  share  I  have  in  present  affairs.’’ 

17*  The  chiefs  gladly  concede  the  city  to  Bohemond,  He  negO'- 
tiates  secretly  with  his  friend  concerning  the  surrender. 

The  chiefs  listened  to  these  words  with  joy  and  gave  a  grateful  assent 
to  Bohemond’s  request  j  that  is,  all  except  the  count  of  Toulouse,  who 
declared  vehemently  that  he  would  yield  his  rights  to  no  one.^^  The 
others  promised  to  grant  the  city  with  its  dependencies  to  Bohemond 
as  an  hereditary  possession  forever,  and  each  man  promised  by  giving 
his  right  hand  that  he  would  reveal  the  secret  to  no  one.  At  the  same 
time,  all  urged  the  prince  to  bring  the  matter  to  an  end  with  diligence, 
lest  a  dangerous  delay  should  intervene. 

The  meeting  then  broke  up.  Bohemond,  whose  character  brooked 
no  delay,  most  ardently  desired  to  push  on  his  project.  He  at  once  com¬ 
municated  with  his  friend  through  the  usual  messenger  and  informed 
him  that  the  chiefs  had  granted  all  that  he  had  asked.  He  urgently 
admonished  Firuz,  by  the  good  faith  between  them,  to  carry  the  plot 
into  effect  the  following  night  with  the  help  of  God.  This  news  re¬ 
joiced  the  faithful  heart  of  the  recipient  beyond  measure. 

An  event  is  said  to  have  occurred  about  this  time  which  gave  Firuz 
a  still  stronger  motive  for  carrying  through  the  plot  which  he  had  ar¬ 
ranged.  While  he  was  busily  engaged  in  the  many  responsible  duties 
belonging  to  the  position  which  he  held  in  the  house  of  his  master  and 
indeed  in  the  whole  city,,  for  some  urgent  reason  unknown  to  us  he  is 
said  to  have  sent  his  son,  a  young  man,  to  his  house. 

On  arriving  there,  the  youth  came  upon  a  shameful  scene.  He  found 
his  mother  in  the  illicit  embrace  of  one  of  the  principal  Turkish  chiefs. 
Touched  to  the  quick  with  horror  and  grief,  the  young  man  returned 
in  haste  to  his  father  and  told  him  of  the  outrage.  Firuz,  greatly  en¬ 
raged,  with  the  angry  resentment  of  an  injured  husband,  is  reported 
to  have  said  bitterly,  ^Tt  is  not  enough  for  the  filthy  dogs  that  they 
crush  us  under  the  yoke  of  unjust  servitude  and  deplete  our  patrimony 

Yewdale  regards  the  opposition  of  Raymond  here  as  only  another  instance  of 
self-seeking  rivalry  with  Bohemond  that  had  begun  long  before  this  (R.  B.  Yew- 
dale,  Bohemond  /,  Prince  of  Antioch^  pp.  50  fF.). 


250  CAPTURE  OF  ANTIOCH 

by  daily  exactions,  but  they  must  needs  violate  the  laws  of  wedlock 
and  destroy  the  bonds  of  marriage.  If  I  live,  I  will  put  an  end  to  such 
insolence  and,  with  the  help  of  the  Lord,  repay  them  as  they  deserve.’^ 

With  these  words,  he  hid  his  sense  of  the  injury  done  him  and  sent 
his  son,  the  sharer  of  his  secret,  whose  mind  was  in  a  turmoil  because 
of  this  wrong  inflicted  upon  his  mother,  to  Bohemond  by  the  usual 
route.  He  bade  him  warn  that  leader  to  prepare  with  all  care  every¬ 
thing  needful  for  the  work  in  hand.  There  would  be  no  delay  on  his 
part,  for  on  the  following  night  he  would  carry  out  his  promise.  He 
also  directed  that  all  the  chiefs,  each  with  his  own  following,  should 
leave  the  camp  about  the  ninth  hour  as  if  intending  to  march  against 
the  enemy.  Toward  the  first  watch  of  the  night,  they  were  to  return 
stealthily,  and  in  utter  silence,  and  hold  themselves  in  readiness  to  act 
according  to  his  orders  about  the  hour  of  midnight.  Bohemond  con¬ 
ducted  the  young  man  in  secret  to  the  leaders  who  were  privy  to  the 
plot  and  explained  all  the  details  of  the  arrangement  which  he  had 
made,  as  planned  by  Firuz  with  his  son’s  aid.  Filled  with  wonder  at 
the  man’s  scheme  and  his  sincere  loyalty,  the  chiefs  approved  the  plan 
and  agreed  that  it  should  be  carried  through  as  he  had  arranged. 

1 8.  The  cltixens  susfect  Firux.  He  declares  his  innocence  bejore 
the  lord  of  the  city. 

But  as  often  happens  in  undertakings  of  supreme  importance,  an  un¬ 
expected  event  occurred  during  those  days.  For  the  citizens,  especially 
those  who  were  principally  responsible  for  the  welfare  of  the  city, 
began  to  divine,  more  from  suspicion  than  from  any  definite  proofs, 
that  secret  negotiations  involving  the  surrender  of  the  place  were  going 
on.  This  soon  became  the  common  topic  of  conversation  on  the  lips  oi 
all.  The  principal  citizens  assembled,  therefore,  and  went  to  the  gov¬ 
ernor  to  advise  with  him  concerning  this  report.  It  seemed  altogether 
probable,  for  many  indications  pointed  that  way.  There  were  many 
Christians  in  Antioch,  as  I  have  mentioned,  and  they,  although  entirely 
innocent  of  this  plot,  were  nevertheless  suspected.  Among  these  was 
the  noble  man  of  whom  we  are  speaking,  for,  although  Yaghi  Siyar 
relied  not  a  little  on  his  sincere  loyalty,  the  other  leading  men  dis 
trusted  him. 

During  the  course  of  this  anxious  conference  on  the  matter  in  tht 


V 


CAPTURE  OF  ANTIOCH 


251 

presence  of  Yaghi  Slyan,  the  name  of  Firuz  was  mentioned  among 
those  of  others  suspected.  There  seemed,  indeed,  to  be  all  the  more 
reason  for  distrust  in  his  case,  for  he  was  a  man  of  much  energy  and 
far  more  influential  in  the  city*  than  the  rest  of  the  Christians.  Under 
the  urgent  persuasion  of  his  counsellors,  the  prince  finally  ordered  the 
man  to  be  summoned.  He  was  brought  in,  and  the  same  topic  was  con¬ 
tinued  in  his  presence  purposely,  that  they  might  hear  his  advice  on 
the  matter  and  be  able  to  decide  from  his  words  whether  he  was  justly 
suspected  or  not. 

But  Firuz  happened  to  be  a  very  shrewd  and  quick-witted  man.  He 
instantly  divined  that  this  conference  was  being  held  on  his  account 
and  that  he  was  under  suspicion.  Accordingly,  that  he  might  subtly 
hide  his  purpose  and  maintain  his  innocence  before  them,  he  is  said  to 
have  answered  those  who  had  met  to  test  him  as  follows:  “Your  solici¬ 
tude,  venerable  men  and  great  chiefs  of  this  city,  is  most  laudable  and 
is  such  as  is  found  only  among  wise  men.  For  it  is  the  part  of  wisdom 
to  foresee  that  which  may  happen,  and  to  be  overcautious  does  no  harm 
in  a  capital  matter.  Hence,  you  seem  to  me  to  be  moved  by  no  trivial 
impulse  when  you  are  anxious  on  behalf  of  your  lives  and  liberty  and 
for  your  wives  and  children.  Yet,  if  you  will  accept  my  advice,  there 
is  a  fairly  quick  method  by  which  a  suitable  remedy  and  an  effective 
cure  for  this  disease  which  threatens  you  may  be  provided.  This  de¬ 
testable  treachery,  which  with  great  foresight  you  fear,  can  be  success¬ 
ful  only  through  the  agency  of  those  who  are  in  charge  of  the  towers 
and  walls  and  of  those  assigned  to  guard  the  gates.  If,  then,  you  dis¬ 
trust  the  loyalty  of  these  people,  let  them  be  changed  frequently,  so 
that  they  may  not  continue  long  in  any  one  place  and  be  able  to  enter 
into  a  disastrous  friendship  with  the  enemy.  For  a  plot  of  this  nature 
is  not  easily  arranged;  it  is  indeed  a  matter  of  some  time.  Nor  is.it 
possible  for  a  private  individual  alone  to  undertake  an  affair  of  such 
importance.  It  must  necessarily  involve  citizens  in  higher  places,  who, 
corrupted  by  bribes,  are  equal  partners  in  the  crime.  But,  by  making 
these  sudden  and  unexpected  changes,  you  will  remove  all  oppor¬ 
tunity  for  perilous  negotiations  of  this  kind.” 

With  these  words  he  ceased  speaking.  His  remarks  pleased  all  and 

This  speech,  like  several  other  incidents  in  this  account  of  Firuz,  must  be  re¬ 
garded  as  an  effort  of  William’s  imagination. 


CAPTURE  OF  ANTIOCH 


252 

seemed  good  in  their  eyes.  He  had  apparently  furnished  adequate 
proof  of  his  innocence  and  mitigated  to  some  extent  the  suspicion  that 
had  been  roused  against  him.  His  advice  would  have  been  put  into 
effect  at  once,  had  it  not  been  that  day  was  already  declining  and  night 
coming  on  apace.  No  such  radical  change  in  guarding  the  city,  there¬ 
fore,  could  be  made  at  that  hour.  Orders  were  given,  however,  that 
the  utmost  watchful  diligence  be  used  in  guarding  the  town,  although 
all  were  completely  ignorant  of  the  secret  measures  which  were  being 
plotted  by  that  man.  He,  well  aware  that  the  situation  would  soon  be 
greatly  changed,  exerted  himself  assiduously  to  carry  through  the 
plot  before  anything  should  occur  to  prevent  its  accomplishment. 

19.  Describes  how  the  Christians  of  Antioch  were  burdened 
with  many  services  and  how  the  massacre  which  had  been 
destined  for  them  was  brought  to  naught. 

From  the  time  when  our  army  arrived  before  the  walls  of  Antioch  and 
placed  the  city  under  siege,  the  townspeople  had  been  suspicious  of  the 
Greeks,  Syrians,  Armenians,  and  all  other  citizens  who  professed  the 
Christian  faith,  irrespective  of  the  race  to  which  they  belonged.  Ac¬ 
cordingly,  they  drove  out  of  the  city  all  the  feeble  and  those  who  did 
not  have  the  necessary  provisions  with  which  to  support  themselves 
and  their  little  families,  lest  they  become  a  burden  to  the  city.  Only 
the  rich  and  those  who  had  ample  means  and  sufficient  provisions  in 
store  for  their  immediate  households  were  allowed  to  remain.  But 
even  upon  these  so  many  services,  both  the  customary  ones  and  extra 
burdens  besides,  were  imposed  that  the  lot  of  the  exiles  seemed  more 
fortunate  than  that  of  those  who  had  been  allowed  to  retain  their  resi¬ 
dence  there  for  the  highest  good  of  the  city.  In  addition,  money  fines 
were  frequently  exacted  from  them  so  that  even  the  little  which  they 
seemed  to  possess  was  extorted  from  them  by  violence.  They  them¬ 
selves  were  carried  off,  in  spite  of  protests,  to  do  all  kinds  of  the  vilest 
and  hardest  tasks  for  the  city.  If  machines  were  to  be  erected  or  im¬ 
mensely  heavy  beams  moved,  that  work  was  at  once  laid  upon  them. 
Some  were  forced  to  carry  stones  and  cement  and  all  kinds  of  material 
for  building  purposes.  Others  had  to  furnish  the  huge  stones  which 
were  being  constantly  hurled  beyond  the  walls  by  the  engines  and  to 
manage  the  ropes  by  which  these  were  operated.  In  this  they  were  sub- 


CAPTURE  OF  ANTIOCH 


253 

ject  to  the  will  of  the  overseers,  and  no  chance  for  rest  or  relaxation 
was  allowed  them.  As  a  culmination  of  this  abominable  wickedness, 
their  oppressors  held  a  secret  counsel,  eight  days  before  the  meeting 
to  which  the  suspected  Firuz  was  summoned,  and  decided  that  all 
Christians  living  in  Antioch  should  be  put  to  death  secretly  by  night. 
There  was  a  certain  wise  and  powerful  chief  in  the  city,  however,  who 
had  always  showed  himself  a  friend  to  the  Christians.  Through  the 
efforts  of  this  man,  a  stay  of  eight  days  was  granted,  against  the  oppo¬ 
sition  of  the  rest,  before  the  work  was  put  into  execution.  Had  it  not 
been  for  this  respite,  without  doubt  assassins  would  have  been  sent  to 
carry  out  their  wicked  design,  and  the  whole  body  of  Christians  would 
have  perished  by  the  sword  that  same  night.  The  delay  of  eight  days 
had  been  conceded  with  the  view  of  ascertaining  in  the  interval  whether 
there  was  a  possibility  of  the  siege  coming  to  an  endj  if  it  was  found 
that  our  people  intended  to  continue  the  blockade,  the  massacre  would 
be  carried  into  effect  j  if  not,  the  citizens  who  had  been  condemned  to 
death  would  be  spared.  The  time  of  respite  had  now  expired  and  that 
night  was  the  last.  Already  the  order  had  secretly  gone  forth  that  the 
sentence  should  be  executed.  The  massacre  was  to  take  place  on  the 
very  night  that  our  chiefs  had  set  for  carrying  out  the  plot  which  had 
been  so  long  ago  arranged  between  Bohemond  and  Firuz  and  which, 
by  the  help  of  God,  was  actually  accomplished.  Thus  it  happened  that 
when  the  Christians  began  to  take  possession  of  the  city,  the  leading 
men  felt  comparatively  little  anxiety  about  the  tumult  which  arose, 
for  they  supposed  that  the  uproar  in  the  city  meant  nothing  more  than 
that  the  orders  against  their  fellow  citizens  of  the  Christian  faith  were 
being  carried  out. 

Thus  when  the  city  had  been  taken  by  force  in  this  way,  there  were 
found  in  the  homes  of  the  Christians  many  infidels  who  had  come,  as 
ordered,  to  massacre  the  unsuspecting  believers. 

20.  In  accordance  with  Firti%^s  flan^  the  army  leaves  the  camf^ 
with  the  intention  of  returning  at  night. 

About  the  ninth  hour,  the  voice  of  the  herald  was  heard  proclaim¬ 
ing  throughout  all  parts  of  the  camp  that  all  the  cavalry  forces,  fully 
armed,  should  follow  their  leaders  to  carry  out  without  delay  the 
orders  that  would  be  given  them.  It  was  not  the  people  alone  who  were 


254 


CAPTURE  OF  ANTIOCH 


completely  ignorant  of  this  secret  plan,  for,  in  fact,  the  mystery  had 
been  divulged  to  only  a  few  of  the  principal  chiefs. 

In  accordance  with  the  wise  arrangements  of  Firuz,  therefore,  the 
entire  cavalry  force  left  the  camp,  following  the  standards  of  the  lead¬ 
ers,  as  if  going  to  a  distance.  In  reality  they  were  only  waiting  until 
night,  falling  upon  the  earth,  should  bring  back  the  usual  darkness  5 
then  under  cover  of  this  they  stealthily  returned  to  camp  in  utter 
silence. 

Firuz,  this  man  of  God  who  had  rendered  the  Christians  so  signal 
a  favor,  had  an  own  brother  who  differed  from  him  utterly  both  in 
feelings  and  purpose.  Firuz,  who  had  but  little  confidence  in  this 
brother’s  loyalty,  had  not  imparted  the  secret  to  him.  On  the  contrary, 
he  distrusted  him  and  had  hidden  his  plans  as  carefully  as  possible. 
That  same  day,  about  the  ninth  hour,  as  our  legions  were  marching 
out  from  the  camp,  the  two  brothers  happened  to  be  standing  together 
on  the  battlements.  They  were  watching  the  camp  through  the  open¬ 
ings  and  witnessed  the  departure  of  the  troops.  The  elder,  desirous  of 
knowing  his  brother’s  attitude  of  mind,  endeavored  to  sound  his  senti¬ 
ments.  With  this  in  view,  he  began  to  address  him  as  follows:  “I  pity 
this  people,  my  brother,  for  whom  so  sudden  an  end  is  being  pre¬ 
pared,  for  they  profess  the  same  faith  as  ourselves.  Ignorant  of  what 
the  morrow  may  bring  forth,  they  ride  out  confidently,  seeming 
to  fear  nothing,  as  if  their  affairs  were  in  a  state  of  security.  But  if  they 
knew  the  snares  that  are  being  laid  for  them  and  the  utter  destruction 
which  so  soon  awaits  them,  perchance  they  would  take  some  other 
measures  for  their  safety.”  To  this  the  brother  replied,  ^^You  are  wor- 
rying  yourself  foolishly  and  your  compassion  is  uncalled  for.  Would 
that  all  these  people  had  already  fallen  by  the  sword  of  the  Turks,  for, 
from  the  very  day  when  they  entered  this  land,  our  condition  has  be¬ 
come  increasingly  worse,  and  it  is  hardly  possible  that  the  benefits 
which  we  may  gain  through  their  efforts  can  equal  the  troubles  we 
have  suffered  on  their  account.” 

Up  to  this  time  Firuz  had  been  undecided  whether  or  not  to  com¬ 
municate  his  intention  to  his  brother.  At  these  words,  however,  his 
spirit  shrank  from  his  brother  as  from  a  pestilence;  in  his  own  heart 
he  cursed  him,  and  lest  obedience  to  Christ  should  be  hindered  through 
his  means,  he  began  to  plot  his  death.  Thus,  he  placed  the  safety  of  the 
Christians  in  general  before  his  own  affection  for  his  brother. 


CAPTURE  OF  ANTIOCH 


255 


21,  Bohemond  begs  his  jriend  to  comflete  the  work.  The  latter 
slays  his  brother  who  disagrees  with  him.  He  receives  the 
C hristians  into  the  city  by  means  of  a  rofe  ladder. 

Meanwhile,  Bohemond  strove  with  all  his  heart  to  accomplish  his 
project.  That  the  attainment  of  the  goal  for  which  he  so  longed  might 
not  be  delayed  through  inactivity  on  his  own  part,  he  visited  the  chiefs, 
one  after  another,  and  begged  them  to  be  ready  for  action.  He  carried 
in  his  hand  a  ladder,  very  skilfully  woven  of  hempen  ropes.  This  was 
to  be  attached  above  to  the  battlements  of  the  wall  and  fastened  below 
by  iron  hooks.  Midnight  was  already  past  5  all  the  inhabitants  of  the 
city  had  succumbed  to  rest,  their  sleep  rendered  the  deeper  in  conse¬ 
quence  of  their  constant  vigils  and  incessant  labor.  Bohemond  now 
sent  to  his  friend  a  member  of  his  own  staff,  a  man  entirely  devoted 
to  him.  This  interpreter  was  directed  to  ascertain  definitely  from  Firuz 
whether  it  was  time  for  his  master’s  company  to  advance.  When  the 
messenger  arrived,  he  found  that  man  watching  at  one  of  the  little 
openings  in  the  wall.  He  delivered  his  lord’s  message  in  a  low  tone, 
and  Firuz  responded,  ^^Sit  down  quietly  and  be  silent  until  the  pre¬ 
fect  of  the  guard,  who  is  on  his  rounds  with  a  large  escort  and  gleaming 
torches,  has  passed  this  place.”  For  it  was  a  custom  of  the  city  that,  in 
addition  to  the  watchmen  stationed  in  each  tower,  the  superior  officer 
should  make  the  rounds  of  the  wall  three  or  four  times  a  night,  with 
a  large  escort  carrying  lighted  torches.  Should  he  find  anyone  over¬ 
come  by  sleep  or  not  exercising  due  caution,  the  prefect  would  mete 
out  the  punishment  deserved.  The  officer  charged  with  this  great  re¬ 
sponsibility  soon  arrived,  and,  finding  Firuz  watching,  he  commended 
his  diligence  and  passed  on  with  mind  at  ease. 

Firuz  saw  that  the  proper  time  for  action  had  come  and  said  to  the 
messenger,  who  had  withdrawn  a  little  apart,  ^^Go  quickly  and  tell 
your  lord  to  come  speedily  with  his  picked  men.”  The  messenger  re¬ 
turned  in  haste  to  his  master  and  found  him  ready.  The  other  leaders 
were  secretly  called,  and  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye  each  responded 
with  his  own  company,  as  had  been  arranged  beforehand.  In  a  short 
time  they  stood  as  one  man  at  the  foot  of  the  tower  long  since  desig¬ 
nated.  Not  a  sound  or  a  noise  was  heard  from  them  as  they  approached. 

During  that  short  interval,  Firuz  had  entered  the  tower  and  found 
his  brother  heavy  with  sleep.  Since  he  had  ascertained  that  the  latter’s 


CAPTURE  OF  ANTIOCH 


256 

sentiments  were  against  the  project  on  which  he  himself  was  bent,  he 
feared  lest  through  his  means  some  impediment  might  be  offered  to  its 
execution,  which  was  now  about  to  be  completed.  Accordingly,  he  gave 
him  a  fatal  thrust  with  the  sword — an  act  at  once  pious  and  wicked. 

He  then  returned  to  the  openings  in  the  ramparts  and  found  that 
his  confederates  were  below.  After  greetings  had  been  exchanged,  with 
expressions  of  hope  for  their  common  safety,  he  let  down  a  rope  by 
which  he  drew  up  the  ladder  from  below. 

When  this  had  been  raised,  however,  and  firmly  attached  both  at 
top  and  bottom,  no  one  could  be  found  who  dared  to  ascend.  No  one 
would  risk  his  life  in  such  an  experiment,  not  even  at  the  command  of 
his  superior  officer  or  of  Bohemond  himself.  The  latter  soon  perceived 
this  y  he  at  once  took  the  initiative  and  intrepidly  mounted  the  ladder 
himself. As  he  reached  the  top  and  grasped  the  battlements,  his  hand 
was  seized  from  within  by  Firuz.  On  discovering  that  it  was  the  hand 
of  Bohemond  himself,  he  is  said  to  have  cried  out,  ^^Long  live  that 

I 

hand!”  In  order  to  win  more  favor  in  the  eyes  of  Bohemond  and  the 
other  Christians,  because  he  had  murdered  his  own  brother  who  would 
not  join  him  in  a  work  so  holy,  he  led  the  chief  into  the  tower  and 
showed  him  the  dead  body  of  his  brother  lying  in  its  own  gore.  Lord 
Bohemond  embraced  that  man  of  true  and  steadfast  loyalty  with  heart¬ 
felt  emotion  j  then,  returning  to  the  battlements,  he  thrust  his  head 
a  little  way  through  the  aperture,  and,  in  a  muffled  voice,  called  on  his 
men  to  ascend.  They  still  hesitated,  however,  and  no  one  dared  to 
obey,  for  they  regarded  with  suspicion  all  that  was  said  from  the  bat¬ 
tlements.  Realizing  this,  Bohemond  returned  to  his  comrades,  by  way 
of  the  ladder,  and  thus  gave  them  a  substantial  proof  of  his  safety. 
Thereupon,  they  at  once  began  to  vie  with  each  other  in  trying  to 
reach  the  ramparts.  Swarming  up  the  wall,  they  seized  not  only  that 
tower,  but  several  others  also  on  either  side  of  it.  We  have  heard  that 
among  those  who  ascended  were  the  count  of  Flanders  and  Lord  Tan- 
cred,  by  whose  example  the  rest  were  led  to  follow. 

This  would  seem  to  be  a  greater  tribute  to  Bohemond^s  bravery  than  to  his  discre¬ 
tion  and  in  accord  with  neither  his  usual  sagacity  nor  the  testimony  of  eyewitnesses 
(see  A.  C.  Krey,  The  First  Crusade,  pp.  151— 55). 


CAPTURE  OF  ANTIOCH 


257 


22*  The  Invaders  gam  an  entrance  and  ofen  the  gates.  The 
armyy  now  become  farticlfants  m  the  floty  rush  into  the 
city.  Antioch  is  taken  by  storm. 

The  other  chiefs,  seeing  that  able  men  had  already  reached  the  ram¬ 
parts  in  sufficient  numbers,  so  that  one  or  more  gates  were  now  being 
opened,  hurried  back  to  the  camp  to  have  their  troops  in  readiness,  so 
that  when  the  signal  should  be  given  by  their  comrades  within  the  city 
there  might  be  no  delay  about  .entering.  Those  who  had  already  scaled 
the  walls  seemed  inspired  with  courage  from  on  high.  Under  the  lead¬ 
ership  of  Firuz,  who  had  let  them  into  the  city,  they  had  already  seized 

O' 
to 

stationed  there.  Yet,  all  this  time,  the  whole  city  lay  wrapped  in  utter 
silence  and  not  a  sound  was  heard. 

In  the  section  of  the  wall  where  the  Christians  had  made  their  ascent 
there  was  a  postern  gate.  To  this  they  descended,  and  after  breaking 
the  restraining  bars  and  bolts,  threw  it  open  by  force.  They  let  in  the 
soldiers  waiting  outside  5  this  greatly  increased  the  number  of  invaders 
within  the  walls.  Together  they  hastened  to  the  place  known  as  the 
gate  of  the  Bridge,  slew  all  the  guards,  and,  by  a  violent  assault,  threw 
that  entrance  open  also. 

Meanwhile,  some  of  Bohemond’s  retainers  had  borne  his  standard 
to  a  hill  overlooking  the  city  and  there  placed  it  in  a  very  prominent 
place,  on  a  height  near  the  upper  fortress. 

The  glowing  sky  now  announced  the  coming  of  the  sun;  the  signal 
was  sounded  by  the  horns  and  clarions ;  and  our  people  began  to  make 
a  great  din  at  the  entrance  to  the  city  in  order  to  rouse  to  action  the 
forces  still  in  camp.  The  chiefs,  well  understanding  the  meaning  of 
the  prearranged  signal,  ran  to  arms.  Sweeping  their  own  forces  rapidly 
along  with  them,  they  hurried  to  the  city  and  seized  the  approaches 
and  gates. 

Meanwhile  the  common  people,  who,  up  to  this  time,  had  been  kept 
in  ignorance  of  the  secret  plans,  were  roused.  When  they  discovered 
that  the  camp  was  almost  deserted,  they  too  followed  the  rest  and 
eagerly  made  their  way  into  the  city.  The  citizens,  awakened  by  the 
great  uproar,  were  at  first  in  doubt  as  to  the  meaning  of  the  unusual 
noises.  Soon,  however,  at  the  strange  sight  of  mailed  knights  rushing 
about  through  the  city  and  of  the  havoc  which  was  being  wrought 


successively  ten  towers  in  the  vicinity,  after  first  killin 


CAPTURE  OF  ANTIOCH 


258 

everywhere  in  the  streets  and  squares,  they  came  to  a  realization  of 
the  truth.  Abandoning  their  homes,  they  tried  to  fly  with  their  wives 
and  children.  Bewildered  and  dazed  in  their  frantic  attempts  to  escape 
the  bands  of  armed  soldiers  and  to  find  a  safe  place  of  refuge,  they 
recklessly  rushed  into  the  way  of  other  warriors. 

The  Christians  who  dwelt  in  the  city,  Syrians,  Armenians,  and  the 
true  believers  of  other  nations,  rejoiced  exceedingly  over  what  had 
happened.  They  at  once  took  arms  and  joined  forces  with  the  army. 
Since  they  were  intimately  acquainted  with  all  of  the  localities,  they 
were  able  to  act  as  guides  for  the  others  through  the  intricate  ways  of 
the  city.  When  they  found  a  gate  still  barred,  they  killed  the  guards 
and  opened  the  way  by  breaking  the  locks  j  then  they  let  in  their  com¬ 
panions.  It  seemed  to  them  that  this  marvellous  change  had  come 
from  God.  Those  who  had  been  bearing  the  undeserved  yoke  of  servi¬ 
tude  to  unclean  dogs,  mercilessly  oppressed  under  the  burden  of  serv¬ 
ices  and  extra  services  and  tortures,  were  now  able  to  Inflict  similar 
woes  upon  their  enemies  and  bring  about  their  destruction. 

By  this  time,  our  entire  army  had  been  admitted  to  the  city  j  already 
they  had  easily  taken  possession  of  the  gates,  towers,  and  ramparts  3  al¬ 
ready  the  standards  of  the  chiefs  and  the  insignia,  well  known  to  all, 
floated  from  the  highest  places  as  the  proof  of  victory.  Everywhere  was 
carnage,  everywhere  anguish  and  the  wailing  of  women  j  everywhere 
fathers  of  families  had  been  slain  and  their  entire  households  mur¬ 
dered.  Forcing  their  way  into  houses,  the  Christians  destroyed  articles 
of  domestic  use.  All  the  substance  of  .the  foe  was  given  over  as  plunder 
to  the  first  who  chanced  to  reach  it.  The  victors  roamed  at  will  through 
places  formerly  inaccessible  to  them  and,  maddened  by  lust  of  killing 
and  greed  for  gain,  they  spared  neither  sex  nor  condition  and  paid  no 
respect  to  age.  They  inquired  of  all  whom  they  met  in  the  streets  and 
city  squares  where  the  houses  of  the  most  important  citizens  were  situ¬ 
ated  and  where  the  richest  people  lived.  Then,  joining  forces,  they  ran 
thither  in  bands.  They  killed  the  servants,  penetrated  into  the  most 
private  apartments,  and  put  to  the  sword  mothers  of  families  and  the 
children  of  nobles.  Then  they  divided  equally  among  themselves  by 
lot  the  furnishings  of  the  houses,  gold,  silver,  and  precious  garments. 

It  is  said  that  more  than  ten  thousand  citizens  were  slain  that  dayj 
along  the  streets  everywhere  the  corpses  of  the  dead  lay  unburied,  just 
as  they  had  fallen. 


CAPTURE  OF  ANTIOCH 


259 


23*  The  cittxens  retreat  to  the  citadel,  Yaghl  Sly  an  is  killed 
outside  the  walls  while  endeavoring  to  escafe.  Many  'perish 
by  jailing  jrom  the  'mountain. 

When  Yaghi  Siyan  saw  that  the  city  had  been  surrendered  to  the  foe, 
that  the  enemy  had  taken  possession  of  all  the  towers  and  fortifica¬ 
tions,  and,  furthermore,  that  all  who  had  escaped  death  had  hastily 
retreated  to  the  citadel,  he  began  to  fear  that  the  Christians  would  fol¬ 
low  them  thither  and  invest  that  also.  In  a  frenzy,  he  rushed  out 
through  a  postern  gate  and  fled  alone  without  a  single  companion,  seek¬ 
ing  only  to  preserve  his  life.  While  he  was  wandering  about  in  des¬ 
perate  anxiety,  without  any  fixed  purpose,  he  happened  to  fall  in  with 
several  Armenians.  They  at  once  recognized  him  and  drew  near  as  if 
to  show  him  the  customary  reverence.  Panic-stricken,  he  allowed  them 
to  approach.  From  the  fact  that  he  had  fled  alone,  they  immediately 
realized  that  the  city  had  been  taken.  Accordingly,  they  threw  him 
violently  to  the  ground,  drew  his  own  sword,  and  cut  off  his  head.  This 
they  bore  into  the  city  and  offered  to  the  leaders  in  the  presence  of  all 
the  people. 

There  were  also  certain  nobles  in  the  city  who  had  come  from  dis¬ 
tant  parts  to  assist  Antioch  as  an  opportunity  of  exercising  their  prow¬ 
ess.  When  it  became  known  that  the  city  had  fallen  into  the  power  of 
the  Christians,  these  men  resolved  to  retire  to  the  upper  citadel,  for 
they  were  unacquainted  with  the  place,  and,  in  their  anxiety  about 
their  lives,  knew  not  what  to  do.  They  were  trying  to  make  their  way 
thither  when  they  chanced  to  encounter  some  of  the  Christians  com¬ 
ing  down  from  the  upper  part  of  the  city.  They  were  caught  in  a  narrow 
defile  where  they  could  go  neither  up  nor  down  on  account  of  the  steep 
slope  of  the  hill,  and,  at  the  same  time,  they  were  crowded  together  by 
our  men  from  above.  Thus,  while  they  were  desperately  trying  to  find 
any  possible  means  of  escape,  about  three  hundred  of  their  number 
were  thrown  headlong  from  the  mountain,  with  their  horses  and  the 
insignia  which  distinguished  them  one  from  another.  Their  necks  were 
broken  and  their  limbs  so  crushed  that  there  was  scarcely  a  reminder 
of  them  left. 

Those  who  dwelt  in  the  city  or  neighboring  places  and  knew  the 
locality  were  more  successful.  As  soon  as  they  knew  that  the  city  had 
been  taken,  these  people  banded  together  and,  at  earliest  dawn,  went 


26o 


CAPTURE  OF  ANTIOCH 


out  through  the  gates,  which  were  now  beginning  to  be  barred  again, 
and  fled  to  the  mountains.  Some  of  these  were  brought  back  by  our 
forces,  who  pursued  them  at  close  range,  seized  them,  and  forcibly 
threw  them  into  chains.  Others,  thanks  to  their  horses,  succeeded  in 
reaching  the  hills,  where  they  took  measures  for  their  lives  and  safety. 

About  the  fifth  hour,  our  pursuing  forces  returned.  When  all  who 
had  been  scattered  through  the  city  were  assembled,  a  careful  in¬ 
vestigation  was  made,  and  the  fact  was  discovered  that  there  were  no 
more  provisions  in  the  city.  Nor  was  this  strange,  for  the  siege  had  been 
carried  on  without  intermission  for  almost  nine  months. 

On  the  other  hand,  such  vast  supplies  of  gold  and  silver,  gems, 
precious  utensils,  rugs,  and  silken  stuffs  were  found  that  even  those 
who  had  but  now  been  hungry  beggars  became  suddenly  rich,  with 
abundant  supplies  of  every  kind.  In  the  entire  city,  scarcely  five  hun¬ 
dred  horses  fit  for  the  service  of  war  were  found,  and  these  were  emaci¬ 
ated  and  dying  of  hunger. 

The  city  of  Antioch  was  taken  in  the  year  of  the  Incarnation  of  the 
Lord  1098,  in  the  month  of  June,  and  the  third  day  thereof. 


HERE  ENDS  THE  FIFTH  BOOK 


THE  SIXTH  BOOK  BEGINS 


CRUSADERS  BESIEGED;  A  MIRACULOUS 

VICTORY 


I.  A  descriftlon  of  the  mountain  which  towers  above  the  city, 

A  fart  of  this  is  still  held  by  the  enemy y  who  have  stationed 
guards  there.  Messengers  are  sent  to  the  coast  to  summon 
the  feofley  frovisions  are  brought  iuy  and  the  city  is  strongly 
fortified. 

Finally  the  tumult  subsided,  the  city  regained  its  calm,  and  even  the 
swords  of  the  victors,  drunk  with  blood,  became  weary  of  unending 
slaughter.  Then  the  leaders  met  for  conference,  for  they  knew  full 
well  that  much  work  remained  to  be  done  before  the  conquest  would  be 
complete.  Accordingly  they  stationed  guards  at  the  gates  and  on  the 
ramparts  and  determined  to  ascend  the  mountain  and  attack  the  citadel. 
The  herald  was  sent  forth  to  proclaim  the  order  that  all  the  cohorts 
were  to  ascend  the  aforesaid  hill.  When  the  heights  were  reached,  how¬ 
ever,  it  was  evident  that,  by  reason  of  its  fortifications,  the  citadel  was 
impregnable  and  could  be  taken  only  by  famine.  Since  this  method 
would  require  many  days,  the  chiefs  realized  that  their  zealous  efforts 
would  be  expended  in  vain.  It  was  necessary,  therefore,  to  resort  to 
other  plans. 

The  mountain  which  towers  above  the  city  is  cleft  by  a  very  deep 
valley  with  steep  and  precipitous  sides.  The  slope  which  faces  east  is 
the  lower  of  the  two  and  at  the  top  broadens  out  into  a  wide  plain,  well 
adapted  to  vineyards  and  agriculture.  So  great  is  the  distance  across  this 
deep  valley  that  there  seem  to  be  two  separate  mountains  rather  than 
one  divided  into  two.  The  slope  toward  the  west  is  far  higher,  and  its 
top  forms  a  peak.  On  the  highest  pinnacle  of  this  latter  height  rose  the 
citadel,  fortified  with  solid  walls  and  still  more  massive  towers.  On  the 
east  and  north  springs  a  mighty  precipice  as  if  from  a  vast  abyss,  so  that 
it  is  impossible  to  imagine  how  harm  could  come  to  the  citadel  from 
either  of  those  sides.  Toward  the  west  is  a  lower  hill,  and  between  it 
and  the  citadel  lies  a  valley  of  moderate  extent,  rather  narrow,  with 
gently  sloping  sides.  Through  this  runs  the  only  road  leading  from  the 
citadel  down  into  the  city,  and  this  of  itself  presents  quite  enough  dan- 


262 


CRUSADERS  BESIEGED 


gers  even  when  no  one  Is  attacking  it.  Our  leaders  deemed  it  wise  to 
take  this  hill,  that  it  might  not  afford  the  enemy  a  passage  down  to  the 
city  when  they  sallied  forth  from  the  gate  of  the  citadel  for  the  pur¬ 
pose  of  attacking  our  troops.  Wise  and  valiant  men  were  accordingly 
stationed  at  that  place,  and  the  necessary  food  and  weapons  were  left 
there  for  them.  A  wall  with  bulwarks  of  solid  masonry  was  also  built, 
and  above  this  were  placed  engines  in  strategic  positions,  with  which  to 
drive  back  the  enemy.  The  chiefs  then  went  down  again  to  the  city  to 
confer  on  more  important  affairs,  with  the  intention  of  returning  when 
that  business  was  over.  For  they  had  determined  that  all,  with  the  ex¬ 
ception  of  the  duke,  should  remain  in  that  position  until  the  citadel  was 
taken.  By  the  common  decision  of  the  leaders,  Godfrey  had  taken 
under  his  vigilant  care  both  the  east  gate  and  the  redoubt  outside  the 
city  which,  when  first  built,  had  been  put  in  charge  of  Bohemond. 

News  had  reached  them  that  Karbuqa,  the  great  chief  mentioned 
above,  would  arrive  very  soon,  that,  in  fact,  he  had  already  entered  the 
land  of  Antioch  and  had  poured  his  thousands  over  the  country.  It  was 
thought  best,  therefore,  to  send  one  of  our  chiefs  to  the  coast  to  recall 
those  brethren  who  had  gone  thither  to  collect  food  supplies.  All  the 
necessary  provisions  which  could  be  found  were  to  be  brought  into  the 
city  as  quickly  as  possible. 

During  the  two  days  that  elapsed  before  Karbuqa’s  main  army  ar¬ 
rived  the  Christians  scoured  the  surrounding  country  with  the  utmost 
diligence.  They  brought  in  all  available  food  and  fodder  from  what¬ 
ever  source  and  made  heroic  efforts  to  provision  the  city.  The  people 
living  in  the  country  about  and  the  farmers  too,  well  aware  that  Anti¬ 
och  had  been  surrendered  to  the  Christians,  assiduously  brought  in  all 
that  they  could.  Yet  the  entire  amount  collected  from  every  source 
was  but  small — ^practically  nothing — for  the  protracted  siege,  which 
for  nine  successive  months  had  drained  the  resources  of  the  entire  dis¬ 
trict,  had  left  nothing  which  could  be  of  real  assistance  to  our  people,, 
even  for  a  few  days . 

2.  An  advance  guard  of  three  hundred  \^sic^  from  Karbuqcds 
main  army  gallof  uf  and  down  before  Antioch.  Roger  de 
Barneville  incautiously  engages  them  and  is  slain. 

On  the  second  day  after  the  taking  of  Antioch,  while  the  Christians 
were  anxiously  engaged  in  guarding  and  provisioning  the  city,  three 


CRUSADERS  BESIEGED  263 

I 

hundred  knights  from  Karbuqa’s  army,  armed  to  the  teeth  and 
mounted  on  swift  chargers,  stationed  themselves  in  ambush  near  the 
city.  They  had  been  sent  on  in  advance  for  the  express  purpose  of 
catching  unawares  any  of  our  people  who  might  be  found  off  their 
guard  outside  the  walls.  Thirty  of  this  number,  mounted  on  the  fleet¬ 
est  horses,  began  to  ride  up  and  down  before  the  city.  They  purposely 
pretended  ignorance  of  any  danger  and  conducted  themselves  very 
carelessly.  When  the  Christians  within  the  walls  saw  them  galloping 
about  in  this  manner,  they  could  not  restrain  their  anger.  They  felt 
that  it  would  be  utterly  disgraceful  if  they  did  not  make  a  sally  against 
them.  Accordingly,  Roger  de  Barneville,  from  the  retinue  of  Robert, 
count  of  Normandy,  a  valiant  warrior  who  had  performed  many  a 
brilliant  deed  on  that  same  campaign,  hurriedly  rode  out  of  the  gate 
to  attack  them.  He  took  with  him  a  band  of  fifteen  followers  and  in¬ 
tended  as  usual  to  perform  one  of  his  doughty  deeds.  He  boldly  at¬ 
tacked  the  skirmishers  at  full  speed,  when  they  suddenly  pretended  to 
turn  in  flight.  They  continued  to  retreat  until  they  reached  the  place 
where  their  comrades  lay  in  ambush.  The  men  hidden  there  at  once 
emerged.  Then,  with  numbers  thus  reinforced,  the  united  band  fell 
upon  their  former  pursuers  and  forced  them  to  retrace  their  course  in 
flight.  Roger  and  his  men  were  entirely  unequal  in  strength  and  num¬ 
ber  to  the  enemy.  They  tried  to  retreat  to  the  city,  but  the  speed  of  the 
foe’s  horses  prevented.  The  knight,  mortally  wounded  by  an  arrow 
which  pierced  his  heart,  fell  from  his  horse  dead.  He  was  a  man  ever 
to  be  regretted  by  his  followers,  for  as  far  as  in  him  lay  he  had  faith¬ 
fully  carried  out  the  aims  of  the  Christian  pilgrimage.  His  comrades 
succeeded  in  reaching  the  city,  but,  in  full  view  of  all  on  the  walls  and 
towers — powerless,  alas,  to  aid — the  enemy  cut  off  the  head  of  that 
illustrious  man  and  retreated  unharmed. 

As  soon  as  they  departed,  the  Christians,  amid  universal  tears  and 
lamentations,  brought  his  body  into  the  city  with  fitting  ceremony. 
Then,  in  the  presence  of  the  leaders  and  the  entire  people,  the  last 
offices  due  to  mortal  man  were  performed,  and  he  was  buried  with 
great  splendor  in  the  porch  of  the  basilica  of  the  Prince  of  the  Apostles.^ 

^  This  church  of  St.  Peter  in  Antioch  was  held  in  special  reverence  by  the  crusaders, 
who  believed  that  the  very  chair  which  Peter  had  occupied  was  still  preserved  in  it. 
The  leaders  of  the  crusade,  in  reporting  the  capture  of  Antioch  to  Pope  Urban,  urged 
him  to  establish  his  seat  there.  (See  H.  Hagenmeyer,  ed.,  Fulcheri  Carnotensis  his- 
toria  Hierosolymitana^  p,  217,  notes  12  and  13  j  A.  C.  Krey,  The  First  Crusade^  pp, 

I94-9S*) 


264 


CRUSADERS  BESIEGED 


3.  The  great  frince  advances  and  establishes  his  camf  on  the 
heights  above  the  citadel.  The  duke  is  vanquished  at  the 
east  gate.  Two  hundred  of  our  feofle  ferish. 

By  dawn,  on  the  following  day,  which  was  the  third  after  the  de¬ 
liverance  of  the  city,  just  as  the  sun  was  rising,  that  all-powerful  prince, 
so  often  mentioned,  had  occupied  the  entire  country  as  far  as  could  be 
seen  from  the  upper  part  of  the  city.  With  his  multitudes  even  greater 
than  rumor  had  affirmed,  he  had  crossed  the  upper  bridge  and  was 
now  encamped  between  the  lake  and  the  river,  which  were  at  that 
place  about  one  mile  apart.  His  expedition  was  on  so  vast  a  scale  and 
his  forces  so  numerous  that  even  the  extensive  plain  in  which,  as  we 
have  explained,  Antioch  lay  scarcely  sufficed  to  accommodate  his  camp. 
Some  of  the  neighboring  hills,  therefore,  were  also  covered  with  his 
tents. 

On  the  third  day  after  encamping  before  Antioch,  however,  he  de¬ 
cided  that  he  was  too  far  away  from  the  city  and  therefore  took  coun¬ 
sel  with  his  people.  He  wished  to  be  nearer  those  who  were  holding  the 
citadel  in  order  to  be  able  to  aid  them,  and  he  also  desired  to  introduce 
his  forces  into  Antioch  through  the  gate  below  the  citadel.  He  accord¬ 
ingly  broke  camp,  ascended  the  heights,  and  invested  the  whole  south¬ 
ern  side  of  the  city  from  the  east  to  the  west  gate  with  a  continuous  line. 

Near  the  east  gate,  on  a  slightly  elevated  hill,  there  was  a  redoubt 
which  had  been  erected  in  the  beginning  to  protect  the  camp.  At  first 
this  place  was  put  in  care  of  Bohemond.  When  Antioch  was  taken, 
however,  and  Bohemond  began  to  carry  on  the  general  administration 
of  the  city,  the  fort  just  mentioned  together  with  the  gate  near  by  were 
placed  under  the  duke^s  protection.  Around  this  redoubt  the  enemy 
pitched  a  camp,  from  which  they  persistently  made  repeated  attacks 
upon  the  men  within.  The  duke  soon  found  it  impossible  to  endure 
their  insolence.  He  accordingly  sallied  forth  with  his  people  to  succor 
the  defenders  of  the  fort,  who  were  now  almost  on  the  point  of  giving 
way.  He  hoped  also  that  he  might  be  able  to  break  up  the  camp  before 
the  gate.  But  as  he  issued  forth  to  go  to  the  rescue  of  his  men,  a  host 
of  Turks  attacked  him.  Since,  both  in  strength  and  numbers,  they  were 
far  superior  to  his  forces,  the  duke  saw  that  he  could  not  hold  his  own 
against  them.  Escaping  with  difficulty  from  their  swords,  he  turned 
and  made  good  his  retreat  into  the  city,  whither  the  Turks  pursued 


CRUSADERS  BESIEGED 


265 

him  with  great  vigor.  But  the  undisciplined  mob  of  pilgrims  became  so 
massed  together  in  their  desperate  flight  that  they  blocked  the  entrance 
and  prevented  each  other  from  entering.  As  a  result  some  were  crushed 
in  the  press,  others  wounded,  and  still  others  taken  prisoners.  About 
two  hundred  in  all  perished  miserably  there. 

4*  The  Christians  build  a  ditch  within  the  city^  along  the  base 
of  the  hill,  A  battle  is  fought  there  in  which  the  enemy  are 
defeated.  Their  commander  descends  from  the  mountain. 

He  besieges  the  lower  fart  of  the  city. 

The  Turks  regarded  the  duke  as  the  chief  head  of  the  Christian  army. 
His  defeat  so  elated  them  that  they  were  inspired  to  even  greater 
deeds  of  daring.  Through  the  gate  of  the  upper  citadel,  they  descended 
to  the  city,  along  bypaths  well  known  to  them,  and  made  a  sudden 
charge  upon  our  people.  They  caught  them  off  guard  and  killed  many 
with  swords  or  arrows.  When  the  Christians  tried  to  pursue  them,  how¬ 
ever,  they  made  a  swift  retreat  to  the  heights  and  gained  the  citadel 
above,  for  they  had  other  roads  than  that  by  the  hill  which  our  people 
had  seized  and  fortified  so  carefully. 

This  happened  so  often,  and  so  many  people  of  the  city  perished 
from  this  baffling  maneuver,  that  the  chiefs  unanimously  agreed  that 
some  remedy  for  this  great  evil  must  be  found.  By  common  consent, 
therefore,  Bohemond  and  the  count  of  Toulouse  caused  a  deep  ditch 
of  adequate  width  to  be  dug  between  the  lower  part  of  the  city  and  the 
slope  of  the  hill.  This  would  hinder  these  constant  attacks  of  the  Turks 
as  they  swooped  down  from  above  and  allow  the  people  in  the  city  to 
rest  in  peace.  To  render  this  still  more  effective  for  the  protection  of 
the  townsmen,  a  redoubt  was  built  there,  on  which  all  the  troops 
worked  faithfully  and  devotedly  as  for  their  own  safety. 

The  Turks  who  still  held  the  citadel  above,  however,  as  well  as 
those  who  were  besieging  the  city  from  without,  continued  to  descend 
through  the  upper  gate  by  secret  paths.  They  made  repeated  assaults 
upon  this  new  work  and  tried  by  every  means  in  their  power  to  de¬ 
stroy  it.  One  day  a  body  of  Turks,  more  numerous  than  usual,  dashed 
down  from  the  heights  by  their  accustomed  paths  to  this  recently  con¬ 
structed  fort  and  began  to  make  a  furious  attack  upon  those  within.  If 
the  leaders  charged  with  the  defense  of  other  parts  of  the  city  and  all 
the  people  scattered  throughout  Antioch  had  not  hastened -to  their 


266 


CRUSADERS  BESIEGED 


assistance,  Bohemond  and  Evrard  du  Puiset,  Ralph  de  Fontenay, 
Reibald  Creton,  Pierre,  son  of  Gisla,  Albericus,  and  Ivo,  valiant  men 
of  high  rank  who  were  defending  the  redoubt  within,  would  have  been 
made  prisoners.  But  the  duke,  the  count  of  Flanders,  and  the  prince  of 
Normandy  rushed  impetuously  to  the  spot  and  brought  to  naught  the 
foe’s  insolent  attempts.  Many  Turks  were  slain,  and  some  others  made 
prisoners.  The  rest,  with  much  rough  handling,  were  forced  to  flee,  not 
only  from  the  redoubt,  but,  in  fact,  from  the  entire  city.  These  fugi¬ 
tives  returned  to  their  lord  full  of  praise  for  the  strength  and  admira¬ 
ble  courage  of  the  Christians.  Thus  in  them  seemed  to  be  fulfilled  the 
prophecy,  “That  thy  foot  may  be  dipped  in  the  blood  of  thine  enemies 
and  the  tongue  of  thy  dogs  in  the  same,”  -  for  even  those  who  had 
persecuted  them  sang  the  praises  of  that  faithful  people. 

Karbuqa  made  a  stay  of  four  days  in  the  mountains,  as  we  have  said; 
then,  convinced  that  he  had  no  chance  of  success  and  perceiving  also 
that  forage  for  his  horses  was  beginning  to  be  scarce,  he  again  broke 
camp  and  marched  down  into  the  plain  a  second  time  with  his  entire 
host.  He  then  crossed  the  river  by  a  ford  farther  down  stream,  placed 
his  forces  in  charge  of  their  respective  officers,  in  a  circle  at  equal  dis¬ 
tances  apart,  and  laid  siege  to  Antioch. 

On  the  morrow,  some  of  the  Turks  separated  from  the  rest  of  the 
army  and  challenged  our  people  to  fight.  They  dismounted  from  their 
horses  and  boldly  attacked  the  defenders  on  the  wall,  an  act  which 
resulted  in  the  loss  of  some  of  their  number.  For  Tancred  made  a  sud¬ 
den  sortie  by  the  east  gate,  while  they  were  in  this  condition,  and,  be¬ 
fore  they  could  remount  their  horses,  had  killed  six  and  put  the  rest  to 
flight.  He  caused  the  heads  of  his  victims  to  be  cut  off  and  bore  them 
into  the  city  for  the  consolation  of  the  people,  for  the  hearts  of  the  faith¬ 
ful  were  rent  with  grievous  sorrow  over  the  loss  of  Roger  de  Barne- 
ville,  who  had  been  killed  there. 

5.  The  Christians  in  Antioch  suffer  greatly  from  hunger. 

Some  of  the  nobles  furtively  defart.  Bohemond  is  f laced  in 
sufreme  control. 

Meanwhile,  the  Christian  people,  who  had  besieged  Antioch  and 
taken  it  by  force  of  arms  a  short  time  before,  were  now  in  their  turn 
enduring  siege — a  change  of  condition  which  frequently  occurs  in  the 
affairs  of  mankind.  Moreover,  exhausted  as  they  were  by  hardships  far 

^  Ps.  68 :  23, 


CRUSADERS  BESIEGED  267 

beyond  their  strength,  they  were  now  forced  to  endure  the  horrors  of  a 
famine  serious  beyond  measure.  Without  was  the  sword,  within  was 
fear.  The  numerous  forces  now  besieging  the  city  from  without  nat¬ 
urally  filled  them  with  terror,  and  in  addition,  the  Turks  still  held  the 
citadel,  from  which,  as  has  been  said,  they  were  continually  making 
sallies.  Thus  there  was  no  rest  possible  for  the  faithful,  and  many,  as 
punishment  for  their  sins,  had  sunk  into  a  state  of  despair.  Forgetful 
of  their  profession  and  the  many  vows  which  they  had  taken  upon 
themselves,  many  deserted  their  comrades,  and,  surreptitiously  de¬ 
scending  from  the  walls  by  means  of  baskets  or  ropes,  fled  to  the  coast. 
Some  of  these  fugitives  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy  and  were 
doomed  to  perpetual  slavery ;  others  reached  the  sea  and  forced  those 
already  on  shipboard  to  cut  the  anchor  ropes  and  set  sail  at  once.  ^^This 
great  prince,”  they  cried,  ^Vho  has  come  with  his  countless  hosts,  has 
seized  by  force  the  city  which  we  had  just  taken,  our  people  have  been 
utterly  wiped  out  and  our  leaders  slain,  but  we,  by  the  help  of  God, 
have  escaped  their  swords.  Cut  the  ropes,  then,  and  speed  your  flight 
lest  they  follow  us  to  the  shore  and  involve  you  in  a  similar  fate.” 

Thereupon,  they  boarded  the  ships  with  those  already  there  and 
began  their  flight.  It  was  not  alone  the  common  mob  and  the  people  of 
lesser  importance  who  fled  in  this  disgraceful  manner.  Among  the 
fugitives  were  illustrious  men  of  high  rank,  notably  William  de  Grand- 
mesnil,  a  distinguished  man  from  Apulia,  who  had  to  wife  Bohemond’s 
sister^  Albericus,  his  brother 3  William  Carpenter;  ^  Guy  de  Troussel; 
Lambert  the  Poor;  and  many  others  whose  names  we  do  not  remem¬ 
ber,  for,  since  they  have  been  blotted  out  from  the  Book  of  Life,  they 
should  not  be  inserted  in  this  work.  Still  others,  panic-stricken  at  the 
thought  of  imminent  perils  and  unable  to  endure  hunger  and  hard¬ 
ships,  took  refuge  with  the  enemy — ^an  act  far  more  abominable — and 
thus  wickedly  denied  the  teachings  of  Christ  and  His  faith.  These 
renegades  informed  the  Turks  of  the  army’s  condition,  and  this  came 
near  involving  the  Christians  in  extreme  danger.  Many  of  those  who 
remained  in  the  city  had  nevertheless  cherished  hopes  of  escaping. 
But  the  venerable  bishop  of  Puy  and  the  illustrious  leader,  Bohemond, 
forestalled  their  attempts.  Men  of  discretion,  whose  experience  and 

^  The  epithet  of  rope-dancers  {junambtilt)  was  applied  to  these  deserters  by  Western 
chroniclers.  William  Carpenter,  viscount  of  Melun,  had  attempted  to  flee  once  before. 
On  that  occasion  he  and  Peter  the  Hermit,  who  was  with  him,  were  brought  back 
by  Tancred.  Bohemond  had  rebuked  him  scorchingly,  but  evidently  without  lasting 
effect  (see  H,  Hagenmeyer,  ed.,  Anonymt  gesta  Francorum  et  aliorum  Hierosolymi- 
tanorum^  pp.  258—60,  334,  note  17  j  Book  IV,  note  21). 


268 


CRUSADERS  BESIEGED 


fidelity  could  be  trusted,  were  assigned  to  each  gate,  and  the  towers 
also  were  put  in  charge  of  special  chiefs  who  kept  untiring  watch  night 
and  day.  Thus,  no  one,  however  active  or  wily,  found  it  possible  to 
effect  an  escape.  That  these  guardians  might  have  more  complete  power 
to  exercise  the  jurisdiction  which  had  been  given  them,  all,  from  the 
least  to  the  greatest,  took  oath  that  they  would  faithfully  and  loyally 
obey  the  orders  of  Bohemond  until  the  siege  of  Antioch  was  ended 
and  the  battle  which  they  were  awaiting  had  taken  place.  Bohemond 
himself,  attended  by  his  retainers,  friends,  and  those  in  whom  he  had 
complete  confidence,  exercised  the  most  vigilant  care.  Day  and  night 
without  respite,  he  made  the  rounds  of  the  streets  and  squares,  towers 
and  ramparts,  to  see  that  no  one  was  careless  and  that  no  opportunity 
was  given  the  enemy  to  enter  by  treachery. 

There  were  four  forts  which  had  to  be  guarded  with  especial  care: 
the  upper  redoubt  which  had  been  built  directly  opposite  the  upper 
citadel;  a  second  one  below,  inside  the  city,  beyond  the  ditch  which 
had  been  dug  for  the  purpose  of  defense  against  the  frequent  sallies 
from  the  gate  of  the  upper  camp ;  a  third,  outside  the  east  gate,  which 
was  built  for  the  protection  of  the  camp  before  the  occupation  of  the 
city;  and  a  fourth  at  the  head  of  the  bridge  by  the  aid  of  which  the 
Christians  had  quite  recently  attacked  the  gate  of  the  Bridge.  This  last 
had  originally  been  guarded  by  the  count  of  Toulouse,  but  when  An¬ 
tioch  was  taken  he  resigned  this  charge  and  entered  the  city  with  the 
others. 

After  the  capture  of  Antioch,  the  count  of  Flanders  with  five  hun¬ 
dred  brave  and  valiant  men  took  over  the  care  of  this  fort.  He  strength¬ 
ened  its  defenses  greatly,  for  he  feared  that  if  it  should  fall  into  the 
enemy’s  hands,  our  people  would  be  prevented  from  going  back  and 
forth  by  way  of  the  bridge,  a  fact  which  would  render  their  condition 
materially  worse. 

6.  The  count  of  Flanders^  unable  to  save  the  fort  before  the 
gate  of  the  BridgCy  voluntarily  sets  fire  to  it  and  abandons 
it.  The  commander  in  chief  of  the  enemy^s  forces  sends 
some  of  his  Christian  caftives  to  Persia, 

Now  Karbuqa  began  to  notice  that  our  people  had  far  too  much  liberty 
in  going  and  coming.  He  observed  also  that  the  fort  by  the  bridge  was 
a  great  hindrance  to  his  own  plans.  Accordingly,  one  day  he  ordered  a 


CRUSADERS  BESIEGED 


269 

force  of  two  thousand  mailed  knights  to  arm  and  make  a  vigorous 
attack  on  the  place.  Instantly  obedient  to  his  commands,  they  took  up 
strategic  positions  around  the  wall  of  the  redoubt  just  mentioned.  From 
the  first  hour  of  the  day  even  unto  the  eleventh  they  kept  up  a  constant 
shower  of  arrows  in  a  succession  of  skirmishes.  The  count  and  his 
men  resisted  bravely  and  made  every  effort  to  defend  the  place  which 
had  been  put  under  his  charge.  As  evening  began  to  come  on,  about 
sunset,  the  assailants  realized  that  they  were  making  little  progress. 
Accordingly,  they  abandoned  the  attack  and  returned  to  camp.  But  the 
count  feared  that  on  the  morrow  they  would  return  to  the  attack  with 
larger  forces  j  he  knew  well  that  he  could  not  possibly  protect  the  fort 
against  so  large  a  force.  Accordingly,  in  the  dead  of  night  he  set  fire  to 
the  place  and  abandoned  everything  to  the  flames.  He  then  retired 
to  the  city  with  those  who  had  been  his  companions  in  that  forlorn 
hope. 

When  morning  came,  the  soldiers  who  had  formed  the  assaulting 
party  on  the  previous  day  returned  to  renew  the  attack,  reinforced  by 
two  thousand  men.  On  their  arrival,  they  found  the  place  abandoned 
and  for  the  most  part  destroyed.  They  were  therefore  obliged  to  return 
without  accomplishing  their  task. 

During  the  course  of  those  same  days,  some  of  the  enemy’s  forces, 
sallying  forth  stealthily,  happened  to  meet  some  Christians — poor  and 
needy  people — ^who  had  gone  out  without  observing  proper  caution. 
These  they  seized  and  led  before  their  prince  as  an  offering  to  him, 
the  first  spoils  of  their  success.  The  mean  arms  and  dress  of  the  captives 
roused  that  lord’s  contempt,  for  they  had  only  wooden  bows  and  worth¬ 
less  swords  covered  with  rust.  Their  garments  were  torn,  as  the  result 
of  their  continuous  labor,  and  from  constant  usage  fully  looked  their 
age,  for  the  pilgrim  people  had  no  extra  clothing  which  permitted  a 
change.  As  he  gazed  upon  them,  the  Turkish  prince  is  said  to  have  re¬ 
marked,  “Behold  a  people  well  fitted  to  cause  apprehension  in  foreign 
nations!  A  people  who  ought  to  consider  themselves  rich  if  in  any 
corner  of  the  earth  bread  were  given  to  them  as  to  the  basest  merce¬ 
naries!  Behold  the  arms  by  which  the  nobility  of  the  Orient  is  to  be 
scourged!  A  blow  from  such  weapons  would  scarcely  cause  even  a 
sparrow  to  fall  to  the  ground.  Bind  these  men  and  conduct  them  in 
chains,  with  those  arms  and  that  miserable  dress,  to  my  lord  who  sent 
me,  that  he  may  see  from  the  appearance  of  these  wretches  of  how  little 


CRUSADERS  BESIEGED 


270 

moment  it  is  to  triumph  over  men  like  these!  Let  him  reflect  what 
must  be  the  reputation  of  those  whom  so  wretched  a  people  boasts  of 
having  conquered !  Let  him  lay  aside  all  care  and  throw  the  responsi¬ 
bility  on  me,  for,  in  a  short  time,  these  filthy  dogs  will  have  ceased  to 
exist.  They  will  be  utterly  destroyed  so  that  they  will  no  longer  be 
numbered  among  the  nations.” 

With  these  words,  he  ordered  them  to  be  delivered  to  certain  men 
charged  with  the  duty  of  conducting  them,  bound,  into  Persia  to  the 
sultan  with  the  comments  he  had  made.  For  he  was  confident  that  he 
could  easily  conquer  men  whose  valor  he  had  not  yet  tried.  But  the 
very  words  which  he  had  thought  would  bring  him  glory,  when  he 
disparaged  that  people  to  his  lord  ,were  later  the  cause  of  his  undoing  j 
for,  inasmuch  as  he  was  defeated  and  thrown  into  confusion  by  a  people 
so  contemptible  in  his  own  judgment,  the  disgrace  which  came  upon 
him  was  all  the  greater.  For  as  a  rule  the  conquered  find  defeat  easier 
to  bear  if  it  can  be  said  that  they  were  vanquished  by  brave  and  valiant 
men.  Just  so,  on  the  contrary,  if  the  victory  is  won  by  the  despicable 
and  unworthy,  the  shame  is  greater  and  the  ignominy  doubled. 

7.  As  the  j amine  increases y  the  feofle  are  comfelled  most 
reluctantly  to  eat  unclean  jood. 

The  city  was  now  besieged  on  every  side,  and,  as  the  Christians  could 
no  longer  go  back  and  forth  to  attend  to  affairs  outside,  their  condition 
became  much  worse.  For  since  no  food  could  be  brought  into  the  place, 
a  famine  of  unusual  violence  arose.  The  failure  of  supplies  and  the 
stern  demands  of  importunate  nature  drove  the  starving  people  to 
shameful  expedients.  There  was  no  choice  in  the  matter  of  food,  even 
for  the  most  fastidious ;  no  arbitrary  distinction  between  clean  and  un¬ 
clean  meat  existed  j  whatever  chance  offered,  whether  free  or  at  a  price, 
was  at  once  used  for  food  3  for  the  famished  stomach  called  aloud  for 
any  kind  of  nourishment  whereby  it  might  be  filled,  if  indeed  such  a 
thing  were  possible.  The  nobles  felt  no  shame,  the  freeborn  no  hesi¬ 
tancy  in  presenting  themselves  as  uninvited  guests  at  the  table  of 
strangers.  Greedily  they  hung  on  the  charity  of  others  as  suppliants 
importunately  demanding  from  the  hands  of  strangers  what  was  too 
often  refused.  Modesty,  once  a  familiar  friend,  had  fled  from  matrons 3 
reverence  no  longer  attended  maidens  3  forgetful  of  their  birthright, 


CRUSADERS  BESIEGED 


271 

with  worn  faces  and  voices  plaintive  enough  to  move  hearts  of  stone, 
they  sought  food  everywhere,  undeterred  by  fear  of  repulse. 

There  were  others  who  could  not  be  forced  by  bitter  famine  to  lay 
aside  modesty  and  with  brazen  face  descend  to  beggary.  Such  persons 
hid  themselves  away  in  secret  places  to  languish  alone,  for  they  pre¬ 
ferred  to  die  rather  than  to  venture  forth  in  public  to  beg  anything  for 
themselves.  Now,  once  robust  men  whom  distinguished  valor  and 
high  rank  had  made  conspicuous  and  well  known  to  all  might  be  seen 
half  dead,  leaning  feebly  on  their  staffs  as  they  dragged  themselves 
along  the  streets  and  squares.  Though  they  uttered  no  words,  their 
downcast  faces  besought  alms  from  the  passers-by.  Wailing  children 
also,  and  babes  still  dependent  on  milk  for  nourishment,  were  to  be 
seen  everywhere  exposed  at  the  crossroads  to  seek  food  for  themselves, 
for  those  who  had  brought  them  forth,  unable  to  obtain  sufficient  food 
even  for  themselves,  refused  them  maternal  care. 

Among  so  vast  a  throng  there  was  scarcely  anyone  who  had  sufficient 
for  himself  alone.  The  resources  of  all  were  virtually  exhausted,  and 
all  alike  had  practically  come  to  the  point  of  beggary.  If,  perchance, 
one  was  so  fortunate  as  to  have  some  remnant  of  his  private  wealth 
still  left,  it  availed  him  nothing,  for  the  things  necessary  to  sustain  life 
were  not  to  be  bought.  Those  who  had  formerly  been  regarded  by  their 
friends  as  most  liberal  and  lavish  in  hospitality  now  sought  the  most 
retired  places,  inaccessible  to  others,  for  taking  refreshment.  There 
they  fell  greedily  upon  the  food,  such  as  it  was,  which  they  had  been 
able  to  procure  from  various  sources  and  refused  to  share  it  with  any¬ 
one.  Is  it  necessary  to  say  more?  The  flesh  of  camels,  asses,  horses, 
mules,  and  unclean  animals  of  all  kinds  was  looked  upon  as  the  rarest 
of  delicacies  when  it  could  be  obtained,  and,  dreadful  to  relate,  the 
bodies  of  beasts  which  had  died  of  suffocation  or  disease  were  dug  up 
and  devoured.  Such  were  the  foods  with  which  they  tried  to  quell  the 
cravings  of  hunger  and  to  prolong  their  miserable  lives  by  any  means 
possible. 

This  overpowering  catastrophe,  famine,  attacked  not  only  the  com¬ 
mon  people  and  men  of  lesser  rank,  but  involved  in  its  horrors  even 
the  more  important  chiefs.  For  them  it  was  the  more  insupportable, 
since  they  had  need  of  more  than  the  rest,  because  they  had  more  peo¬ 
ple  to  maintain  and  could  not  refuse  their  bounty  to  those  who  sought  it. 


272  CRUSADERS  BESIEGED 

Although  traditions  of  this  time  still  exist  among  aged  men,  it  would 
require  a  special  treatise  to  relate  what  happened  to  each  of  the  chiefs, 
and  to  tell  of  the  straits  and  difficulties  under  which  these  pious  leaders 
labored  for  the  sake  of  Christ.  This  is  far  beyond  the  scope  of  a  com¬ 
pendium  of  history.'^  It  may  be  said,  however,  that  on  the  whole  it 
would  be  difficult  to  find  elsewhere  in  history  another  example  of 
miseries  so  patiently  endured  without  protest  by  such  great  leaders  and 
so  vast  an  army. 

8.  The  enemy  nearly  succeeds  in  taking  by  stealth  one  of  the 
towers,  Henry  ddEsch  makes  a  valiant  resistance  andy  after 
killing  several  Turks y  gains  'possession  of  the  tower  by  force 
of  arms. 

Through  the  energetic  zeal  of  Karbuqa  and  his  people,  Antioch  was 
now  surrounded  on  all  sides.  The  Christians  shut  up  within  the  walls 
could  not  go  out,  nor  could  anyone  come  to  them.  Furthermore,  they 
were  exhausted  beyond  endurance  by  almost  constant  engagements 
both  within  and  without  the  city.  Weakened  by  protracted  hardships 
and  the  pressure  of  famine,  our  people  now  began  to  display  less 
vigilant  care  in  guarding  the  place.  Those  who  were  almost  wholly 
occupied  in  seeking  the  food  necessary  for  mere  existence  naturally 
became  somewhat  remiss  in  regard  to  other  matters.  Thus  it  happened 
that  one  day  the  enemy  nearly  succeeded  in  entering  the  city  through 
a  carelessly  guarded  tower,  next  to  the  one  by  which  the  Christians 
had  made  their  entrance. 

Some  of  the  Turks,  hoping  to  seize  this  tower  under  the  protection 
of  the  silent  night,  had  secretly  applied  ladders  to  the  walls.  Thence 
they  thought  to  descend  into  the  city  as  we  had  done  before.  Toward 
evening,  about  thirty  men  mounted  to  the  walls  by  this  means  with 
the  purpose  of  taking  the  tower,  which  they  found  without  defenders. 
While  they  were  actively  engaged  in  this  attempt,  however,  the  prefect 
of  the  watch,  who  was  making  the  rounds  of  the  wall,  happened  to 
reach  the  place  where  the  Turks  were  working.  He  discovered  the 
plot  and  at  once  gave  the  alarm  to  those  in  the  neighboring  towers  by 
shouting  aloud  that  the  enemy  had  treacherously  seized  the  tower. 

^William  evidently  feels  that  his  summary  (^comfendiufn)  treatment  justifies  an 
abbreviation  of  sufferings  in  the  famine.  These  continued  with  varying  intensity  for 
several  months  longer. 


CRUSADERS  BESIEGED 


273 

The  uproar  roused  all  those  on  watch  guard  in  that  part  of  the  city. 
Among  others  was  Henry  d’Esch,  an  energetic  and  illustrious  man, 
who  immediately  hastened  to  the  spot  with  two  other  knights,  Franco 
and  Siegmar,  his  kinsmen,  natives  of  the  town  called  Mechlin  [Ma- 
lines],  on  the  river  Meuse.  They  feared  that  someone  had  by  chance 
yielded  to  the  temptation  of  bribery  and  had  treacherously  betrayed 
the  city.  Aided  by  those  who  rushed  to  his  assistance  from  the  neighbor¬ 
ing  towers,  Esch  attacked  the  enemy  vigorously  with  his  accustomed 
energy.  The  assailants  put  up  a  very  stout  resistance,  but  in  a  short 
time  he  succeeded  in  driving  them  from  the  tower.  Four  Turks  were 
killed 5  the  remaining  twenty-six  (for  the  thirty  who  had  already 
mounted  intended  to  admit  the  others  afterwards)  were  thrown  head¬ 
long  from  the  ramparts  and  dashed  to  pieces. 

In  this  encounter  the  valiant  chief  suffered  the  loss  of  his  com¬ 
rade  Siegmar,  who  perished  by  the  sword  j  Franco  was  also  mortally 
wounded  and  was  carried  home  almost  lifeless. 

4 

9.  The  enemy  descend  to  the  coasts  They  burn  the  shifs  and 
kill  many  of  our  feofle  along  the  way. 

Day  by  day  the  lack  of  food  continued  to  distress  the  besieged  more 
and  more,  and,  as  the  famine  increased,  the  sufferings  of  the  besieged 
became  more  intense.  Rendered  desperate  by  their  many  privations  and 
the  daily  burden  of  affliction,  some  of  the  Christians  cast  aside  care  for 
their  life  and  safety  and  secretly  left  the  city.  Though  beset  by  a 
thousand  perils,  they  passed  through  the  midst  of  the  enemy’s  lines 
and  succeeded  in  reaching  the  sea,  where  some  Greek  and  Latin  ships 
still  lingered.  Their  object  was  to  buy  food  and  carry  it  back  to  the 
city.  Some,  however,  in  the  hope  of  escaping  perils  so  great,  departed 
never  to  return.  They  had  abandoned  all  expectation  that  the  situation 
of  those  whom  they  had  left  behind  could  change  for  the  better,  or 
that  they  could  by  any  chance  escape  the  enemy’s  swords. 

Meanwhile,  the  Turks  discovered  that  some  of  our  people  were 
making  surreptitious  trips  by  night  to  the  sea  and  were  wandering  to 
and  fro  near  the  city  in  search  of  food.  They  at  once  sent  out  men  well 
acquainted  with  the  localities  to  lay  ambushes  for  these  people  and 
thereby  wrought  repeated  slaughter  upon  them.  Success  so  often  at¬ 
tended  these  attempts  that  at  last  they  dispatched  two  thousand  picked 
horsemen  down  to  the  sea  with  orders  to  seize  the  sailors  and  traders 


CRUSADERS  BESIEGED 


274 

and  burn  the  ships.  This  measure  would,  they  hoped,  completely  root 
out  that  kind  of  commerce,  so  that  henceforth,  since  that  way  of  obtain¬ 
ing  food  was  removed,  the  Christians  would  find  themselves  cut  off 
from  all  supplies  and  would  give  up  all  hope  of  safety.  That  was  what 
actually  happened.  The  Turkish  cavalry  carried  out  their  orders  liter¬ 
ally.  They  burned  some  of  the  ships,  killed  the  greater  part  of  the 
crews,  who  were  caught  entirely  off  their  guard,  and  put  the  rest  to 
flight.  The  news  of  this  disaster  spread  abroad.  It  greatly  alarmed  the 
merchants  who  had  been  coming  thither  on  trading  voyages  from 
Cyprus,  Rhodes,  and  other  islands,  as  well  as  from  Cilicia,  Isauria, 
Pamphylia,  and  other  maritime  countries.  Under  the  existing  condi¬ 
tions,  they  were  afraid  to  return  there  even  to  carry  their  wares  and 
dared  not  approach.  As  a  result,  trading  in  commodities  ceased  entirely, 
and  the  situation  of  the  Christians,  perilous  as  it  had  been  before,  be¬ 
came  decidedly  worse.  Although  the  small  amount  of  merchandise 
brought  by  the  traders  was  entirely  inadequate  to  supply  the  needs  of 
so  many  people,  yet,  as  long  as  communication  by  sea  had  been  open, 
some  slight  relief  had  come  to  the  Christians  in  this  way. 

On  their  return  from  the  shore,  the  enemy  encountered  some  of  the 
faithful  on  the  way.  All  of  these  were  put  to  the  sword,  with  the  ex¬ 
ception  of  a  very  few  who  crept  away  through  the  thickets  and  under¬ 
brush  and  found  hiding  places  in  caves.  The  news  of  this  disaster,  the 
harbinger  of  evil,  caused  our  people  not  less  distress  than  did  the  cruel 
famine.  As  often  as  they  heard  the  story  of  the  catastrophe  which  had 
befallen  their  friends,  so  often  was  their  anguish  renewed.  Exhausted 
by  many  woes,  by  privations  without  end,  by  the  daily  loss  of  friends, 
and  by  bitter  misfortunes,  they  now  began  to  despair  even  of  life  itself  3 
they  became  less  careful,  also,  to  protect  themselves  and  less  inclined 
to  obey  their  chiefs. 

10.  Stefheriy  count  of  ChartreSy  visits  the  emferor  of  Con¬ 
stantino  fie. 

Meanwhile,  William  de  Grandmesnil  and  the  others  who  had  fled 
with  him  arrived  at  Alexandretta.  There  they  found  Stephen,  count 
of  Chartres  and  Blois,  whom  the  leaders — and  in  fact  all  the  people — 
were  eagerly  expecting  from  day  to  day.  Under  the  pretext  of  illness, 
he  was  still  sojourning  at  this  place.  They  informed  him  of  all  that 
had  occurred  at  Antioch,  and,  lest  they  too  might  appear  to  have  de¬ 
serted  their  comrades  like  cowards,  for  an  insufficient  and  trivial  reason, 


CRUSADERS  BESIEGED 


27s 

they  exaggerated  the  extent  of  the  troubles  and  misery  there.  The 
situation  was  indeed  dreadful  beyond  comparisonj  yet,  by  their  studied 
report,  they  made  it  still  worse  and  accentuated  conditions  bad  enough 
in  themselves.  It  was  not  difficult  to  convince  Stephen  of  anything 
that  tended  to  strengthen  his  cowardice.  It  was  for  these  very  reasons 
that  he  had  deserted  his  companions  and  had  fled  from  them  under  the 
excuse  of  illness.  After  they  had  conferred  together,  therefore,  they 
set  sail  in  ships  that  were  ready  for  them  in  the  harbor.  After  a  voyage 
of  several  days,  they  arrived  at  one  of  the  coast  cities.  Here  they 
anxiously  inquired  about  the  emperor^s  whereabouts.  Through  various 
reports  differing  in  substance  and  veracity,  they  learned  that  he  had 
set  out  for  Antioch  with  numerous  troops,  both  Greek  and  Latin,  to 
carry  aid  to  the  Christians,  as  he  was  bound  to  do  by  agreement.  He 
was  now  encamped  in  the'  vicinity  of  Philomelium. 

In  addition  to  the  armies  which  he  had  mustered  from  all  nations, 
there  had  joined  him  about  forty  thousand  Latins.  These  had  been 
left  behind  in  the  emperor’s  land  by  the  legions  which  had  already 
gone  on,  either  because  they  were  poverty-stricken  or  because  there 
was  sickness  among  them  or  for  some  other  urgent  reason.  Now,  how¬ 
ever,  they  had  regained  their  strength,  and,  inspired  by  the  presence 
of  the  emperor  and  his  innumerable  host,  they  had  acquired  confidence 
to  march  on.  With  all  their  hearts  and  souls,  they  were  now  eager  to 
join  their  comrades  of  the  pilgrimage. 

On  learning  that  the  emperor  was  tarrying  at  that  place  to  await 
large  reinforcements  and  make  further  preparations  for  the  march, 
Count  Stephen,  accompanied  by  those  in  his  party,  hastened  to  the 
imperial  army  by  the  shortest  route.  He  was  received  on  his  arrival 
with  sufficient  honor,  but  also  with  astonishment.  For  the  emperor  had 
made  his  acquaintance  in  the  beginning  of  the  campaign,  when  Stephen 
had  crossed  over  with  the  rest,  and  friendly  relations  had  grown  up 
between  them.  In  response  to  the  careful  inquiries  which  the  emperor 
made  about  the  life,  safety,  and  status  of  the  other  chiefs  and  why  the 
count  had  left  them,  he  answered  as  follows. 

II.  Stefhen^s  decehjul  sfeech  to  the  emferor  which  resulted  in 
fatal  consequences  to  the  Christians. 

^^Your  loyal  servants,  O  invincible  Emperor,  who  were  permitted  to 
march  through  your  empire  a  short  time  ago  and  were  enriched  by  your 
liberality,  first  captured  Nicaea  and,  after  a  successful  march,  arrived 


CRUSADERS  BESIEGED 


276 

at  Antioch.  They  besieged  that  city  without  ceasing  for  nine  successive 
months,  and,  finally,  by  the  mercy  of  God,  succeeded  in  taking  it  by 
force.  The  citadel,  however,  still  held  out,  for,  situated  on  a  high 
mountain,  it  towers  above  the  city  and  is  absolutely  impregnable.  Our 
people  believed  that  the  siege  was  over  and  they  themselves  delivered 
from  all  danger,  for  the  city  had  already  been  surrendered.  But  now  a 
new  danger  arose,  much  worse  than  the  former,  and  they  fell  into  far 
greater  peril  than  they  had  before  experienced. 

^^Scarcely  three  days  had  passed  after  the  occupation  of  the  city 
when  Karbuqa,  a  powerful  Persian  general,  came  with  a  countless  num¬ 
ber  of  troops  from  the  Orient,  in  multitude  far  beyond  estimating. 
He  invested  the  city  on  every  side.  Entrance  and  exit  were  cut  off  in 
all  directions,  and  both  leaders  and  people  were  visited  with  so  many 
afflictions  that  they  despaired  even  of  their  lives. 

^^The  mind  can  scarcely  conceive  the  vast  numbers  of  that  besieging 
host,  for,  to  put  it  briefly,  their  ranks  covered  the  entire  country  round 
about  the  city  like  locusts,  so  that  there  seemed  to  be  scarcely  roqm 
for  their  tents.  Our  people,  on  the  other  hand,  have  been  so  diminished 
by  famine,  by  cold  and  heat,  by  massacre  and  death,  that  the  entire 
host  now  concentrated  in  Antioch  seems  barely  sufficient  for  its  defense. 

“Moreover,  the  assistance  which,  up  to  this  time,  has  been  brought 
to  them  by  ships  from  your  kingdom  and  from  the  Islands  and  cities 
on  the  coast  has,  as  you  know,  been  entirely  cut  off.  For  the  enemy 
sent  out  troops,  who  have  seized  all  the  country  between  Antioch 
and  the  sea  3  they  have  almost  entirely  destroyed  the  fleet,  put  the 
sailors  and  traders  to  the  sword,  and  thus  have  effectually  deprived 
our  people  of  all  hope  of  obtaining  food  by  trading. 

“It  is  reported  that  there  is  in  Antioch  at  present  only  enough  food 
to  supply  the  needs  of  the  people  for  one  day.  To  coniplete  the  measure 
of  their  woe,  not  even  in  the  city  have  they  any  secure  place  where  they 
may  take  refuge.  For  the  Turks  are  often  secretly  introduced  into  the 
city  through  the  fortress  above,  whence  they  make  sallies  into  the  very 
heart  of  the  town  and  attack  the  Christians  in  the  streets  and  squares. 
Thus  our  people  suffer  not  less  from  these  conflicts  within  the  walls 
than  from  those  waged  by  the  foe  from  without. 

“Hence,  we  ourselves  and  these  captains  and  men  of  noble  rank 
who  are  with  us  here  realized  that  the  undertaking  in  which  our 
brethren  are  engaged  could  not  succeed,  and  we  have  often  talked 


CRUSADERS  BESIEGED 


277 

with  them  and  advised  them  in  a  brotherly  way  to  provide  for  their 
safety.  Since  the  divine  will  is  not  with  them,  they  should  cease  to  hope 
to  accomplish  the  impossible.  When  we  found  that  we  were  unable 
to  move  them  from  their  purpose,  we  took  means  to  provide  for  our 
own  safety,  lest  we  also  foolishly  be  involved  in  the  same  disasters. 

“Now,  if  it  seems  good  to  you  and  to  the  illustrious  nobles  who  sur¬ 
round  you,  give  up  your  intention  of  marching  to  Antioch,  that  the 
fortunate  soldiers  whom  you  are  leading  be  not  overtaken  by  the  same 
perils.  For  it  is  wiser  to  retire  while  your  forces  are  intact  before  the 
vast  multitude  which  the  whole  Orient  has  furnished,  without  attempt¬ 
ing  this  campaign,  than  to  measure  your  strength  rashly  with  such 
numbers  of  valiant  troops  when  the  result  is  uncertain. 

“These  illustrious  men  here  in  your  presence  have  shared  the  same 
lot  and  can  testify  that  our  words  are  true,  Taticius  also  knows  this, 
that  shrewd  and  cunning  man  whom  your  magnificence  sent  with  us  5 
for  he  perceived  the  weakness  of  our  people  and  wisely  withdrew  from 
connection  with  them,  that  he  might  inform  your  majesty  of  the  situa¬ 
tion.” 

There  was  in  the  emperor’s  army  a  brother  of  Lord  Bohemond, 
Guido  by  name.®  As  this  man  listened  to  Stephen’s  words,  he  was 
moved  almost  to  frenzy  and  bitterly  lamented  the  misfortunes  of  his 
brother  and  friends.  At  first  he  desired  to  contradict  the  count’s  story 
and  to  reproach  him  with  cowardice  because  he  had  so  Inconsiderately 
withdrawn  from  the  fellowship  of  those  great  chiefs  j  but  William 
de  Grandmesnil,  the  brother-in-law  of  Bohemond  and  himself  a  man 
noble  in  birth  even  if  not  in  character,  succeeded  in  silencing  him. 

12.  The  emferor  returns  to  his  own  land^  His  confidence  in 
the  counds  words  leads  him  to  dismiss  the  exf editionary 
force  which  he  had  assembled  for  our  assistance. 

After  the  emperor  had  listened  to  these  words,  he  called  his  nobles 
together  to  consider  whether  he  should  march  on  to  Antioch  or  turn 
about  and  lead  his  army  home.  After  all  phases  of  the  matter  had 
been  considered  at  length,  it  was  unanimously  decided  that  it  would 
be  wiser  to  lead  the  army  back  in  safety  than  to  rouse  the  kingdoms  of 
the  entire  Orient  and  risk  the  vicissitudes  of  war. 

®  Called  Wido  by  the  anonymous  author  of  the  Gesta  Francorum.  He  was  a  younger 
half  brother,  the  offspring  of  Robert  Guiscard  by  his  second  wife. 


CRUSADERS  BESIEGED 


278 

The  emperor  placed  such  confidence  in  Stephen’s  words  that  he 
believed  all  would  be  as  the  count  had  stated.  He  even  feared  in  his 
heart  that  Karbuqa,  who,  it  was  said,  had  destroyed  our  forces,  might 
invade  the  empire  with  the  vast  armies  which  rumor  affirmed  he  was 
leading.  Thus  Nicaea  with  all  Bithynia,  which  had  been  gained  by  the 
zealous  work  of  the  crusading  leaders,  might  again  be  wrested  from 
the  emperor’s  power.  To  provide  against  this  danger,  he  ordered  that 
all  the  provinces  along  his  line  of  retreat,  both  on  the  right  and  on  the 
left,  from  Iconium  to  Nicaea,  should  be  given  over  to  fire  and  pillage. 
If,  by  any  chance,  the  enemy  should  be  inclined  to  direct  their  strength 
against  his  kingdom,  he  hoped  that  this  devastated  country,  deserted 
by  its  inhabitants  and  utterly  without  food  supplies,  would  at  least  serve 
as  an  obstacle. 

Thus  the  conduct  of  Stephen  deprived  the  Christians  of  the  aid  they 
so  vitally  needed,  aid  which  the  emperor  was  preparing  to  bring  in  ful¬ 
fillment  of  the  treaty. 

As  one  carefully  examines  the  count’s  action  in  this  matter,  with  due 
consideration  for  the  intrinsic  facts,  it  appears  wholly  inexcusable  and 
seems  to  have  sprung  from  an  instinct  in  itself  vicious  and  essentially 
dishonorable.  Yet,  through  the  protecting  care  of  Him  who  alone  is 
potent  and  wise  enough  to  bring  to  the  best  issue  even  that  which  had 
its  beginning  in  evil,  the  result  certainly  redounded  to  the  glory  of 
the  people  of  God  and  their  leaders.  It  was  indeed  fitting  that  those 
who  had  borne  the  burden  and  heat  of  the  day,  those  who  had  left  wives 
and  children  to  fight  as  pilgrims  for  the  Lord,  should  enjoy  the  glory 
resulting  from  their  labors.  If  the  emperor  had  been  present,  how¬ 
ever,  he  would  have  begrudged  this  to  all  the  others.  If  he  had  been 
on  the  spot  with  his  legions,  he  would  undoubtedly  have  brought  the 
siege  to  an  end,  because  of  his  superior  authority  and  larger  forces. 
Thus  the  palm  would  have  fallen,  and  with  justice,  to  him.  One  must 
believe,  then,  that  it  was  the  Lord  Himself  who  brought  it  to  pass 
that  those  who  had  toiled  faithfully  and  devotedly  under  hardships 
without  number  should  gather  in  the  fruit  of  their  labor  and  win  the 
title  of  victory. 


CRUSADERS  BESIEGED 


279 


13*  The  news  of  the  etriferor^s  %vtthdra%val  ins'ph’es  the  enemy 
to  'press  on  with  still  greater  vigor.  The  Christians y  in 
despair y  refuse  to  do  their  duty,  Bohemond  sets  fire  to  the 
city  in  order  to  drive  them  out  of  their  hiding  places.  The 
chiefs  meditate  flight.  The  duke  defeats  their  purpose. 

Meanwhile,  many  tongues  spread  the  rumor  throughout  the  city  that 
the  emperor  had  turned  back.  This  report  added  the  culminating  touch 
to  the  woes  under  which  the  Christians  were  suffering  and  came  near 
plunging  all  headlong  into  the  depths  of  despair.  They  abhorred  the 
very  memory  of  Count  Stephen  and  condemned  it  to  eternal  infamy. 
They  cursed  William  de  Grandmesnil  and  all  the  participants  of  that 
impious  treachery.  They  implored  heaven  that  those  who  not  only 
withdrew  from  the  hardships  common  to  all  but  even  defrauded  the 
people  of  God  of  the  abundant  help  which  the  Lord  seemed  to  have 
prepared  for  them  might  have  their  portion  with  the  traitor  Judas 
in  the  fire  everlasting. 

Karbuqa  and  his  principal  leaders  had  learned  through  their  scouts 
that  the  emperor  was  on  the  march  and  were  naturally  in  a  state  of 
much  anxiety.  Not  without  justice  did  they  fear  his  strength,  com¬ 
posed  as  it  was  of  the  flower  of  his  empire.  When  it  became  known,  also 
through  these  same  scouts,  that  the  Greeks  had  turned  back,  Karbuqa^s 
insolence  greatly  increased  5  and,  as  if  already  assured  of  victory,  he 
pressed  our  people  more  cruelly  and  hemmed  them  in  yet  more  closely. 
As  a  result,  the  faithful  inside  the  city  were  plunged  into  many  new 
miseries.  No  longer  did  there  seem  to'  be  hope  of  rescue  or  of  help  from 
any  source.  Utter  despair  settled  upon  all,  and  day  by  day  this  feeling 
grew  stronger. 

The  general  responsibility  of  the  entire  army  had  been  committed 
to  Bohemond  j  but,  as  he  passed  around  the  city,  he  found  it  impossible, 
either  by  words  or  blows,  to  drive  even  one  person  from  the  houses 
where  the  people  were  hiding.  Not  a  man  could  be  found  to  do  guard 
duty  or  to  engage  the  enemy  either  within  or  without  the  city,  although 
all  were  suffering  from  the  many  woes  inflicted  by  the  infidels. 

One  day,  after  the  heralds  and  public  servants  had  returned  ex¬ 
hausted  from  their  fruitless  efforts  to  call  forth  the  people,  Bohemond 
decided  that  it  was  useless  to  make  further  attempts  to  force  them 
from  their  retreats.  Accordingly,  he  ordered  his  helpers  to  set  fire  to 


28o 


CRUSADERS  BESIEGED 


the  city  in  several  places.  The  fear  of  fire  might,  he  hoped,  drive  out 
into  public  view  those  whose  hard  hearts  refused  to  obey  the  divine 
will.  This  maneuver  was  successful,  for,  whereas  before  that  time  he 
had  been  unable  to  procure  enough  men  for  the  public  service,  there¬ 
after  he  found  all  zealously  anxious  to  perform  these  duties. 

It  is  said  also  that  [some  of]  the  chief  men,  in  despair  of  life  and 
safety,  held  a  private  conference  in  which  they  determined  to  desert 
the  people  and  the  entire  pilgrim  host  that  very  night  in  order  to  at¬ 
tempt  a  stealthy  escape  to  the  coast  by  night.  These  plans  reached  the 
ears  of  the  duke  and  the  venerable  bishop  of  Puy,  who  summoned  the 
guilty  ones  to  their  presence  and  vigorously  reproached  them.  They 
reminded  them  that  the  stigma  of  everlasting  infamy  would  be  branded 
upon  themselves  and  their  posterity  if,  in  defiance  of  the  demands  of 
honor  and  their  high  lineage,  they  should  withdraw  from  this  great 
assemblage  of  the  faithful  in  Christ. 

At  this  crisis,  there  was  such  a  lack  of  food  among  the  people  of  God, 
such  desperate  straits  of  famine,  and  such  pressure  on  the  part  of  the 
enemy,  both  within  and  without  the  walls,  that  there  seemed  to  be 
no  remedy  or  help  anywhere.  Great  and  small  alike  were  involved 
in  the  same  disaster  and  thus  could  render  no  assistance  to  one  another. 
When  they  thought  of  the  wives  and  children  they  had  left  at  home, 
and  the  broad  ancestral  estates  which  they  had  forsaken  for  love  of 
Christ,  they  gave  way  to  complaints  against  the  ingratitude  of  the  Lord, 
because  He  regarded  not  their  labors  and  true  devotion,  but  suffered 
them,  like  a  people  alien  to  Him,  to  be  given  over  into  the  hand  of 
their  enemy. 

I4‘  ^  revelation  is  made  to  one  Peter »  The  Lance  of  the  Lord 
IS  discovered^  The  feofle  are  once  more  comforted. 

While  the  people  of  God  were  suffering  affliction  in  this  way,  the 
Lord  looked  upon  them  and  heard  their  groans  and  sent  them  consola¬ 
tion  from  the  seat  of  His  majesty.  A  certain  cleric  named  Peter,®  as 

®  This  was  Peter  Bartholomew,  an  obscure  cleric  in  the  Provencal  army.  Raymond 
d’Aguilers,  chaplain  of  Count  Raymond,  became  a  sort  of  sponsor  for  the  visionary 
and  devoted  a  large  portion  of  his  history  to  a  refutation  of  the  charges  against  the 
authenticity  of  the  Lance.  According  to  Raymond  there  were  five  visions  between 
December  30,  1097,  and  the  finding  of  the  Lance  (see  H.  Hagenmeyer,  Chronologie^ 

nos.  221,  236,  251,  277.  The  account  of  Raymond  is  translated  in  full  in  Krey,  The 
First  Crusade). 


28i 


CRUSADERS  BESIEGED 

it  is  said,  from  the  land  called  Provence,  came  to  the  bishop  of  Puy  and 
the  count  of  Toulouse.  He  claimed  that  the  blessed  apostle  Andrew 
had  appeared  to  him  in  dreams  three  or  four  times  and  had  commanded 
him  most  urgently  to  tell  the  leaders  that  the  Lance  which  pierced 
the  side  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  lay  hidden  in  the  church  of  the 
Prince  of  the  Apostles.  They  were  to  seek  it  there  with  all  diligence 
in  the  spot  which  the  apostle  had  indicated  by  definite  signs. 

Accordingly  Peter  went  to  those  beloved  servants  of  God  and  made 
known  to  them  in  full  detail  the  command  which  he  swore  had  been 
laid  upon  him.  He  declared  that  he  had  been  forced  by  the  apostle  to 
do  this  under  threats  of  many  terrors.  Again  and  again  he  had  refused 
to  undertake  the  mission  because  he  was  a  poor  and  unlearned  man,  yet 
at  last  he  could  no  longer  evade  the  urgent  command  of  the  apostle, 
even  though  it  be  at  the  risk  of  his  life. 

This  communication  was  confided  in  all  secrecy  to  the  other  leaders, 
and  Peter  was  brought  before  them  that  they  might  learn  from  him 
the  exact  mode  and  form  of  the  command.  After  listening  to  his  words, 
they  put  faith  in  his  story  and  assembled  at  the  place  which  he  had 
named,  within  the  precincts  of  the  church  mentioned  above.  The  earth 
in  that  spot  was  dug  up  to  some  depth,  and  there  they  found  the 
Lance  just  as  Peter  had  said.*^ 

When  the  people  heard  the  news,  they  ran  to  the  church  as  one  man, 
for  they  felt  that  consolation  had  been  sent  them  from  on  high.  Gifts 
and  offerings  were  brought  to  honor  the  discovery  of  that  precious 
token.  Freed  from  their  anxiety,  they  began  to  breathe  once  more  and 
felt  renewed  strength  to  carry  out  the  divine  commands.  There  were 
some,  also,  who  claimed  to  have  had  visions  of  angels  and  the  holy 
apostles,  which,  as  corroborating  evidence,  tended  to  strengthen  faith 
in  Peter’s  dream.  The  despondent  spirits  of  the  people  rose  marvel- 

Then,  at  the  suggestion  of  venerable  and  God-fearing  men,  all  the 
chiefs  renewed  their  vows  and  took  an  oath  of  fidelity  to  one  another. 
They  promised  that,  if  the  Lord  would  mercifully  rescue  them  from 
their  present  critical  situation  and  grant  them  the  longed-for  victory 
over  their  enemies,  they  would  not  separate  until,  by  the  help  of  God, 

"June  14,  1098.  The  circumstances  of  the  finding*  of  the  Lance  were  used  in  the 
indictment  of  Peter  Bartholomew.  William  has  abbreviated  the  story  greatly.  (For 
the  divergent  views  held  at  the  time  see  Krey,  The  First  Crtisadey  pp.  174—93)  223—41.) 


282 


CRUSADERS  BESIEGED 


they  had  restored  the  Holy  City  and  His  glorious  sepulchre  to  the 
Christian  faith  and  its  own  former  state  of  liberty. 

15.  By  the  common  consent  of  the  chief Sy  Peter  the  Hermit  is 
sent  as  an  envoy  to  the  enemy.  He  intrefidly  undertakes  the 
mission. 

For  twenty-six  successive  days,  the  people  had  struggled  under  these 
intolerable  conditions.  Now  they  took  heart  once  more  and  began  to 
gird  up  their  loins  with  new  courage,  comforting  themselves  in  the  . 
abundance  of  their  long-suffering  by  the  hope  sent  them  from  on  high. 
All  from  the  least  even  unto  the  greatest  agreed  that  these  sufferings 
must  be  brought  to  an  end.  They  must  come  to  a  conflict  with  the 
enemy  immediately  and,  aided  by  divine  strength,  forthwith  repulse 
the  infidels  who  presumed  so  much  on  their  great  strength.  Thus  the 
city  which  the  Lord  had  bestowed  upon  them  would  be  liberated.  Far 
wiser  would  it  be  to  try  the  fortune  of  war  once  and  for  all  than  to 
waste  away  slowly  through  long-continued  famine  and  to  be  tortured 
by  the  ever-present  burden  of  misfortunes. 

This  was  the  sentiment  on  the  lips  of  all;  it  was  imperative  that 
they  march  forth  from  the  city  and  fight  it  out  with  the  enemy.  Nor 
was  this  the  view  of  the  nobles  alone.  The  common  people  also  were 
kindled  with  the  same  desire.  They  even  accused  their  leaders  of  in¬ 
activity  and  chided  any  delay. 

The  leaders  recognized  that  the  fervor  of  the  people  was  inspired 
from  above.  They  met  for  deliberation,  and  it  was  decided  by  common 
consent  to  send  a  deputation  to  the  commander  in  chief  of  the  enemy’s 
forces,  proposing  that  he  agree  to  do  one  of  two  things:  either  let  him 
depart  and  leave  the  city  to  the  Christians  as  a  possession  forever — 
the  city  which  had  been  theirs  in  the  first  place  and  which  now  by  the 
will  of  God  had  been  restored  to  them — or  let  him  prepare  for  battle 
and  submit  to  the  decision  of  the  sword. 

Peter  the  Hermit,  that  man  of  revered  life,  about  whom  so  much 
has  been  said  in  the  preceding  pages,  was  chosen  for  this  mission.  He 
was  given  as  his  associate  and  companion  the  wise  and  discreet  Her- 
luin,®  a  man  who  possessed  some  knowledge  of  the  Persian  idiom  and 

®  Persian  and  Parthian  are  somewhat  vague  as  here  used.  Doubtless  Karbuqa’s  army 
from  Mosul  did  include  Persians  as  it  likewise  included  Turks.  Most  of  them,  how¬ 
ever,  must  have  been  familiar  with  Arabic,  the  language  of  Islam.  Herluin,  the  in- 


CRUSADERS  BESIEGED 


283 

was  also  skilled  in  the  tongue  of  the  Parthians.  To  these  two  men  was 
entrusted  the  delivery  of  the  proposition  just  stated.  The  condition 
was  added,  however,  that  if  the  prince  should  choose  battle,  the  decision 
should  rest  with  him  whether  he  himself  would  try  single  combat  with 
one  of  the  Christian  chiefs,  or  whether  a  certain  number  of  his  men 
should  fight  with  the  same  number  of  ours,  or,  again,  whether  the  en¬ 
tire  host  on  both  sides  should  meet  in  general  combat. 

A  temporary  truce  was  obtained  and  peace  granted  for  the  purpose 
of  sending  a  deputation.  The  two  men  mentioned  above  then  set  out 
for  the  camp  of  the  prince  with  the  escort  assigned  to  them.  They  found 
Karbuqa  surrounded  by  his  chiefs  and  satraps.  Peter  the  Hermit, 
though  small  of  stature,  was  a  man  of  lofty  spirit.  He  acquitted  him¬ 
self  of  the  task  assigned  to  him  faithfully  and  vigorously.  With  fear¬ 
less  and  steadfast  demeanor,  he  approached  the  Persian  satrap  and, 
disdaining  any  obeisance,  delivered  the  ultimatum  as  follows:  “The 
sacred  assemblage  of  leaders,  beloved  of  God,  who  are  at  Antioch, 
have  sent  us  to  warn  your  highness  to  desist  from  molesting  them  and 
to  cease  besieging  the  city  which  divine  mercy  has  restored  into  their 
hands.  This  city  was  called  out  of  idolatry  by  Peter,  the  prince  of  the 
apostles,  that  wise  and  faithful  dispensator  of  our  faith.  Through  the 
power  of  miracles  and  by  the  gracious  words  of  exhortation  in  which 
he  excelled,  Antioch  was  converted  to  the  faith  of  Christ  and  given 
to  us  as  a  peculiar  right.  This  city,  which  you  took  from  us  by  force, 
not  by  right,  the  Lord,  strong  and  mighty,  has  now  restored  to  us. 

“Therefore,  with  a  deep  sense  of  the  responsibility  due  to  the  heritage 
of  our  fathers,  the  intimate  abode  of  Christ,  the  Christian  leaders  offer 
you  the  opportunity  of  choosing  one  from  the  several  propositions 
which  we  are  about  to  place  before  you.  Either  withdraw  from  the  siege 
and  cease  troubling  the  Christians,  or,  the  third  day  hence,  try  the 
ordeal  by  battle  with  them,  when  the  sword  shall  be  the  judge.  More¬ 
over,  lest  perchance  you  should  try  to  avoid  the  engagement  offered 

terpreter,  is  thought  to  have  been  a  priest  familiar  with  Provencal  as  well  as  Arabic 
and  Latin.  The  crusaders  seem  to  have  had  surprisingly  little  difficulty  in  communicat¬ 
ing  with  the  peoples  of  the  East.  The  Normans  of  southern  Italy  and  Sicily  had  been 
dealing  with  Greeks  and  Arab-speaking  Muslims  for  a  generation,  and  some  of  their 
leaders,  e.g.,  Tancred  and  Richard  of  the  Principate,  are  thought  to  have  known  Arabic. 
Doubtless  Greeks  and  Armenians  served  as  interpreters  on  many  occasions.  Compara¬ 
tively  little  is  known -about  the  extent  of  linguistic  knowledge  at  this  time  (see  R.  B. 
Yewdale,  Bohemond  /,  Prince  of  Antioch^  p.  38}  also  C.  H.  Haskins,  Renaissance  of 
the  Twelfth  Century y  chap,  ix,  fassim). 


CRUSADERS  BESIEGED 


284 

by  inventing  some  reasonable  excuse,  they  give  you  the  option  of  choos¬ 
ing  one  of  several  propositions.  You  may  yourself  meet  one  of  our 
chiefs  in  single  combat  and,  if  victorious,  obtain  all,  but,  if  vanquished, 
leave  us  in  peace.  Or  several  of  your  knights  may  fight  with  the  same 
number  of  ours,  under  the  same  terms  j  or,  again,  the  entire  hosts  on 
both  sides  may  try  the  result  of  battle.” 

But  the  prince  spurned  their  projffered  challenge  and  is  reported 
to  have  said,  ^^It  does  not  seem  to  me,  my  Peter,  that  the  leaders  who 
have  sent  you  here  are  in  a  position  to  propose  options  to  me,  or  to 
force  me  to  make  a  choice  according  to  their  will.  By  our  prowess 
they  have  been  reduced  to  a  condition  where  they  have  no  freedom 
of  choice  but  must  carry  out  or  abandon  their  own  wishes  in  accordance 
with  my  good  pleasure. 

^^Go  then  and  say  to  those  foolish  leaders,  who  do  not  yet  realize 
their  situation  and  have  therefore  sent  you  to  me,  that  I  shall  save 
all  those  who  are  in  the  flower  of  youth  of  either  sex,  for  the  service 
of  my  master.  All  others,  however,  I  shall  cut  down  with  the  sword 
like  dead  trees,  so  that  no  memory  of  them  may  survive.  Had  I  not 
preferred  to  leave  them  to  die  of  cruel  hunger  rather  than  to  destroy 
them  by  the  sword,  I  should  long  ago  have  broken  down  the  walls  and 
taken  the  city  by  storm,  and  they  would  have  gathered  in  the  fruit  of 
their  ways  under  the  blows  of  the  avenging  sword.” 


1 6.  Peter  returns  to  the  chtejs.  He  gives  them  a  jull  account  of 
the  arrogant  attitude  of  the  enemy.  Battle  is  declared. 

When  Peter  learned  the  mind  of  the  prince  to  whom  he  had  been  sent 
and  took  note  of  his  haughty  bearing,  which  arose  from  a  conscious¬ 
ness  of  incomparable  riches  and  the  vast  array  of  troops,  he  took  leave 
of  Karbuqa  and  returned  to  his  own  people.  Upon  reaching  the  city, 
he  desired  to  deliver  the  answer  with  which  he  was  charged  to  the 
leaders  who  had  sent  him.  The  entire  multitude,  both  fathers  and 
people,  was  impatiently  waiting  to  hear  the  nature  of  the  response 
and  the  result  of  his  mission. 

Peter  had  determined  to  give  a  circumstantial  account  in  the  as¬ 
sembly  of  the  entire  people  of  everything  that  had  occurred  during 
his  audience  with  Karbuqa,  the  haughty  attitude  of  the  prince  himself, 
his  threats,  and  his  overweening  arrogance.  But  the  illustrious  Godfrey 
feared  the  effect  on  the  populace  if  all  the  details  of  the  matter  were 


CRUSADERS  BESIEGED  285 

made  known.  The  common  people,  weakened  by  constant  hardships 
and  already  almost  fainting  under  their  burden  of  woes,  might  be  so 
terrified  that  they  would  be  utterly  prostrated  by  fear.  He  therefore 

as  he  was  cage 

him  apart  from  the  throng.  He  suggested  that  he  omit  all  the  details 
and  merely  give  a  brief  summary  of  Karbuqa’s  answer,  namely,  that 
the  enemy  demanded  war.  To  preparations  for  that  the  Christians 
must  now  turn  their  whole  attention. 

Accordingly,  the  people  merely  learned  from  Peter’s  account  that 
the  enemy  demanded  battle.  All,  from  the  least  to  the  greatest,  were 
at  once  kindled  with  the  same  desire  and  demanded  with  intense  long¬ 
ing  that  they  fight.  With  such  joy  was  this  report  received  that  the 
people,  in  sure  anticipation  of  victory,  seemed  to  have  forgotten  utterly 
the  hardships  under  which  they  had  been  struggling.  By  words  and 
gestures  all  signified  that  they  were  one  in  heart  and  mind,  and  battle 
was  accordingly  proclaimed  for  the  following  day. 

The  people  then  returned  joyfully,  each  one  to  his  own  place,  and 
passed  a  sleepless  night  in  eager  anticipation  of  battle.  They  brought 
out  their  weapons,  made  ready  their  horses,  cleaned  breastplates  and 
helmets,  fitted  their  shields,  and  sharpened  their  swords.  There  was 
no  time  for  sleep  or  for  indulgence  in  repose.  Public  proclamation  was 
made  by  the  voice  of  the  herald  that  at  earliest  dawn,  before  sunrise, 
each  man,  armed  and  arrayed  for  battle,  should  join  his  legion  and 
follow  the  standard  of  his  own  commander. 

At  break  of  dawn  on  the  morrow,  moreover,  the  priests  and  ministers 
of  God  celebrated  divine  service  in  the  churches  and  offered  the  sacrifice. 
They  then  invited  the  people,  after  making  confession  according  to 
custom  in  a  spirit  of  humility  and  contrition,  to  fortify  themselves 
against  the  perils  of  the  world  by  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ.  Thus, 
when  all  sins  had  been  forgiven  and  hatred,  should  any  exist,  laid  aside, 
their  hearts  transformed  with  more  perfect  love,  they  would  march 
forth  to  battle  with  more  assurance,  as  disciples  and  members  of  Him 
who  said,  ^^By  this  shall  all  men  know  that  ye  are  my  disciples,  if  ye 
have  love  one  to  another.”  ® 

After  the  celebration  of  divine  service,  when  all  the  legions  had  been 
filled  with  the  divine  gift,  grace  in  wondrous 'fullness  was  showered 
upon  them  from  on  high.  Those  who,  but  yesterday  and  the  day  be- 


rly  proceeding  with  his  story,  and  drew 


stopped  Peter, 


®  Jno.  13:  35. 


286 


CRUSADERS  BESIEGED 


forCj  were  listless  and  abject,  emaciated  and  lifeless,  so  weak  that  they 
could  scarcely  lift  their  eyes  or  raise  their  heads,  those  who,  lean  with 
hunger  and  fainting  under  privations,  were  seeking  hiding  places  with¬ 
out  a  thought  of  their  former  reputation,  now  voluntarily  came  forth 
in  public.  Casting  aside  cowardice,  they  bore  their  arms  manfully,  as 
if  with  strength  renewed,  while  with  their  former  customary  boldness 
they  discussed  military  matters  and  foretold  victory.  In  that  vast  as¬ 
semblage  there  was  scarcely  a  person,  no  matter  what  his  age  or  con¬ 
dition,  who  was  not  planning  valiant  deeds,  not  one  who  did  not  spring 
to  arms  and  prophesy  success  for  the  Christians. 

The  priests,  clad  in  their  sacerdotal  robes  and  bearing  in  their  hands 
the  cross  and  the  images  of  the  saints,  went  about  among  the  ranks  and 
wherever  the  people  gathered.  They  promised  indulgence  for  sin  and 
full  pardon  for  all  offenses  to  those  who  should  fight  bravely  in  battle 
as  defenders  of  the  Christian  faith  bequeathed  them  by  their  fathers. 
The  bishops  also  exhorted  the  princes  and  leaders  of  the  army,  both 
individually  and  publicly,  and  urged  them  on  with  all  the  power  of 
eloquence  that  was  granted  them  from  on  high.  They  blessed  the 
people,  likewise,  and  commended  them  to  God.  Foremost  among 
these  prelates  was  that  servant  of  Christ,  the  lord  bishop  of  Puy.  He, 
ever  constant  in  exhortation,  fasting,  and  prayer,  as  well  as  most  gen¬ 
erous  in  bestowing  alms,  was  continually  offering  himself  as  a  sacrifice 
to  the  Lord. 

17.  Drawn  uf  in  battle  array y  they  march  out  of  Antioch,  The 
count  of  Toulouse  is  left  to  guard  the  city. 

At  daybreak,  on  June  28,  after  invoking  aid  from  on  high,  all  as¬ 
sembled  as  one  man  before  the  gate  of  the  Bridge.  Before  marching 
out  of  the  city,  they  drew  up  the  ranks  in  battle  formation  and  assigned 
the  order  and  mode  of  proceeding  to  the  legions.  Hugh  the  Great, 
brother  of  the  king  of  France,  was  placed  in  command  of  the  first 
corps,  as  leader  and  standard-bearer  5  with  him  was  associated  Anselm 
de  Ribemont,  a  man  worthy  of  praise  in  every  respect,  and  other 
nobles  whose  names  and  number  we  do  not  recall.  In  charge  of  the 
second  division  was  Robert,  surnamed  the  Frisian,  count  of  Flanders, 
with  those  who  had  followed  his  camp  from  the  first.  Robert,  duke 
of  Normandy,  was  assigned  to  the  command  of  the  third  division,  and 


CRUSADERS  BESIEGED 


287 

with  him  was  his  distinguished  nephew,  Stephen,  count  of  Aumale, 
and  other  nobles  who  had  come  in  his  retinue.  Lord  Adhemar,  the 
bishop  of  Puy,  of  precious  memory,  led  the  fourth  unit,  which  com¬ 
prised  his  own  followers  and  those  of  the  count  of  Toulouse.  He  bore 
the  Lance  of  the  Lord.  Reinard,  count  of  Toul,  was  directed  to  lead 
forth  the  fifth  division  j  with  him  were  Peter  de  Stenay,  his  brother, 
Count  Gamier  de  Grey,  Henry  d’Esch,  Reinhold  von  Ammersbach, 
and  Walter  de  Dommedard.  Over  the  sixth  division,  by  order  of  the 
leaders,  were  placed  Rainbald,  count  of  Orange,  Ludovic  de  Moncons, 
and  Lambert,  son  of  Conon  de  Montague.  Godfrey,  duke  of  Lorraine, 
that  illustrious  and  magnificent  lord,  with  the  revered  Lord  Eustace, 
his  brother,  in  command  of  the  seventh  division,  drew  up  that  con¬ 
tingent  according  to  the  rules  of  military  discipline. 

The  eighth  division  was  commanded  by  Tancred,  distinguished 
alike  for  his  nobility  of  character  and  for  his  prowess  in  arms.  Count 
Hugh  of  St.  Pol  and  Enguerrand,  his  son,  Thomas  de  La  Fere,  Baldwin 
du  Bourg,  Robert,  son  of  Gerard,  Renaud  de  Beauvais,  and  Galo  de 
Chaumont  were  assigned  to  the  command  of  the  ninth.  In  charge  of 
the  tenth  were  Rotrou,  count  of  Perche,  Evrard  du  Puiset,  Drogo  de 
Monci,  Ralph,  son  of  Godfrey,  and  Conon  Roto.  Isoard,  count  of  Die, 
Raymond  Pilet,  Gaston  de  Beziers,  Gerard  de  Roussillon,  William  de 
Montpellier,  and  William  Amanjeu  led  the  eleventh  unit.  The  twelfth 
division,  which  was  larger  than  the  others,  formed  the  rear.  This  looked 
to  Lord  Bohemond  as  chief  and  leader.  He  was  to  bring  up  the  rear, 
that  he  might  aid  the  troops  ahead  at  critical  moments  and  also  look 
out  for  those  who  might  be  subjected  to  unusually  heavy  pressure  from 
the  enemy. 

The  count  of  Toulouse  was  seriously  ill  at  this  time.  He  was  there¬ 
fore  left  to  protect  the  city.  For  the  Turks  still  held  the  citadel,  and 
there  was  danger  that  they,  believing  the  city  to  be  without  defenders 
in  the  absence  of  the  chiefs,  might  try  to  sally  forth  and  attack  the  feeble 
old  men  and  women  and  the  rest  of  the  defenseless  populace. 

On  the  hill  opposite  the  citadel,  the  Christians  built  a  solid  wall  of 
cement  and  stone  with  outworks,  on  which  were  placed  several  hurling 
machines.  A  force  of  two  hundred  gallant  men,  well  armed,  was  left 
there  to  hold  the  place. 

The  eyewitness  accounts  vary  as  to  the  number  of  battle  lines,  noting  from  six 
to  thirteen.  William  here  follows  Albert  of  Aix,  though  with  some  corrections. 


288 


CRUSADERS  BESIEGED 

1 8.  Karbuqa  f  re  fares  to  f  revent  the  Christians  from  marching 
out  of  the  city.  Our  feofle  effect  an  exit  by  force. 

When  our  forces  had  been  drawn  up  in  this  way  and  arranged  in 
battle  formation,  the  leaders  decreed  by  common  consent  that  Hugh 
the  Great,  the  count  of  Flanders,  and  the  duke  of  Normandy  should 
march  out  ahead  of  the  main  army.  The  rest  were  to  observe  the 
following  order  of  march.  First  came  the  infantry  and,  immediately 
behind  them,  the  cavalry  as  a  guard.  A  general  proclamation  of  warn¬ 
ing  was  also  issued  to  the  effect  that  no  one  should  dare  to  cast  an  eye 
toward  the  spoils,  but  that  the  entire  attention  of  all  should  be  given 
to  destroying  the  enemy.  When  the  victory  had  been  won  and  the 
enemy  laid  low,  then,  with  a  clear  conscience,  they  might  return  to 
collect  the  plunder. 

From  the  very  first,  but  especially  after  Peter’s  visit,  Karbuqa  had 
foreseen  that  the  Christians  would  make  a  sudden  attack  on  his  camp. 
Accordingly,  he  had  arranged  with  the  Turks  in  the  citadel  that,  if 
at  any  time  the  Christians  were  seen  to  be  preparing  for  a  sortie,  the 
townspeople  should  instantly  notify  his  camp  by  means  of  a  prear¬ 
ranged  signal. 

About  the  first  hour  of  the  day,  our  people  began  to  form  their 
lines.  The  Turks  in  the  citadel  immediately  perceived  the  movement 
and  gave  the  signal  to  notify  the  camp.  Karbuqa,  determined  to  antici¬ 
pate  and  prevent  our  intended  action,  at  once  dispatched  about  two 
thousand  knights  to  engage  our  troops  at  the  bridge  and  prevent  them 
from  leaving  the  city.  In  order  to  attack  more  vigorously  and  gain 
space  for  using  their  bows,  these  men  dismounted  and,  on  foot,  seized 
the  farther  end  of  the  bridge. 

The  Christians  arranged  their  lines  and  distributed  their  men  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  rules  of  military  science.  They  then  unbarred  the  gate, 
and  the  legions,  still  maintaining  their  positions  at  the  same  distances 
apart,  marched  out,  rank  by  rank. 

While  the  enemy’s  forces  which  had  been  dispatched  to  prevent  our 
people  from  sallying  forth  were  exerting  themselves  strenuously  to 
that  end,  Hugh  the  Great,  who,  as  we  have  said,  was  in  command  of 
the  first  contingent,  sent  on  ahead  a  force  of  infantry  and  bowmen, 
who  made  a  vigorous  charge  upon  them.  At  first  they  tried  to  resist,  but, 
at  length,  unable  to  withstand  the  onset  of  our  troops  they  were  forced 


CRUSADERS  BESIEGED 


289 

to  flee  in  disorder.  Hugh  pursued  them  so  furiously  that  it  was  only 
with  the  greatest  difficulty  that  they  succeeded  in  reaching  and  re¬ 
mounting  their  horses.  As  they  fled,  Anselm  de  Ribemont,  a  man  of 
much  renown,  who  had  been  stationed  in  the  first  line,  attacked  them 
boldly  and  gave  an  ever-memorable  proof  of  valor.  Regardless  of  his 
own  safety,  he  rashly  plunged  into  their  midst,  overthrew  some,  thrust 
others  through  the  heart  with  his  sword,  and  exerted  himself  so  vali¬ 
antly  in  the  work  of  slaughter  that  he  drew  to  himself  the  eyes  and 
good  will  of  all  the  ranks.  At  sight  of  this  gallant  behavior,  Hugh  the 
Great,  Robert,  count  of  Flanders,  Robert,  count  of  Normandy,  Bald¬ 
win,  count  of  Hainault,  and  Eustace,  the  duke’s  brother,  full  of  admira¬ 
tion  for  the  man’s  prowess,  flew  to  his  aid.  Uniting  their  forces,  they 
made  a  charge  and  routed  whatever  troops  still  remained  to  their  foe. 
They  continued  the  pursuit  almost  to  the  enemy’s  camp  and  inflicted 
untold  loss  upon  the  infidels. 


19.  As  the  Chrhttayis  sally  jorthy  dew  as  from  heaven  ts  shed 
ufon  themy  whereby  all  receive  consolation. 

Just  as  our  troops  were  leaving  the  city,  a  circumstance  worthy  of 
record  occurred.  Equipped  for  action,  they  were  already  leading  their 
forces  out  of  the  gate.  Some  of  the  foe  who  had  proposed  to  block  their 
exit  had  been  killed,  and  others  put  to  flight.  Just  at  that  moment  a 
gentle  dew  fell  upon  the  Christian  army  from  heaven.  Slight  but 
most  refreshing,  it  descended  so  sweetly  upon  our  people  that  it  seemed 
as  if  the  Lord  himself  were  shedding  His  benediction  and  favor  upon 
them.  Whoever  came  under  the  influence  of  that  heaven-sent  rain 
experienced  such  fullness  of  joy,  both  of  body  and  soul,  and  com¬ 
plete  restoration  of  strength  that  it  was  as  if  he  had  endured  no  hard¬ 
ship  nor  trouble  during  the  whole  pilgrimage.  Nor  was  this  true  in  the 
case  of  men  alone.  Even  the  horses  were  completely  restored  to  their 
former  vigor  by  the  power  of  God.  Although  for  days  before,  their 
food  had  consisted  only  of  leaves  and  the  bark  of  trees,  yet  throughout 
that  entire  day  their  speed  and  endurance  surpassed  that  of  the  enemy’s 
horses,  which  had  been  fed  on  barley  and  straw. 

So  strong  was  the  hope  of  victory  and  power  of  endurance  inspired 
in  our  soldiers  by  the  benediction  of  this  dew  that  of  them  it  might 
have  seen  said,  ‘^Thou,  O  God,  didst  send  a  plentiful  rain,  whereby 


CRUSADERS  BESIEGED 


290 

thou  didst  confirm  thine  inheritanccj  when  it  was  weary.”  They 
doubted  not^  in  fact,  that  they  had  visibly  received  the  grace  of  the 
Holy  Spirit. 

When  all  the  legions  had  been  led  out  of  the  city,  the  chiefs  deter¬ 
mined  to  extend  the  lines  to  the  mountains,  which  are  about  two  miles 
from  Antioch,  and  occupy  the  entire  plain.  For  there  was  danger  that 
the  enemy  with  their  vast  numbers  might,  either  by  stealth  or  by 
violence,  interpose  themselves  between  our  troops  and  the  city.  In  this 
way,  by  surrounding  our  people  on  every  side,  as  is  their  custom  in 
battle,  they  might  cut  off  the  retreat  of  the  fugitives  to  the  city.  The 
Christians  were  advancing  at  a  slow  pace,  yet  in  such  fashion  that  their 
ranks  might  not  become  intermingled  or  thrown  into  disorder.  By  the 
operation  of  divine  power,  it  happened  that  the  Christians  who,  when 
inside  the  walls,  seemed  to  be  less  in  number  than  the  enemy,  or  rather 
almost  none  in  comparison  with  them,  appeared,  now  that  they  were 
outside,  to  be  more,  or  certainly  not  less.  Thus,  that  same  One  who 
once  so  greatly  increased  the  remnants  of  the  five  loaves  of  bread  after 
the  multitude  had  been  fed,  determined,  by  no  less  a  miracle,  that 
this  people,  dedicated  to  a  good  work  so  acceptable  in  His  sight,  should 
also  be  multiplied  for  the  glory  of  His  name. 

Mingling  with  those  who  went  forth  to  do  battle  were  priests  and 
Levites  consecrated  to  God.  Clad  in  white  vestments,  they  carried  in 
their  hands  the  wondrous  sign  of  the  cross.  Still  other  ministers  of 
God  remained  in  the  city;  these,  likewise  wearing  their  sacerdotal  robes, 
mounted  the  walls  and,  with  outstretched  hands,  continually  suppli¬ 
cated  the  Lord  with  tears  and  prayers  on  behalf  of  His  faithful  people, 
that  He  would  spare  them  and  not  give  His  heritage  for  a  reproach 
to  the  Gentiles. 

20.  Karbuqa  draws  uf  hts  ranks  In  battle  array,  A  fight  at  close 
quarters  follows,  Qtlij  Arslan  attacks  the  Christians  in  the 
rear  and  fresses  Bohemond^s  lines  hard.  The  other  leaders 
come  to  his  aid.  The  Turks y  routedy  set  fires  to  make  a 
smoke  screen. 

During  this  time  Karbuqa  had  learned  from  the  signal  displayed  on 
the  citadel  and  also  from  the  fugitives  who  had  been  routed  when  our 
forces  marched  out  of  Antioch  that  the  Christians  were  advancing. 

Ps.  68:9. 


CRUSADERS  BESIEGED 


291 

He  at  once  summoned  his  elders  and  the  leaders  of  the  forces  to  a 
conference,  for  the  situation  which  he  had  formerly  ridiculed  was  be¬ 
ginning  to  assume  a  serious  aspect.  He  now  viewed  with  alarm  that 
insignificant  people  whose  equipment  and  small  numbers  he  had  so 
recently  scorned.  By  the  advice  of  his  council,  therefore,  and  with  due 
consideration  to  the  experience  of  the  Antiochenes,  he  organized  his 
troops  and  drew  up  his  battle  lines.  With  much  skill,  he  arranged  his 
forces,  making  a  careful  distinction  between  the  contingents  which  were 
to  form  the  advance  guard  and  those  which  were  to  follow.  Among 
his  other  shrewd  movements  was  the  following:  before  the  Christians 
had  occupied  the  entire  plain  between  the  city  and  the  mountains,  he 
dispatched  toward  the  seashore  a  corps  noted  for  the  efficiency  and 
bravery  of  its  members.  This  unit  is  said  to  have  been  under  the  com¬ 
mand  of  Qilij  Arslan,  that  illustrious  prince  of  Nicaea  who  has  been 
so  often  mentioned  before.  The  purpose  of  this  maneuver  was  that,  if 
the  people  of  God  should  be  worsted  and  forced  to  flee,  they  might 
find  themselves  opposed  both  in  front  and  rear,  whether  they  attempted 
to  fly  to  the  sea  or  to  the  city.  Thus  caught  between  the  pursuing  forces 
and  those  who  were  cutting  them  off  ahead,  they  would  be  crushed 
as  between  two  millstones. 

The  rest  of  his  forces  Karbuqa  placed  on  the  right  and  on  the  left, 
each  under  its  special  commander.  He  gave  strict  instructions  that  if 
they  wished  to  win  his  favor  they  should  ever  remember  their  reputa¬ 
tion  for  valor  and  strive  to  fight  bravely  and  vigorously.  Let  them 
regard  as  of  no  importance  all  the  efforts  of  an  unwarlike  people,  a 
mere  mob  of  famished  creatures,  unarmed  and  undisciplined. 

When  our  forces  had  occupied  the  entire  plain  in  such  a  way  that 
there  was  no  danger  of  their  being  surrounded,  the  trumpets  sounded 
the  signal,  and  the  troops,  preceded  by  the  standard-bearers,  advanced 
gradually  toward  the  ranks  of  the  foe.  When  they  were  so  close  that 
the  infidels  could  discharge  their  arrows  against  them,  our  first  three 
lines  rushed  forward  simultaneously  and  attacked  the  foe  at  close  quar¬ 
ters  with  swords  and  lances.  Our  foot  soldiers,  who  were  using  bows 
and  ballistae,  preceded  the  cavalry  squadrons  and,  in  emulation  of  one 
another,  hurled  themselves  forward  in  a  furious  charge.  Close  on  the 
heels  of  the  infantry  came  the  cavalry,  using  every  effort  to  protect  the 
vanguard.  While  the  first  lines  were  exerting  themselves  to  the  utmost 
in  the  combat,  those  behind  came  up  to  their  support  with  a  charge 


292  CRUSADERS  BESIEGED 

not  less  vigorous,  thus  stimulating  the  vanguard  to  deeds  even  more 
courageous  and  daring.  All  the  Christian  forces  except  the  rear  ranks 
commanded  by  Bohemond  had  now  come  up  to  the  enemy  and  were 
fighting  valiantly.  Many  Turks  had  been  slain,  and  their  lines  had 
become  so  disorganized  that  they  were  now  in  flight.  Meanwhile,  the 
duke  with  his  unit  had  also  completely  routed  the  strongest  and  most 
closely  massed  cohort  of  the  enemy.  But  just  at  this  moment,  Qilij 
Arslan  turned  back  with  that  legion  which,  as  we  said  above,  he  had 
led  shoreward.  He  made  a  fierce  onset  from  the  rear  on  Bohemond’s 
contingent  and  sent  forth  such  showers  of  arrows  that  they  covered 
the  entire  company  like  hail.  Then,  laying  aside  their  bows,  his  forces 
abandoned  their  usual  tactics  and  hurled  themselves  with  clubs  and 
swords  upon  Bohemond.  So  furious  was  the  charge  that  his  lines  were 
barely  able  to  sustain  the  pressure  of  the  impetuous  attack.  His  legion 
was  almost  thrown  into  confusion,  although  he  himself,  with  a  few 
comrades,  fought  gallantly  in  the  midst  of  the  enemy  like  a  brave 
and  valiant  leader.  At  this  critical  moment,  however,  the  duke,  who 
had  been  hastily  summoned,  hurried  up  with  his  forces  to  Bohemond’s 
aid.  With  him  came  that  valiant  leader,  Tancred.  The  opportune  ar¬ 
rival  of  these  nobles  offset  the  enemy’s  strength.  Their  courage  dwin¬ 
dled  away  as  the  Christians  pursued  them  with  vigor,  dealing  out 
wounds  and  death.  When  they  saw  that  their  strength  was  unequal 
to  ours  and  realized  that  they  could  no  longer  withstand  the  force 
of  their  opponents,  they  had  resort  to  other  tactics.  According  to  their 
usual  method,  they  set  fire  to  the  stubble,  for  there  was  much  dry  grass 
and  straw  about,  which  readily  took  fire  and  furnished  the  necessary 
fuel  for  a  blaze.  Although  the  flame  was  but  slight,  yet  it  produced 
a  dense  and  noisome  smoke.  Enveloped  in  this  dense  cloud,  our  forces 
could  not  pursue  the  foe  so  fiercely,  for  the  smoke  and  the  dust  stirred 
up  by  the  feet  of  many  men  and  horses  almost  blinded  them.  Under 
cover  of  this  smoke,  so  skilfully  raised  for  the  purpose,  the  enemy  at¬ 
tacked  our  forces  and  killed  some  of  our  foot  soldiers.  The  knights, 
however,  thanks  to  the  speed  of  their  horses,  succeeded  in  avoiding  the 
dangers  of  the  smoke  screen  and  returned  to  the  fray.  Sustained  by 
aid  from  on  high,  they  continued  the  fight,  and  at  length,  with  strength 
divinely  renewed,  they  put  the  enemy  to  flight  before  their  avenging 
swords.  Nor  did  they  cease  the  pursuit  until  they  had  forced  the  infidels, 
seriously  disorganized,  to  retreat  to  their  own  lines. 


CRUSADERS  BESIEGED 


293 


21.  The  commander  of  the  enemy^s  forces  flees.  His  legions 
ferish.  Those  who  escafe  are  fut  to  flight. 

Near  the  scene  of  battle  was  a  little  valley  through  which,  in  the 
winter  season,  a  mountain  torrent  used  to  cut  its  way  as  it  rushed  down 
from  the  heights  above  in  headlong  course.  Our  forces  had  driven  the 
enemy  beyond  this  stream,  and  there,  on  a  hill  a  little  above  the  plain, 
the  infidels  were  endeavoring  to  make  a  stand  and  to  recall  their  scat¬ 
tered  troops  by  the  sound  of  trumpet  and  drum.  Our  chiefs  pursued 
them,  however,  without  a  moment’s  pause  and  swiftly  came  up  to  them. 
In  the  rear,  where  the  principal  engagement  was  taking  place,  Duke 
Godfrey,  Bohemond,  Tancred,  and  some  other  nobles  had  engaged 
Qilij  Arslan’s  contingent,  and,  by  the  aid  of  God,  routed  it.  Mean¬ 
while,  the  vanguard,  consisting  of  Hugh  the  Great,  the  two  Roberts, 
counts  of  Flanders  and  of  Normandy,  with  many  others  worthy  of 
remembrance  forever,  had  already  put  to  flight  the  ranks  opposing 
them.  These  warriors  crossed  the  valley,  dislodged  the  enemy  from 
the  hill  by  force,  and  compelled  them  a  second  time  to  flee  in  disorder, 
unable  to  endure  the  pressure  exerted  by  the  Christian  forces. 

From  the  beginning  of  the  engagement,  Karbuqa  had  kept  apart 
from  the  throng  and  had  stationed  himself  on  a  certain  hill.  A  stream  of 
messengers  constantly  went  back  and  forth  to  bring  him  reports  con¬ 
cerning  the  progress  of  the  battle.  He  was  anxiously  awaiting  the  result 
of  this  important  conflict  when  he  suddenly  perceived  that  his  legions, 
completely  disorganized  and  scattered,  were  fleeing  in  every  direction. 
He  was  panic-stricken  over  the  realization  of  the  disaster.  His  followers 
advised  him  to  take  means  for  his  own  safety,  so,  without  a  thought 
for  his  people,  he  left  the  camp,  and,  waiting  for  no  one,  fled  in  great 
haste.  By  a  constant  relay  of  horses  to  facilitate  his  escape,  he  reached 
the  Euphrates.  This  he  crossed  in  such  a  state  of  terror  that  even 
when  on  the  farther  shore  he  could  scarcely  believe  himself  safe. 

Thus  deserted  and  deprived  of  their  leader’s  aid,  the  enemy’s  forces 
lost  at  the  same  time  both  their  courage  and  their  strength.  They  seized 
all  available  horses,  and,  following  their  leader’s  example,  took  to 
flight  to  escape  the  swords  of  their  pursuers.  Our  people  did  not  venture 
to  continue  very  far  lest  their  own  horses  might  give  out,  but  Tancred 
and  a  few  others  followed  them  for  three  or  four  miles,  until  the  hour 
of  sunset,  and  wrought  great  havoc  among  them. 


CRUSADERS  BESIEGED 


294 

So  deeply  had  divine  power  impressed  fear  upon  the  hearts  of  these 
fugitives  that  they  did  not  try  to  make  a  stand  or  to  repel  the  attacks 
of  their  assailants.  For  ten  of  our  people  seemed  to  them  as  many  thou¬ 
sands,  nor  was  there  anyone  to  give  them  counsel  as  they  fled  before 
us.  This  fact  plainly  proves  that  “there  is  no  counsel  against  the 
Lord.”  The  truth  of  the  proverb,  “God  hath  not  forsaken  them 
that  hope  in  him,”  was  likewise  made  manifest  in  this  same  experi¬ 
ence,  when  a  people,  needy  and  almost  perishing  from  famine,  were 
able,  solely  by  the  aid  of  God,  to  defeat  such  a  host  of  strong  warriors 
and,  far  beyond  any  hope  of  their  own,  to  confound  in  one  battle  the 
entire  strength  of  the  Orient,  which  knew  not  God. 

22.  Our  feofle  return  from  the  slaughter  of  the  enemy.  They 
bring  back  to  camf  an  Immense  amount  of  flunder. 

When  the  battle  was  over  and  our  people  had  been  granted  the  victory 
from  on  high,  they  turned  back  to  the  enemy’s  camp.  There  they 
found  a  wealth  of  all  necessary  things  and  great  stores  of  Oriental 
treasures.  So  vast  were  these  that  it  was  impossible  to  count  or  measure 
the  gold  and  silver,  the  gems,  silks,  and  valuable  garments,  to  say  noth¬ 
ing  of  utensils,  most  excellent  both  in  workmanship  and  material. 
Horses,  flocks,  and  herds  were  also  found  there,  together  with  food¬ 
stuffs  and  grain  in  such  abundance  that  even  those  who  but  now  had 
been  in  extreme  destitution  hardly  knew  what  to  choose.  They  took 
the  enemy’s  tents  and  pavilions,  of  which  they  had  especial  need,  for 
their  own  were  old  and  had  become  so  rotten  through  exposure  to 
the  heavy  rains  that  they  were  practically  useless.  Treasures  in  abun¬ 
dance  were  seized  and  carried  back  to  Antioch,  including  maidservants 
and  children  whom  the  Turks  had  left  behind  when  they  fled.  Among 
other  spoils,  they  came  upon  the  pavilion  of  the  commander  in  chief. 
This  was  a  marvellous  piece  of  work,  woven  of  the  finest  silk  of  many 
hues.  It  was  made  in  the  likeness  of  a  city  with  turrets,  walls,  and 
ramparts.  From  the  center,  as  from  a  main  hall,  connecting  apartments 
ran  out  in  many  directions,  separated  from  each  other  as  if  by  streets. 
It  was  claimed  that  two  thousand  men  might  be  comfortably  accom¬ 
modated  in  this  tent, 

Prov.  2 1 :  30. 

Judith  13:  17.  Here  the  Douay  translation  more  correctly  gives  William’s  mean- 


CRUSADERS  BESIEGED 


295 

Laden  with  spoils  and  enriched  with  booty,  the  Christians  carried 
their  plunder  into  the  city.  Here,  in  joy  and  exultation,  a  solemn  day 
of  triumph  was  observed.  Unto  Him  from  whose  hands  it  had  come, 
they  rendered  thanks  that,  after  so  many  hardships  and  disasters,  they 
had  finally  obtained  the  long-desired  victory. 

The  Turks  who  were  still  holding  the  citadel  now  realized  that  their 
allies  had  been  defeated.  As  there  was  no  further  hope  of  relief  from 
any  other  source,  they  surrendered  the  place  to  our  leaders,  whose 
standards  were  thereupon  placed  on  the  highest  towers.  The  Turks 
stipulated,  however,  that  they  should  be  permitted  to  leave  unharmed 
and  unmolested,  with  their  wives  and  children  and  all  they  possessed. 

Thus,  through  the  superabundant  grace  of  God,  the  Christians  had 
won  the  victory  and  gained  possession  of  the  citadel.  The  poverty- 
stricken  and  famished  throng  of  the  preceding  days  now  had  all  good 
things  in  the  greatest  abundance.  For  even  those  who  had  been  most 
powerful  among  the  pilgrims,  those  who  bore  illustrious  names,  had 
been  reduced  to  such  straits  that  they  were  compelled  to  beg.  To  say 
nothing  of  the  common  people,  we  may  mention  the  case  of  Count 
Hartman,  a  nobleman  of  the  Teutonic  kingdom.  This  nobleman  found 
himself  in  such  dire  poverty  that,  as  a  great  favor,  he  was  allotted 
a  daily  dole  of  bread  from  the  duke’s  own  table.  Henry  d’Esch,  like¬ 
wise  a  man  distinguished  for  his  upright  life,  would  literally  have 
perished  from  hunger  had  not  the  duke  received  him  as  his  own  guest. 

During  this  siege  the  duke  himself  suffered  great  inconvenience 
before  a  battle  because  he  had  no  horses.  Finally,  with  much  difficulty 
and  urgent  entreaties,  he  obtained  one  from  the  count  of  Toulouse, 
on  which  to  ride  forth  to  the  conflict.  For  Godfrey  and  the  other  chiefs 
also  had  already  expended  all  the  money  they  had  brought  with  them 
in  generous  almsgiving  and  in  works  of  piety,  especially  those  which 
concerned  the  common  welfare. 

Hence,  on  the  day  of  battle  many  noble  knights,  distinguished  alike 
for  high  birth  and  warlike  deeds,  went  into  battle  either  on  foot  or 
mounted  on  asses  and  other  beasts  of  burden,  for  they  had  exhausted 
their  means  and  were  now  needy  and  without  horses. 

But  before  the  sun  set  God  the  Comforter  looked  down  upon  them 
in  His  goodness.  He  brought  about  the  defeat  of  the  enemy  and  be¬ 
stowed  upon  His  needy  people  more  than  abundant  wealth.  This  was 
plainly  a  repetition  of  that  ancient  story  of  Samaria,  when  a  measure 


296  CRUSADERS  BESIEGED 

f 

of  wheaten  flour  and  barley  was  sold  for  a  single  piece  of  money.^^ 
For  he  who  in  the  morning  had  barely  sufiicient  for  his  own  support 
had  by  evening  enough  to  feed  many. 

This  battle  occurred  in  the  year  of  the  Incarnation  of  the  Lord  1098, 
in  the  month  of  June,  and  the  twenty-eighth  day  thereof. 


Peace  and  order  are  now  established  in  Antioch,  'The 
churches  are  cleansed  and  refaired  and  clergy  flaced  over 
them. 


After  the  leaders  had  returned  from  the  battlefield  and  the  city  had 
been  restored  to  a  state  of  peace  and  order,  the  first  care  of  all  was 
for  the  churches.  The  venerable  bishop  of  Puy  in  particular,  as  protector 
of  the  army,  felt  especial  responsibility  for  this  work.  The  other  priests 
in  the  army  heartily  cooperated  with  him,  and  the  people  lent  eager 
assistance.  In  this  way  the  principal  church,  dedicated  to  the  prince 
of  the  apostles,  and  all  the  other  churches  of  Antioch  as  well,  were 
restored  to  their  original  state  of  dignity.  Clergy  who  were  to  devote 
themselves  continually  to  the  divine  services  were  also  established 
in  these. 

The  sacrilegious  race  of  Turks  had  desecrated  the  venerable  places^ 
they  had  driven  out  the  ministers  of  divine  worship  and  put  the  churches 
to  profane  uses.  Some  pf  these  sacred  edifices  had  been  used  as  stables 
for  horses  and  other  beasts  of  burden,  and  in  others  pursuits  unbefitting 
the  sanctuary  had  been  carried  on.  The  pictures  of  the  revered  saints 
had  been  erased  from  the  very  walls — symbols  which  supplied  the 
place  of  books  and  reading  to  the  humble  worshippers  of  God  and 
aroused  devotion  in  the  minds  of  the  simple  people,  so  praiseworthy 
for  their  devout  piety.  On  these  the  Turks  had  spent  their  rage  as 
if  on  living  persons  3  they  had  gouged  out  eyes,  mutilated  noses,  and 
daubed  the  pictures  with  mud  and  filth. They  had  thrown  down  the 
altars  and  defiled  the  sanctuary  of  God  with  their  impious  acts. 

It  was  accordingly  determined,  by  the  wish  of  all,  that  the  clergy 
be  restored  without  delay  to  their  former  positions  of  dignity  in  the 
churches,  and  money  was  set  aside  for  the  support  of  those  who  were 
fighting  for  the  Lord  in  that  way.  Gold  and  silver  taken  as  spoils  from 

iMl  Ki.  7:  I. 

^  ^  William’s  interest  in  painting  appears  on  several  occasions.  The  region  around 
Antioch  saw  a  revival  of  painting  by  Armenians  as  well  as  continued  interest  in 
mosaic  work  by  the  Greeks  (see  Prologue,  note  5). 


CRUSADERS  BESIEGED 


297 

the  enemy  were  brought  for  making  candelabra,  crosses,  chalices,  in¬ 
scriptions  from  Holy  Writ,  and  all  other  things  necessary  for  the 
service  of  the  church.  Silken  stuffs  were  also  offered  for  priestly  vest¬ 
ments  and  altar  coverings. 

_  I 

The  Patriarch  John,  a  true  confessor  of  Christ,  who  had  suffered 
untold  troubles  from  the  infidels  since  the  coming  of  the  Christians, 
was  restored  to  his  own  see.  Bishops  were  placed  in  neighboring  cities 
which  had  formerly  possessed  the  dignity  of  cathedral  churches.  It 
was  not  deemed  wise  to  choose  or  consecrate  a  patriarch  of  our  Latin 
race,  however,  while  the  former  occupant  of  that  sacred  office  was  still 
living,  lest  two  should  be  holding  the  same  seat,  a  condition  which 
is  clearly  contrary  to  the  sacred  xanons  and  the  statutes  of  the  holy 
fathers.  Scarcely  two  years  later,  however,  John,  realizing  that  he,  as 
a  Greek,  could  not  effectively  rule  over  Latins,  voluntarily  left  Anti¬ 
och  and  went  to  Constantinople.  After  his  departure,  the  clergy  and 
people  of  the  city  met  and  chose  as  patriarch  over  them  Bernard,  bishop 
of  Artasium,  a  native  of  Valence,  who  had  attended  the  bishop  of  Puy 
on  this  expedition  as  his  chaplain.^® 

But  according  to  the  promise  made  in  the  beginning,  the  power 
and  rule  over  Antioch  were  yielded  by  all  to  Bohemond,  except  in  the 
case  of  the  count  of  Toulouse.  He  retained  the  gate  next  to  the  bridge 
with  its  adjacent  towers  and  placed  a  garrison  of  his  own  men  there 
to  guard  It. 

Later,  however,  after  the  count  left  the  city,  Bohemond  drove  out 
these  soldiers  and  took  the  place,  as  will  be  related  below.  His  own 
men  had  called  Bohemond  by  the  honorable  name  of  prince  j  hence, 

from  that  time  on,  the  lord  of  Antioch  was  known  as  prince.^*^ 

**  ■ 

Greek  historians  take  a  different  view  of  the  departure  of  Patriarch  John,  believing’ 
that  he,  like  Taticius,  was  forced  out  by  Bohemond.  It  is  interesting  to  observe  that 
the  crusaders  originally  thought  a  single  ecclesiastical  organization  including  both 
Greek  and  Latin  prelates  might  serve.  The  Greeks  at  Constantinople  continued  to 
choose  patriarchs  of  Antioch,  whom  successive  emperors  tried  to  reinstate. 

The  implication  seems  to  be  that  Bohemond  formalized  the  title  of  prince  of 
Antioch  because  his  soldiers  were  in  the  habit  of  calling  him  that  informally.  This 
statement  has  been  erroneously  interpreted  as  meaning  that  Bohemond  had  held  a  title 
of  prince,  e.  g.,  prince  of  Taranto,  before  the  crusade.  This  error  is  corrected  by 
Yewdale,  Bohemond  /,  pp.  29,  85. 


HERE  ENDS  THE  SIXTH  BOOK 


THE  SEVENTH  BOOK  BEGINS 


DISSENSION  AMONG  THE  CRUSADERS; 

THEY  MARCH  ON  JERUSALEM 

I.  Hugh  the  Great  and  the  count  of  Hainault  are  sent  as 
envoys  to  the  emferor.  Count  Baldwin  disaf fears  on  the 
way,  Hugh  the  Great  fails  to  return.  The  bishof  of  Puy 
dies,  A  festilence  arises. 

After  affairs  in  Antioch  had  been  thus  adjusted,  the  leaders  resolved 
by  unanimous  consent  to  send  envoys  to  entreat  the  emperor  that  he 
come  at  once  to  their  aid  in  person,  as  provided  by  the  agreement  which 
he  had  made  with  them.  The  envoys  were  instructed  to  inform  him 
that  the  Christians  were  about  to  set  forth  for  Jerusalem  and  to  be- 
seech  him  to  follow  them  soon,  as  he  was  bound  to  do  by  the  treaty. 
If,  however,  he  should  fail  to  carry  out  the  stipulations  of  the  pact, 
they  desired  to  be  considered  as  in  no  way  bound  to  him.  Two  noble 
and  distinguished  men,  Hugh  the  Great,  brother  of  the  king  of  France, 
and  Baldwin,  count  of  Hainault,  were  chosen  for  this  mission.  The 
latter  disappeared  while  on  the  journey  after  a  skirmish  with  the 
enemy,  and  his  fate  is  in  doubt  even  to  this  day.^  Some  say  that  he 
fell  in  the  fight,  while  others  maintain  that  he  was  taken  prisoner  by 
the  enemy  and  carried  away  in  chains  to  far  distant  parts  of  the  Orient. 

Lord  Hugh,  however,  successfully  avoided  the  wiles  of  the  enemy 
and  reached  the  emperor  in  safety.  At  this  juncture,  alas,  he  dimmed 
the  glory  of  his  brilliant  deeds  by  a  heavy  cloud  and  fell  short  not  a 
little  of  the  splendid  title  of  his  race.  Many  valiant  deeds  had  he  done 
on  the  expedition  and  thereby  won  immortal  fame  for  himself.  While 
on  this  mission,  however,  he  besmirched  his  fair  name  3  for,  after  com¬ 
pleting  that  affair,  he  did  not  carry  back  the  answer  to  those  who  had 
sent  him,  nor  did  he  trouble  himself  to  return.  His  dereliction  in  this 
matter  was  all  the  more  conspicuous  because  of  his  exalted  rank ;  for, 
as  our  Juvenal  says,  “Every  fault  of  character  has  in  itself  more  con¬ 
spicuous  guilt  according  as  he  who  sins  is  esteemed  the  greater.”  - 

^  Another  instance  of  the  use  of  oral  tradition  for  this  period. 

^Juvenal  viii.  140,  141. 


DISSENSION  AMONG  CRUSADERS 


299 

Soon  after  the  siege  had  ended  gloriously  in  the  capture  of  Antioch 
and  affairs  there  had  been  brought  to  a  state  of  quiet,  a  terrible  pestilence 
fell  upon  the  people  from  causes  unknown.  So  frightful  was  the  mor¬ 
tality  that  scarcely  a  day  passed  when  at  least  thirty  or  forty  corpses 
were  not  borne  out  for  burial.  In  fact,  the  scanty  numbers  who  had 
survived  the  siege  were  reduced  to  almost  nothing. 

This  baleful  contagion  attacked  all  classes  everywhere  without  dis¬ 
tinction.  Among  others  who  went  the  way  of  all  flesh  at  that  time  was 
Adhemar,  bishop  of  Puy,  a  man  of  revered  character  and  immortal 
memory.  The  entire  people  mourned  for  him  as  their  father  and 
especial  guide.  Amid  the  tearful  sobs  and  heartfelt  groans  of  all,  he 
was  buried  with  high  honor  in  the  church  of  the  blessed  Peter,  in  the 
place  where  the  Lance  of  the  Lord  was  said  to  have  been  found.  ^ 

Henry  d^Esch,  highly  esteemed  both  for  his  lineage  and  his  valiant 
conduct,  was  also  stricken  by  this  grievous  plague.  He  died  and  was 
buried  at  the  fortress  of  Turbessel.  Reinhold  von  Ammersbach,  a  war¬ 
rior  equally  famous  both  for  race  and  for  valor,  likewise  perished  of 
the  same  scourge  and  was  interred  in  the  vestibule  of  the  basilica  of  the 
Prince  of  the  Apostles.  Women  in  particular  were  the  victims  during 
this  epidemic,  nearly  fifty  thousand  perishing  within  a  few  days. 

Those  who  have  had  the  curiosity  to  investigate  this  subject  in  the 
hope  of  ascertaining  the  causes  of  this  terrible  scourge  have  arrived  at 
varying  conclusions.  Some  say  that  it  arose  from  seeds  of  disease  that 
were  latent  in  the  air.  Others  believe  that  when  the  people,  so  long 
victims  of  cruel  hunger,  finally  obtained  an  abundance  of  food,  they 
were  overeager  to  eat  in  order  to  make  up  for  their  privations.  Thus 
their  unrestrained  gluttony  was  the  cause  of  their  death.  As  a  convinc¬ 
ing  proof  of  this  opinion,  they  point  to  the  fact  that  those  who  were 
temperate  and  partook  of  food  sparingly  were  in  much  better  condition 
than  the  rest  and  returned  sooner  to  a  normal  state  of  health.^ 

®  This  is  the  same  church  as  that  called  the  basilica  of  the  Prince  of  the  Apostles 
elsewhere. 

^  The  nature  of  this  plague  has  not  been  definitely  established.  The  bubonic  plague 
was  recurrent  in  the  eastern  Mediterranean  regions.  William’s  emphasis  upon  tem¬ 
perance  as  a  protection  is  characteristic. 


300 


DISSENSION  AMONG  CRUSADERS 


2.  The  feofle  make  vociferous  demands  that  the  journey  to 
Jerusalem  be  resumed.  The  defarture  is  deferred  until  the 
first  of  October,  Bohemond  goes  down  into  Cilicia  and 
seizes  the  entire  district. 

Meanwhile,  whether  for  the  sake  of  escaping  the  pestilence  or  with 
the  intention  of  forcing  the  resumption  of  the  pilgrimage,  the  populace 
began  to  make  loud  and  vociferous  demands  that  the  leaders  again 
prepare  to  take  up  the  march  toward  Jerusalem,  the  goal  for  which 
they  had  come.  Let  them  lead  forward  the  army  of  the  Lord  and  thus 
accomplish  the  main  purpose  which  had  moved  all  to  leave  their  own 
lands.  Accordingly,  the  chiefs  met  and  entered  into  consultation  con¬ 
cerning  this  wish  of  the  people,  for  it  seemed  worthy,  in  truth,  of  a 
favorable  hearing. 

The  reaction  of  the  individual  leaders  to  this  demand  differed.  Some 
felt  that  they  should  set  out  on  the  way  without  delay  and  thus  satisfy 
the  wishes  of  the  throng.  Others,  however,  in  view  of  the  intolerable 
heat  of  summer,  the  scarcity  of  water,  the  lack  of  horses,  and  the  en¬ 
feebled  condition  of  the  people  brought  on  by  long  endurance  of 
famine,  argued  that  it  would  be  far  wiser  to  defer  the  march  until  the 
Kalends  of  October,  when  the  weather  would  begin  to  be  more  favora¬ 
ble.^  In  the  interval,  they  might  acquire  new  horses  and  give  the  old 
ones  a  chance  to  recuperate  j  the  people  too,  restored  to  their  former 
condition  by  rest  and  food,  would  rise  with  renewed  strength  and  be 
better  able  to  cope  with  the  hardships  of  the  march. 

These  latter  sentiments  met  with  the  approval  of  all,  and,  by  com¬ 
mon  agreement,  a  stay  until  the  time  mentioned  was  determined  upon. 
The  leaders  then  separated  for  a  while,  in  the  hope  of  avoiding  the 
death  that  threatened  them.  It  seemed  probable  also  that  they  might 
find  more  abundant  provisions  elsewhere.  It  was  well  understood, 
however,  that  at  the  appointed  time  all  would  return  without  delay. 

Bohemond  went  to  Cilicia.  There  he  took  the  cities  of  Tarsus,  Adana, 
Mamistra,  and  Anavarza,  appointed  rulers  in  those  places,  and  made 
himself  master  of  that  entire  district.®  The  other  chiefs  dispersed 
through  the  neighboring  cities,  where,  apart  from  the  throng,  they 

®  Hag-enmeyer  sets  the  date  as  November  i,  1098,  instead  of  October  i  (see  H. 
Hag’enmeyer,  Chronologie^  no.  299). 

®  Bohemond  was  evidently  trying  to  consolidate  these  places  which  Tancred  had 
taken  into  a  principality  of  which  Antioch  would  be  head. 


DISSENSION  AMONG  CRUSADERS 


301 

devoted  themselves  to  the  recuperation  of  their  own  strength  and  that 
of  their  horses.  Many,  both  nobles  and  people,  crossed  the  Euphrates 
and  hastened  eagerly  to  Edessa.  Here  Baldwin,  the  duke’s  brother, 
was  ruling,  and  from  him  they  hoped  to  obtain  favors.  They  met  with 
a  kind  reception  from  the  count,  who  showed  them  high  honor  while 
they  were  with  him  and,  at  length,  sent  them  back  to  their  friends  in 
good  spirits,  enriched  with  many  gifts. 

3,  The  lord  of  Hasarth  seeks  the  duke^s  helf  against  his  over- 
lordy  Ridwan,  The  duke  summons  Baldwhiy  his  brother y 
and  hastens  thither. 

About  that  time,  it  happened  that  Ridwan,  prince  of  Aleppo,  had  in¬ 
curred  the  enmity  of  one  of  his  satraps,  who  was  in  command  of  the 
castle  of  Hasarth  [Ezaz].*^  The  hostility  between  them  had  reached 
such  a  point  that  the  prince  summoned  troops  from  all  the  regions 
subject  to  him  and  laid  siege  to  that  fortress.  The  lord  of  the  castle 
saw  that,  unless  he  received  aid  from  the  Franks,  he  would  have  great 
dijfficulty  in  withstanding  the  anger  of  his  powerful  and  irate  lord.  He 
therefore  sent  one  of  his  own  people,  a  loyal  Christian,  to  request  an 
alliance  of  friendship  with  the  duke.  In  the  hope  of  more  readily  win¬ 
ning  favor,  he  sent  gifts  also  and  promised  to  devote  himself  heart  and 
soul  to  Godfrey’s  service.  He  expressed  the  desire  to  bind  himself  by 
the  indissoluble  bonds  of  a  treaty,  and,  that  the  duke  might  have  full 
confidence  in  his  words  and  not  hesitate  over  any  part  of  this  promise, 
he  offered  to  send  his  own  son  as  a  hostage.  Most  earnestly  he  begged 
Godfrey  to  relieve  him  from  the  present  danger  and  promised  that 
at  an  opportune  time  he  should  receive  a  fitting  return  for  his  services. 

Moved  by  these  words,  the  venerable  man  entered  into  friendly 
relations  with  the  lord  of  the  castle  and  received  him  into  his  favor. 
He  at  once  dispatched  messengers  to  the  count  of  Edessa,  his  brother, 
inviting  him  to  come  with  his  forces  to  aid  in  raising  the  siege  for  the 
relief  of  this  friend. 

Ridwan  had  been  established  with  his  forces  in  camp  before  the 
castle  of  Ezaz  hardly  five  days  when  Duke  Godfrey  set  forth  from 
Antioch.  He  was  accompanied  by  a  large  number  of  his  own  faithful 

^  The  dissension  among’  the  amirs,  here  illustrated,  was  one  of  the  chief  factors  in 
the  success  of  the  crusaders.  The  failure  of  Karbuqa  to  cooperate  with  Ridwan  and 
vice  versa  were  other  instances. 


DISSENSION  AMONG  CRUSADERS 


302 

retainers  and  by  friends  whom  he  had  invited  to  assist  him  in  the  un¬ 
dertaking.  They  formed  a  strong  company  and  marched  with  all  haste 
to  the  relief  of  Ezaz. 

The  envoys  who  had  been  sent  to  the  duke  felt  that  they  had 
successfully  accomplished  their  mission,  according  to  their  wishes,  since 
they  had  secured  full  favor  for  their  lord  in  the  sight  of  the  duke. 
Nevertheless,  it  was  impossible  for  them  in  person  to  inform  their 
master  of  the  result,  for  the  hostile  camp  so  encircled  the  castle  on 
every  side  that  no  one  could  enter  or  leave  it.  They  therefore  sent  forth 
two  pigeons,  especially  trained  for  the  purpose,  to  deliver  the  message. 
Notes  containing  a  complete  report  of  their  success  were  fastened  to 
the  tails  of  these  birds  so  that  their  master  would  be  fully  informed  of 
all  that  they  had  accomplished.®  As  soon  as  the  pigeons  were  freed, 
they  flew  swiftly  home,  where  both  were  captured  by  those  who  had 
guarded  and  tended  them.  The  dispatches  were  removed  and  presented 
to  the  governor.  Terror  of  the  investing  host  had  so  overwhelmed  him 
that  he  despaired  of  longer  resistance.  On  reading  the  message,  how¬ 
ever,  he  was  filled  with  such  buoyant  hope  that  he  did  not  fear  to 
take  the  initiative  in  attacking  his  foe. 

4.  Baldwin  sets  forth  zvith  a  large  force  to  meet  his  brother. 

The  other  chiefs  furnish  aid,  Ridwan  flees.  Some  of  our 
feofle  ferish  on  the  march.  About  ten  thousand  of  the 
enemy  are  killed. 

The  duke  and  his  company  had  advanced  a  day^s  march  when  Baldwin 
met  them  wtih  a  band  of  three  thousand  fighters  splendidly  armed. 
Godfrey  welcomed  his  brother  with  deep  love  and  pious  affection. 
He  explained  all  the  details  of  the  campaign,  dwelling  especially  on 
the  alliance  of  friendship  which  he  had  made  with  the  lord  of  Ezaz. 
Baldwin  approved  of  all.  He  warned  Godfrey,  however,  that  his  forces 
did  not  seem  adequate  to  raise  so  formidable  a  siege.  He  advised  him, 
above  all,  before  proceeding  further  to  call  to  his  assistance  the  leaders 

®  The  use  of  carrier  pig‘eons  as  a  means  of  communication  across  enemy  lines  was 
evidently  new  to  most  of  the  Westerners.  According  to  Dr.  C.  A.  Webster  of  the 
American  University  of  Beirut,  whose  avocational  interest  is  the  history  of  postal 
service,  the  use  of  carrier  pigeons  had  long  been  highly  developed  among  the  Arabs. 
The  method  of  attaching  the  message  to  the  tail  of  the  bird,  however,  seemed  to  him 
unusual,  for  the  regular  method  was  to  attach  the  messages  under  the  wings  to  balance 
the  weight. 


DISSENSION  AMONG  CRUSADERS 


303 

who  had  remained  at  Antioch.  Reinforced  by  them,  he  could  advance 
with  more  confidence  to  the  undertaking. 

The  duke  willingly  hearkened  to  his  brother's  advice  and  at  once 
dispatched  a  messenger  to  Bohemond  and  the  count  of  Toulouse.  Ear¬ 
nestly  he  begged  that,  in  view  of  their  fraternal  bonds,  they  would  come 
without  delay  and  help  him  in  his  efforts  on  behalf  of  his  ally.  He  as¬ 
sured  them  that,  at  the  right  time,  he  would  return  the  favor.  As  a 
matter  of  fact,  he  had  already  asked  their  aid  before  leaving  the  city 
and  had,  in  a  most  friendly  way,  invited  them  to  join  him.  Jealousy, 
however,  and  the  fact  that  the  lord  of  Ezaz  had  appealed  to  Godfrey 
first  had  led  them  to  decline  to  follow  him.  But  on  the  second  sum¬ 
mons  they  perceived  that  they  could  no  longer  refuse  the  duke’s 

* 

request  with  honor  to  themselves.  Accordingly,  they  summoned  their 
troops,  followed  the  duke,  and  joined  his  expedition.  When  all  the 
forces  thus  united  were  assembled,  their  total  strength  was  about  thirty 
thousand  fighters. 

Ridwan  was  said  to  have  a  force  of  forty  thousand  Turks,  Neverthe¬ 
less,  he  distrusted  his  own  strength.  Terrified  at  the  thought  of  our  ap¬ 
proach,  which  his  spies  informed  him  would  soon  materialize,  he  dis¬ 
banded  his  army  and  returned  to  Aleppo. 

Meanwhile,  Godfrey’s  forces,  unaware  that  the  enemy  had  fled, 
were  still  proceeding  on  the  march.  They  were  followed  at  a  distance 
by  many  foot  soldiers  and  knights  from  Antioch  who  wished  to  join 
the  advancing  legions.  Since  they  were  somewhat  behind  the  army, 
however,  many  had  the  misfortune  to  fall  into  ambuscades  that  had 
been  carefully  set  by  the  enemy.  Unequal  to  the  Turks  both  in  strength 
and  energy,  they  were  easily  overcome,  many  being  killed  and  others 
carried  off  as  prisoners. 

As  soon  as  the  duke  and  the  other  leaders  learned  of  this,  they  halted 
and,  as  with  one  mind,  started  in  pursuit  of  those  malefactors.  By  good 
luck  . they  encountered  them  before  the  Turks  could  retire  to  their  re¬ 
treats  and  regain  their  accustomed  hiding  places.  The  Christians 
charged  them  furiously  with  the  sword  and  in  a  moment  broke  their 
ranks.  They  rescued  some  of  our  people  who  were  being  carried  off  as 
prisoners,  killed  many  Turks,  and  took  innumerable  captives.  The  rest 
fled,  their  numbers  reduced  to  almost  nothing.  These  forces  were 
picked  men  chosen  from  Ridwan’s  retinue  and  retainers  and  were  often 
known  as  his  own  corps.  They  were  in  number  about  ten  thousand. 


DISSENSION  AMONG  CRUSADERS 


304 

After  this  victory,  our  army,  again  in  one  united  body,  resumed  the 
march  and  at  length  arrived  at  its  destination.  The  lord  of  the  castle 
came  out  to  welcome  the  forces  with  three  hundred  knights.  In  full 
view  of  the  assembled  legions,  he  knelt  on  the  ground  and,  with  bowed 
head,  returned  thanks,  first  to  the  duke  and  then  to  the  other  chiefs. 
Before  all  the  people  he  pledged  himself  to  be  faithful  to  the  Christian 
chiefs  and  gave  the  oath  of  fidelity,  declaring  that  no  exigency  of  time 
or  circumstance  should  ever  draw  him  away  from  fealty  and  obedience 
to  them. 

Thus  the  duke  had  rendered  the  desired  assistance  to  his  ally,  and  the 
matter  was  happily  concluded.  Baldwin,  Godfrey’s  brother,  then  went 
back  to  Edessa,  and  the  army  returned  to  Antioch. 

5 .  To  avoid  the  danger  of  festilencey  the  duke  turns  aside  into 
his  brother's  country.  There  he  destroys  fortresses  belong¬ 
ing  to  certain  traitors.  Some  of  the  other  chiefs  also  refcnr 
to  Edessa  to  share  the  magnificent  generosity  of  Baldwin, 

As  the  plague  was  still  raging  in  Antioch  and  the  mortality  among  the 
people  was  still  mounting,  the  duke  decided  to  accept  his  brother’s 
invitation  to  visit  the  land  of  Edessa.  During  their  recent  expedition 
together,  Baldwin  had  very  cordially  urged  Godfrey  to  do  this,  that 
he  might  avoid  the  heat  of  August  and  escape  the  menace  of  contagion 
in  the  air.  Accordingly,  the  duke  took  with  him  his  private  retinue  and 
a  large  throng  of  needy  people,  for  whose  wants  he  was  eager  to  pro¬ 
vide,  and  went  down  into  his  brother’s  land.  He  took  up  his  residence 
in  the  vicinity  of  Turbessel,  Hatab,  and  Ravendal,  where  he  used  the 
whole  region  as  he  pleased  and  often  enjoyed  the  society  of  his  brother. 

While  he  was  living  there,  it  frequently  happened  that  the  people  in 
the  vicinity,  and  especially  religious  men  dwelling  in  the  many  monas¬ 
teries  round  about,  poured  forth  serious  complaints  in  his  presence 
about  two  brothers,  Pakrad  and  Corasilius  [Kogh  Vasil].®  These  men 
were  Armenian  by  nation,  very  distinguished,  but  crafty  beyond  meas- 

®  Kogh  Vasil,  known  to  history  as  a  friend  of  the  Christians  from  the  West,  is  here 
cast  in  a  doubtful  role.  Iskenderian  denies  that  the  appellation  Kogh,  meaning  thief,  was 
intended  as  a  reflection  upon  Vasil’s  character.  He  believes  that  it  was  intended  to 
characterize  Vasil’s  method  of  warfare  in  a  complimentary  fashion.  He  doubts  both 
the  relationship  to  Pakrad  and  the  participation  in  these  unsavory  activities  (see  Galust 
T.  Iskenderian,  Die  Kreuzfahrer  und  ihre  Beziehtingen  zu  den  armenischen  Nachbar- 
filrsten  bis  zum  Untergange  der  Grafschajt  Edessa,  p.  61,  and  A.  A.  Beaumont,  Jr., 
“Albert  of  Aachen  and  the  County  of  Edessa,”  Munro-Crusades,  p.  119). 


DISSENSION  AMONG  CRUSADERS 


305 

ure.  They  owned  fortified  places  in  that  district,  and,  presuming  on  the 
strength  of  these,  they  burdened  the  inhabitants  and  particularly  the 
monasteries  with  heavy  and  unjust  exactions.  The  daring  of  these  lords 
had  reached  such  a  point  that  they  had  actually  ventured  to  rob,  on 
the  highway,  messengers  sent  by  the  count  of  Edessa  with  gifts  for  his 
brother,  when  the  latter  was  still  actively  pressing  on  the  siege  around 
Antioch.  These  presents,  designed  for  the  duke,  they  sent  to  Lord 
Bohemond,  that  they  might  win  his  favor  for  themselves  against  the 
count  of  Edessa.  The  duke’s  just  indignation  was  roused  as  he  listened 
to  these  accusations.  He  sent  against  the  marauders  forthwith  fifty  of 
his  own  knights,  with  people  of  the  region,  who  broke  into  their  strong¬ 
holds  by  force  of  arms  and  razed  them  to  the  ground,  that  the  intoler¬ 
able  insolence  of  these  lords  might  be,  in  some  measure  at  least,  checked. 

During  the  residence  of  the  duke  in  this  region,  nearly  all  the  more 
important  men  of  our  army  and  large  numbers  of  the  common  people 
as  well  flocked  in  eager  rivalry  to  the  count.  They  hoped  to  obtain  from 
him  some  assistance  against  the  ever-pressing  menace  of  poverty.  This 
was  especially  so  after  the  castle  of  Ezaz,  which  stood  midway  on  the 
route  to  Edessa,  had  come  under  our  protection.  Baldwin  received  all 
these  people  with  honor  and  finally  dismissed  them  with  generosity  so 
lavish  that  it  astonished  even  those  who  had  come  thither  for  the  very 
purpose  of  receiving  its  benefits. 

6.  The  citizens  of  Edessa  consfire  against  their  lordy  indignant 
because  he  is  using  Latins  only\  Baldwin  is  warned  of  the 
'plot.  He  puts  the  conspirators  to  death. 

The  Christians  now  began  to  flock  to  Edessa  in  such  numbers  that 
the  multitude  of  Latins  in  that  city  became  an  annoyance  to  the  citizens. 
Although  such  hospitality  had  been  shown  them,  these  guests  soon 
began  to  cause  their  hosts  trouble  by  reason  of  their  domineering  atti¬ 
tude.  Baldwin,  too,  depended  less  and  less  on  the  counsel  of  those 
noble  citizens  by  whose  favor  he  had  won  that  great  city.  This  roused 
strong  indignation  against  him  and  his  race,  and  his  subjects  bitterly 
rued  that  they  had  given  him  dominion  over  them.  Since  nothing 
seemed  to  satisfy  him,  they  feared  that  eventually  he  would  despoil 
them  of  all  they  owned.  Accordingly,  they  entered  into  a  conspiracy 
with  some  of  the  Turkish  princes  in  the  vicinity  and  began  to  plot  how 
Baldwin  might  either  be  suddenly  killed,  as  if  by  accident,  or  at  least 


3o6  dissension  AMONG  CRUSADERS 

driven  from  the  city.  In  preparation  for  this  attempt,  they  deposited 
their  treasures  and  all  their  substance  with  friends  in  the  castles  and 
cities  near  by.  While  they  were  working  out  their  plans  with  great  care, 
however,  word  of  the  plot  came  to  the  ears  of  Baldwin  through  a  true 
and  loyal  friend.  On  investigation,  many  indubitable  proofs  of  the 
scheme  were  found.  Accordingly,  the  count  sent  a  large  force  of  his 
own  people  to  seize  the  conspirators,  whom  he  ordered  to  be  bound  and 
held  as  murderers.  Eventually,  the  whole  matter  was  fully  revealed 
through  their  own  confession.  Baldwin  thereupon  directed  the  ring¬ 
leaders  of  the  party  to  be  blinded.  Others,  who  seemed  less  guilty,  were 
exiled  from  the  city,  and  their  goods  were  confiscated.  Still  others, 
though  mercifully  allowed  to  remain  in  Edessa,  were  severely  penal¬ 
ized  financially  by  the  forfeiture  of  their  possessions  to  the  count’s 
treasury.  In  this  way  the  count  acquired  a  quantity  of  gold  pieces  to  the 
number  of  twenty  thousand,  which  he  disbursed  with  great  liberality  to 
his  guests,  by  whose  assistance  the  cities  and  neighboring  castles  had 
been  brought  under  his  power.  Thus  to  the  towns  and  people  in  the 
vicinity  his  very  name  carried  such  fear  that  many  were  actively  plot¬ 
ting  his  destruction.  Even  his  father-in-law,  fearing  that  grave  ques¬ 
tions  might  be  raised  over  the  rest  of  his  daughter’s  dowry,  which, 
though  promised,  had  not  yet  been  paid,  fled  surreptitiously  into  the 
mountains,  where  he  had  strongholds  of  his  own. 

7.  Balas  flots  treachery  agmnst  the  count,  'The  latter  takes 
'precautions  for  his  own  safety.  Sonre  of  his  allies  are  seized, 

Fulbert  of  Chartres  alleviates  this  disaster.  The  traitor 
Balduk  is  slain. 

There  was  a  certain  noble  of  the  Turkish  race  named  Balas  living  in 
that  part  of  the  country,  who  had  formerly  been  the  lord  of  Seruj.  At 
that  time,  he  had  been  allied  by  treaty  with  the  count,  and  before  the 
Latins  arrived  in  such  numbers  the  two  had  been  on  very  friendly 
terms.  This  man  perceived  that  Baldwin’s  affection  toward  him  had  be¬ 
come  less.  Led  either  by  his  own  feelings  of  resentment,  or  possibly  by 
the  request  of  the  citizens,  he  went  to  the  count  and  begged  as  a  favor 
that  he  would  come  personally  to  receive  the  one  fortress  which  still  re¬ 
mained  in  his  [Balas’s]  possession.  He  declared  that  Baldwin’s  favor 
would  be  all-sufficient  for  him  and  would  be  esteemed  as  a  valuable 


DISSENSION  AMONG  CRUSADERS 


307 

heritage.  He  said  also  that  he  intended  to  bring  his  wife  and  childreiij 
with  all  he  possessed,  to  Edessa  and  pretended  to  stand  in  great  fear 
of  his  fellow  countrymen,  because  he  had  become  so  friendly  with  the 
Christians.  To  carry  out  this  wish,  the  count  was  persuaded  to  set  a  day 
to  visit  the  place.  At  the  time  appointed,  he  set  out  with  two  hundred 
knights  and  marched  to  the  fortress,  whither  Balas  had  preceded  him. 
The  latter,  however,  had  secretly  strengthened  the  defenses  of  the 
castle  by  introducing  a  hundred  valiant  knights,  splendidly  armed. 
This  force  was  concealed  inside  in  such  a  way  that  not  a  man  was  visible. 

When  Baldwin  arrived  before  the  castle,  Balas  begged  that  he  would 
take  only  a  few  of  his  staff  with  him  into  the  fortress.  He  gave  as  an 
excuse  for  this  request  the  risk  of  danger  to  his  property  if  the  entire 
force  were  introduced.  His  persuasive  words  almost  induced  the  count 
to  accede  to  his  wishes  in  every  respect.  Fortunately,  however,  some  of 
the  wise  noblemen  in  attendance  on  Baldwin  had  a  certain  foreboding 
of  treachery.  Almost  by  force  they  held  the  count  back  against  his  pro¬ 
test  and  prevented  his  entering  the  castle.  They  rightly  distrusted  the 
evil  designs  of  the  rascal  and  judged  it  safer  that  the  trial  be  first  made 
by  others.  The  count  acquiesced  in  this  prudent  counsel.  He  ordered 
twelve  of  his  bravest  men,  well  armed,  to  enter  the  place.  Meanwhile, 
he  himself  with  the  rest  of  his  band  remained  quietly  outside  near  by 
until  he  should  see  with  his  own  eyes  the  result  of  the  experiment.  No 
sooner  had  the  gallant  band  entered  than  they  fell  victims  to  the  perfid¬ 
ious  treachery  of  the  wicked  Balas.  For  the  hundred  Turks  mentioned 
above  at  once  emerged  from  their  hiding  places,  armed  to  the  teeth. 
They  seized  the  betrayed  knights  and,  in  spite  of  their  efforts  to  resist, 
threw  them  into  chains.  This  result  distressed  the  count  greatly.  Anx¬ 
ious  about  the  fate  of  his  loyal  men  whom  he  had  lost  by  so  dastardly  a 
trick,  he  drew  nearer  to  the  castle  and  earnestly  admonished  Balas  to 
remember  the  oath  of  fidelity  which  he  had  taken.  On  the  strength  of 
this  fealty,  he  urged  him  to  return  the  prisoners  so  treacherously  seized 
and  to  receive  instead  a  large  sum  of  money  as  ransom.  Balas  abso¬ 
lutely  refused  to  consider  this  proposition,  however,  unless  Seruj  were 
returned  to  him.  The  count  perceived  that  he  could  do  nothing  more, 
for  the  castle  was  situated  on  a  steep  precipice  and  was  impregnable 
both  because  of  its  strength  and  because  of  the  skill  with  which  it  was 
built.  Exceedingly  angry  over  the  seizure  of  his  men,  he  returned  to 


DISSENSION  AMONG  CRUSADERS 


308 

Edessa  earnestly  pondering  in  his  own  mind  the  deception  which  had 
been  practiced  upon  him. 

The  city  of  Seruj  just  mentioned  was  at  that  time  under  the  charge 
of  Fulbert  of  Chartres/^  a  man  of  much  experience  in  the  science  of 
war.  He  had  with  him  a  garrison  of  a  hundred  knights  well  equipped 
for  action.  When  he  heard  of  the  trick  which  had  been  played  on  his 
lord,  his  whole  heart  went  out  to  him  in  pity,  and  he  began  to  plan 
earnestly  how  to  avenge  the  outrage.  In  accordance  with  this  purpose, 
he  laid  an  ambush  one  day  before  Balas’s  castle  in  a  spot  well  adapted 
to  his  design.  Then  with  a  purposely  small  escort,  he  approached  the 
fortress  as  if  to  seize  and  drive  off  cattle.  His  real  purpose,  however, 
was  to  induce  the  enemy  to  pursue  him.  The  garrison  within  noticed 
that  he  was  trying  to  steal  the  herds  from  the  pasture.  They  seized  their 
arms  and  started  in  pursuit.  Fulbert  pretended  to  flee.  The  infidels  fol¬ 
lowed  him  eagerly  until  he  passed  the  ambuscade.  At  that  point,  his 
men  who  were  lying  in  hiding  burst  forth.  Reinforced  by  them,  he 
turned  on  his  pursuers  and  attacked  them.  Some  were  killed,  and  others 
narrowly  escaped  by  fleeing  into  the  fortress.  Six  prisoners  were  taken. 

Shortly  afterwards  an  exchange  of  prisoners  was  arranged,  and  Ful¬ 
bert  received  for  these  six  men  an  equal  number  of  Christians.  Four 
others  of  this  same  company  of  twelve  succeeded  in  eluding  their  guards 
and  gained  their  liberty,  but  the  remaining  two  were  beheaded,  by  or¬ 
der  of  that  wicked  and  impious  man.  From  that  day  forward,  Baldwin 
declined  any  alliance  of  friendship  with  the  Turks  and  utterly  dis¬ 
trusted  their  good  faith.  Of  this  fact  he  soon  after  gave  a  striking  proof. 

There  was  in  the  same  vicinity  another  Turkish  lord  named  Balduk. 
This  man  had  sold  to  the  count  for  a  consideration  the  ancient  and  well- 
fortified  city  of  Samosata.  By  the  terms  of  the  treaty  made  between 
them,  Balduk  was  bound  to  bring  his  wife  and  children,  together  with 
his  entire  household,  to  Edessa.  With  plausible  excuses,  however,  he 
kept  putting  off  the  fulfillment  of  his  promises,  waiting  for  an  oppor¬ 
tunity  to  do  some  malicious  injury.  One  day,  as  this  man,  according  to 
his  usual  custom,  approached  the  count  to  offer  some  trifling  reason  for 
his  delay,  Baldwin  ordered  him  to  be  beheaded.  By  this  summary  act 
he  prevented  the  possibility  of  similar  treachery  in  the  future. 

Fulbert  or  Fulcher  of  Chartres,  mentioned  by  Albert  and  by  the  Chanson  d^An^ 
tiochCy  is  not  recognized  by  the  chaplain  of  Baldwin,  who  has  the  same  name  and 
came  from  the  same  town.  There  is  considerable  confusion  regarding  him  in  the  pages 
of  Albert  (see  B.  Kugler,  Albert  von  Aachen^  pp.  178—79). 


DISSENSION  AMONG  CRUSADERS 


309 


8.  The  count  of  Toulouse  takes  Albara,  He  establishes  a 
btshof  in  that  city^  A  Teuton  fleet  sails  into  the  harbor. 

Loss  by  death  is  unceasing. 

While  Godfrey  was  still  lingering  in  the  vicinity  of  Turbessel  and 
the  events  just  recorded  were  taking  place  in  the  country  round  Edessa, 
the  count  of  Toulouse^  accompanied  by  his  own  following  and  a  great 
number  of  poor  people,  set  forth  from  Antioch.  Anxious  lest  his  energy 
be  wasted  in  this  period  of  inactivity,  he  laid  siege  to  Albara,  a  well- 
fortified  city  in  the  province  of  Apamea,  distant  a  march  of  about  two 
days  from  Antioch.  By  force  the  citizens  were  soon  compelled  to  sur¬ 
render  their  city.  After  the  seizure  of  Albara  and  the  conquest  of  all  the 
adjacent  country,  Raymond  established  a  bishop  in  that  place,  Peter  of 
Narbonne,  a  member  of  his  own  staff,  a  very  religious  man  of  honorable 
life  and  character.  On  the  new  bishop  he  immediately  bestowed  half 

of  the  city  and  of  the  whole  district,  and  rendered  thanks  to  God  that 

■ 

through  his  zealous  work  the  East  was  to  have  a  Latin  bishop.^ ^ 

By  the  direction  of  the  count,  Peter  then  went  to  Antioch  to  receive 
the  gift  of  consecration  and  was  there  invested  with  pontifical  power 
in  all  its  fullness.  Later,  when  the  church  at  Antioch  was  set  in  order 
by  Bernard,  the  first  Latin  patriarch  of  that  city,  Peter  transferred  the 
allegiance  of  his  own  metropolis  to  that  church.  He  himself  became 
archbishop  and  received  the  insignia  of  the  pallium  by  the  hand  of 
Bernard. 

There  was  at  this  time  in  the  company  of  the  count  of  Toulouse  a 
certain  nobleman  named  William.  By  a  lucky  accident,  when  the  city 
of  Antioch  was  taken,  this  man  had  captured  the  wife  of  Yaghi  Siyan, 
the  governor  of  the  city,  and  also  the  two  little  children  of  her  son 
Samsadolus.  They  were  still  in  his  custody.  As  ransom  for  them,  Sam- 
sadolus  offered  William  a  large  sum  of  money,  on  receipt  of  which 
the  lady  and  the  two  children  were  restored  to  their  former  freedom. 

About  this  time  also,  a  large  company  of  people,  numbering  about 
fifteen  hundred,  landed  at  the  port  of  St.  Simeon  after  a  prosperous 
voyage.  They  were  from  the  vicinity  of  Ratisbon  in  the  kingdom  of  the 

It  is  interesting”  to  note  the  important  part  which  the  secular  leaders  on  the 
crusade  took  in  the  selection  of  prelates  in  the  East.  The  Investiture  Struggle  con¬ 
cerned  with  this  issue  was  still  being  actively  waged  in  the  West  at  this  time.  The  in¬ 
fluence  of  that  controversy  is  reflected  in  William’s  emphasis  upon  the  ecclesiastical 
merit  of  the  person  selected  and  upon  his  investiture  by  higher  church  ofiicials  at 
Antioch.  Albara  is  the  modern  Kafr  al  Bara. 


DISSENSION  AMONG  CRUSADERS 


310 

Teutons.^-  Within  a  short  time,  however,  all  these  people  died  of  the 
epidemic  which  was  raging  there  at  that  time.  For  three  successive 
months  until  the  beginning  of  December,  that  malignant  disease  had 
so  ravaged  the  people  that  more  than  five  hundred  men  of  knightly 
rank  died,  and  the  number  of  victims  among  the  people  was  beyond 
estimating, 

9.  The  Christians  besiege  and  cafture  Maara.  William^  bishof 
of  Orangey  dies,  Joufier  de  Lastours  becomes  famous. 

By  the  first  of  November  all  the  leaders  who  had  left  the  city  to 
avoid  the  plague  had  returned,  as  they  had  agreed  to  do.  The  city  of 
Albara  had  already  been  taken,  as  we  have  related,  and  now,  by  com¬ 
mon  consent,  it  was  proposed  to  assault  Maara,  a  very  strongly  fortified 
city  eight  miles  distant  from  Albara.  It  was  necessary  that  some  activity 
be  carried  on  during  this  interim,  for  the  insistent  clamor  of  the  people, 
as  they  demanded  that  the  march  to  Jerusalem  be  resumed,  was  unen¬ 
durable.  Accordingly  the  necessary  preparations  were  made,  and  on 
the  day  appointed  the  counts  of  Toulouse  and  Flanders,  the  count  of 
Normandy,  the  duke  with  his  brother  Eustace,  and  Tancred  set  out 
with  the  purpose  of  laying  siege  to  the  city  of  Maara. 

The  citizens  of  this  place  were  extremely  haughty  and  arrogant, 
because  of  their  great  riches.  Moreover,  they  were  particularly  proud 
of  the  fact  that  they  had  once  slain  a  large  number  of  our  people  in  a 
certain  engagement — a  feat  of  which  they  were  still  boasting.  Hence 
they  scorned  the  Christian  army  and  hurled  insulting  abuse  upon  its 
leaders.  They  even  set  up  crosses  on  their  ramparts  and  towers,  and 
upon  these,  as  an  insult  to  our  people,  they  visited  all  sorts  of  indigni¬ 
ties,  even  to  the  extent  of  spitting  upon  the  sacred  emblems. 

As  is  ever  the  case  when  sacrilege  is  concerned,  these  outrages  roused 
the  Christians  to  still  more  passionate  wrath.  They  attacked  the  city 
in  a  succession  of  assaults  so  violent  that,  if  a  sufficient  number  of  lad¬ 
ders  had  been  available,  it  would  have  been  taken  by  force  on  the  sec¬ 
ond  day  after  their  arrival. 

On  the  third  day,  Bohemond  joined  them  with  large  reinforcements. 
He  continued  the  blockade  by  hemming  in  that  side  of  the  town  which 
had  hitherto  remained  open.  Several  days  after  his  arrival,  the  pil¬ 
grims,  incensed  because  they  were  being  detained  at  Maara  so  long 

This  incident  rests  upon  the  sole  authority  of  Albert  of  Aix. 


DISSENSION  AMONG  CRUSADERS 


311 

without  results,  built  wooden  towers,  wove  protections  of  wickerwork,. 
and  set  up  hurling  engines.  Then,  impatient  of  delay,  they  pushed  on 
the  work  of  storming  the  city  with  even  greater  boldness.  But  the  de¬ 
fenders  within  the  walls  resisted  with  all  their  might.  Persistently  they 
hurled  down  upon  their  foes  all  sorts  of  missiles.  In  their  desperate  ef¬ 
forts  to  drive  the  enemy  from  the  fortifications,  they  made  use  of 
stones,  beehives  swarming  with  bees,  fire,  and  even  quicklime.  But, 
thanks  to  the  all-powerful  mercy  of  God,  they  were  successful  in  injur¬ 
ing  few,  if  any,  of  our  number. 

It  now  became  increasingly  evident  that  all  the  efforts  of  the  defend¬ 
ers  were  in  vain  and  that  their  strength  was  beginning  to  weaken. 
Spurred  by  this,  the  Christians  pressed  on  the  siege  yet  more  valiantly 
and  stormed  the  city  on  every  side.  The  assault  had  continued  without 
interruption  from  break  of  day  until  sunset,  and  the  defenders,  ex¬ 
hausted  by  their  steady  exertions,  were  now  showing  less  caution  in 
their  resistance.  Accordingly,  the  Christians  attached  the  ladders  to  the 
walls  and  succeeded  in  scaling  the  ramparts  by  force.  First  to  ascend 
was  Guelferus,  surnamed  of  the  Towers  [  Joufier  de  Lastours] ,  a  noble¬ 
man  from  the  bishopric  of  Limoges.  He  was  followed  by  many  others. 
Certain  towers  were  seized,  but  the  approach  of  night  prevented  them 
from  continuing  their  efforts  and  winning  the  whole  city.  That  matter 
was  deferred  until  the  following  day.  It  was  planned,  however,  to  re¬ 
new  the  attack  at  daybreak,  and  the  knights,  with  several  bands  of  the 
principal  men,  kept  watch  round  the  city  throughout  the  entire  night 
to  prevent  the  enemy  from  leaving. 

Meanwhile,  however,  the  undisciplined  people,  weary  of  their  long 
privations  and  the  bitter  straits  of  protracted  famine,  entered  it  without 
the  knowledge  of  the  elders,  for  not  an  enemy  appeared  on  the  walls 
and  the  entire  city  seemed  to  be  wrapped  in  utter  silence.  They  found 
it  without  defenders  and  secretly  and  stealthily  carried  off  all  the 
spoils.  The  citizens  meanwhile  had  fled  to  underground  caves  that  they 
might  secure  their  own  safety,  at  least  temporarily. 

When  morning  came,  the  leaders  arose  and  seized  the  city  with¬ 
out  a  battle,  but  they  found  little  booty  to  carry  away.  They  discovered, 
however,  that  the  citizens  were  hiding  in  underground  retreats.  There¬ 
upon  they  built  fires  around,  which  poured  forth  such  volumes  of  dense 
smoke  that  the  fugitives  were  compelled  to  surrender.  Some  of  these 
people,  thus  forcibly  driven  from  their  hiding  places,  were  slain,  and 
others  were  taken  prisoners. 


312  DISSENSION  AMONG  CRUSADERS 

There  died  at  that  siege  Willianij  bishop  of  Orange,  of  good  mem¬ 
ory,  a  devout  and  God-fearing  man.^^ 

The  duke  and  others  remained  at  Maara  for  fifteen  days.  Then,  as 
his  own  affairs  required  his  presence,  he  returned  to  Antioch,  accom¬ 
panied  by  the  count  of  Flanders. 

10.  The  duke  returns  to  ht$  brother  and  takes  leave  of  him* 

On  the  return  trif  to  the  army y  he  falls  into  an  ambush  but 
escapes  unharmed , 

About  this  time  Godfrey,  duke  of  Lorraine,  perceived  that  the  people 
were  making  preparations  to  depart  and  that  they  were  constantly  im¬ 
portuning  the  leaders  to  proceed  toward  Jerusalem.  Before  leaving 
that  region,  however,  he  resolved  to  visit  his  brother,  that  he  might 
enjoy  pleasant  converse  with  him.  Accordingly,  he  set  out  with  his  pri¬ 
vate  escort  and  went  down  into  Baldwin’s  kingdom.  After  he  had  vis¬ 
ited  with  him  and  finished  the  business  on  which  he  had  come,  he  took 
leave  and  started  back  to  Antioch,  where  the  other  leaders  were  await¬ 
ing  him.  About  five  or  six  miles  from  the  city,  attracted  by  a  pleasant 
grassy  place  beside  a  spring  from  which  bubbled  forth  sweet  and  limpid 
water,  he  dismounted  from  his  horse  to  take  food.  While  his  compan¬ 
ions  were  occupied  in  making  such  arrangements  as  pertained  to  the 
time  and  place,  a  squadron  of  the  enemy’s  cavalry,  armed  to  the  teeth, 
suddenly  emerged  from  the  reeds  of  a  marshy  place  near  by  and  rushed 
upon  them  as  they  ate.  Before  the  Turks  reached  them,  however,  the 
duke  and  his  companions  had  seized  their  weapons  and  leaped  upon 
their  horses.  A  skirmish  followed,  in  which,  by  the  grace  of  God,  the 
duke  came  off  victorious.  For  he  killed  many  and  put  the  rest  to  flight. 
Then,  covered  with  glory,  he  resumed  his  march  to  the  city. 

11.  A  strife  arises  at  Maara  between  the  count  of  Toulouse  and 
Bohemond,  Bohemond  seizes  the  count^s  holdings  at 
Antioch.  The  chiefs  meet  at  Rugia  but  nothing  of  impor¬ 
tance  is  decided*  The  people  struggle  with  famine* 

After  Maara  was  taken  a  violent  controversy  arose  between  Bohemond 
and  the  count  of  Toulouse.  The  latter  had  proposed  to  give  the  con- 

William  of  Orange  was  virtually  the  last  important  prelate  who  had  started  on  the 
crusade.  The  hardships  of  the  expedition  had  fallen  upon  the  older  men  with  especial 
weight. 


DISSENSION  AMONG  CRUSADERS 


313 

quered  city  to  the  bishop  of  Albara.  Bohemond,  however,  was  unwill¬ 
ing  to  concede  to  the  bishop,  at  Raymond’s  bidding,  that  part  of  the  city 
which  he  himself  had  taken,  unless  the  count  would  first  agree  to  sur¬ 
render  to  him  the  towers  still  in  the  latter’s  possession  at  Antioch. 
Bohemond  finally  abandoned  the  conflict  at  Maara  in  anger  and  re¬ 
turned  to  Antioch.  There  he  seized  the  towers  which  the  count’s  fol¬ 
lowers  had  fortified  and  were  still  holding  and  drove  out  the  defenders 
by  force  of  arms.  By  this  summary  action,  he  acquired  possession  of  the 
entire  city  and  held  it  as  sole  lord. 

■When  the  count  saw  that  his  rival  had  retired  and  that  consequently 
it  was  within  his  own  power  to  dispose  of  the  conquered  city  as  he 
wished,  he  granted  it  to  the  bishop  of  Albara,  as  he  had  originally  in¬ 
tended.  He  was  conferring  with  the  bishop  in  regard  to  protecting  the 
place  from  the  enemy  and  had  appointed  guards  from  both  infantry 
and  cavalry  troops  when  the  people  discovered  his  design.  They  be¬ 
came  violently  angry.  They  complained  to  each  other  that  the  leaders 
were  ever  trying  to  invent  excuses  for  delay  and  that  the  main  object 
of  the  pilgrimage  seemed  wholly  forgotten.  Whenever  a  city  was  taken, 
the  chiefs  at  once  began  to  wrangle  and  fight  over  the  question  of  its 
possession.  They  thereupon  held  a  meeting  of  their  own  and  decided 
that  as  soon  as  the  count  happened  to  be  away  for  any  reason  they  would 
destroy  Maara,  that  thereafter  there  might  be  nothing  to  hinder  the 
accomplishment  of  their  vows. 

It  happened  that  at  this  same  time  the  leaders  were  assembled  at 
Rugia,  a  city  about  half  way  between  Antioch  and  Maara.^^  The  pur¬ 
pose  of  the  conference  was  to  deliberate  over  the  clamorous  demands  of 
the  people  that  the  pilgrimage  be  resumed.  The  count  had  received  a 
summons  to  this  meeting  and  went.  As  all  the  leaders  held  different 
opinions  on  the  subject,  however,  no  harmonious  or  helpful  decision 
on  the  matter  at  issue  was  reached. 

But  while  the  count  was  at  Rugia,  the  people  left  at  Maara  seized  the 
opportunity  for  carrying  out  their  plan  during  his  absence.  In  spite  of 
the  opposition  of  the  bishop,  who  forbade  it  absolutely,  they  tore  down 
the  walls  and  towers  from  their  foundations,  that  the  count,  when  he 
returned,  might  find  no  excuse  on  that  account  for  further  delay. 

Raymond  was  greatly  distressed,  on  his  return,  over  this  catastrophe, 
but,  perceiving  the  wishes  of  the  people,  he  wisely  concealed  his  feel- 


Probably  about  January  4,  1099, 


314  DISSENSION  AMONG  CRUSADERS 

ings.  The  people  continued  their  insistent  demands.  They  implored 
and  besought  him  that  he  would  act  as  the  leader  of  the  children  of  God 
in  carrying  out  the  pilgrimage  on  which  they  had  started.  If  he  refused 
to  do  thisj  they  threatened  to  place  some  one  of  the  soldiers  in  command 
of  the  army  to  march  at  their  head  on  the  way  of  the  Lord. 

To  add  to  their  troubles^  a  severe  famine  was  raging  in  the  army  at 
this  time,  and,  as  food  failed,  many  in  defiance  of  custom  relapsed  to 
the  savagery  of  wild  beasts  and  began  to  eat  the  flesh  of  unclean  ani¬ 
mals.  It  is  asserted  also,  though  this  is  scarcely  credible,  that  many, 
through  lack  of  proper  food,  fell  to  such  depths  that  they  were  eating 
human  flesh. 

Pestilence  was  rife  among  the  pilgrims  also,  nor  could  this  be  other¬ 
wise,  since  the  wretched  people  were  subsisting  upon  unclean  and  nox¬ 
ious  food  (if  indeed  that  can  be  called  food  which  is  contrary  to  nature) . 
Nor  was  this  terrible  famine  which  had  come  upon  the  people  a  tem¬ 
porary  thing,  lasting  but  a  short  time,  since  for  five  weeks  and  even 
longer  the  people  had  been  exposed  to  this  scourge  while  they  were  de¬ 
tained  before  Maara  in  the  attempt  to  take  it. 

A  number  of  distinguished  men  of  high  rank  died  before  that  place, 
not  only  from  the  vicissitudes  of  war,  but  from  various  diseases.  Among 
them  was  a  young  man  of  unusually  promising  character,  Enguerrand, 
the  son  of  Hugh,  count  of  St.  Pol.  He  was  stricken  with  a  serious  mal¬ 
ady  from  which  he  died. 

* 

12.  The  count  makes  a  foray  into  the  enerny^s  country  and 
drives  off  cattle.  Unable  to  endure  longer  the  clamorous 
demands  of  the  feofle,  he  starts  on  the  march.  The  count 
of  Normandy  and  Tancred  join  him. 

Troubled  in  heart  and  mind  over  these  matters,  the  count  of  Toulouse, 
that  distinguished  and  eminent  man,  was  hesitating,  undecided  as  to 
what  course  he  ought  to  follow.  The  distress  of  his  imperilled  people 
weighed  heavily  upon  him,  and  the  critical  situation  wearied  him.  A 
passionate  longing  to  proceed  on  the  pilgrimage  burned  in  the  hearts  of 
all,  both  great  and  small  alike,  and  their  importunate  demands,  ac¬ 
companied  as  they  were  by  incessant  shouts  and  earnest  entreaties, 
allowed  him  no  rest.  In  the  hope,  therefore,  of  providing  a  fitting 
remedy  for  both  of  these  troubles,  he  appointed  the  fifteenth  day  of 
the  month  as  the  time  for  starting  on  the  way  to  Jerusalem.  This  he 


DISSENSION  AMONG  CRUSADERS 


315 

did  to  satisfy  the  demands  of  the  people  and  his  own  conscience,  al¬ 
though  he  knew  well  that  the  other  chiefs  would  be  unwilling  to  fol¬ 
low  him  in  that  course. 

In  the  meantime,  that  the  people  might  not  be  endangered  by  the 
rapidly  increasing  famine,  he  took  a  party  of  knights  and  some  foot 
soldiers  who  seemed  stronger  than  the  others  and  went  down  into  the 
enemy’s  country.  The  rest  of  the  people  were  left  in  the  city.  Ray¬ 
mond’s  object  was  to  procure  at  all  costs  the  things  that  were  necessary 
to  sustain  the  life  of  the  people.  With  a  very  strong  following,  he 
entered  an  extremely  rich  country  belonging  to  the  enemy.  Here  he 
assaulted  many  fortified  towns,  burned  some  of  the  suburbs,  and  re¬ 
turned  from  that  raid  with  many  flocks  and  herds.  He  brought  back 
also  servants  and  maidservants  and  large  supplies  of  food  so  that  the 
starving  and  thirsting  people  were  refreshed  even  to  satiety.  He  was 
able  also  to  send  back  a  goodly  portion  to  those  who  had  remained  at 
Maara  to  guard  that  city. 

On  his  return  from  this  expedition,  the  count  once  more  hesitated  as 
to  his  course,  for  the  people  again  clamored  that  the  day  set  for  the 
departure  was  already  at  hand  and  spurned  the  thought  of  delay. 
Realizing  that  the  cause  of  the  people  was  a  really  worthy  one,  the 
count  felt  that  he  could  no  longer  resist  their  pleadings.  Accordingly, 
although  he  was  alone  in  the  matter,  for  not  one  of  the  other  chiefs 
had  determined  to  follow  him,  he  set  fire  to  the  city  and  reduced  it  to 
ashes.  Then,  accompanied  by  his  own  people  only,  he  started  out  on 
the  march. 

Since  he  had  but  few  knights,  however,  he  asked  the  bishop  of  Albara 
to  make  the  march  with  him.  The  latter  kindly  agreed  to  the  count’s 
request  and  placed  his  own  affairs  in  charge  of  a  certain  nobleman 
named  William  of  Cumltacoy  with  whom  he  left  a  force  of  seven 
knights  and  thirty  foot  soldiers.  This  man  attended  to  the  matters  in¬ 
trusted  to  him  so  loyally  and  devotedly  that  within  a  few  days  the 
number  of  knights  increased  from  seven  to  forty  and  the  foot  soldiers 
from  thirty  to  eighty  or  more.  Thus,  as  the  result  of  his  efforts,  the 
property  of  his  lord  was  greatly  increased. 

On  the  appointed  day,  the  count  set  out  on  the  march  without  wait¬ 
ing  for  any  of  the  others.  He  had  about  ten  thousand  men  in  his  com¬ 
pany,  of  whom  not  more  than  three  hundred  and  fifty  were  knights. 
The  count  of  Normandy  and  Tancred,  each  with  forty  knights  and  a 


DISSENSION  AMONG  CRUSADERS 


316 

numerous  company  of  foot  soldiers,  joined  him  and  became  his  insepa¬ 
rable  comrades  on  the  march.  After  starting,  they  found  such  an  abun¬ 
dance  of  necessary  things  on  the  way  that  nothing  more  was  needed  to 
supply  the  people. 

As  they  passed  through  Shayzar,  Hama,  and  Emesa,  which  in  com¬ 
mon  parlance  is  called  Camela,  the  rulers  of  those  places  offered  them 
escorts  and  also  <  furnished  markets  under  the  best  of  conditions.  In 
addition,  the  fortified  towns  and  municipalities  through  whose  lands 
they  marched  likewise  made  them  many  gifts  in  gold  and  silver  as 
well  as  flocks  and  herds.  All  kinds  of  provisions  were  also  furnished 
that  the  countryside  might  be  spared.  Thus  day  by  day  the  strength  of 
the  army  ^as  increased  and  its  condition  improved,  since  there  was  a 
great  abundance  of  everything  needful.  Gradually,  too,  they  secured  by 
purchase  and  also  gratis  a  large  number  of  horses,  the  lack  of  which 
heretofore  had  been  a  great  disadvantage  to  them.  Consequently,  be¬ 
fore  they  met  the  other  leaders,  they  had  a  thousand  or  more  newly 
acquired  horses  for  army  service  in  addition  to  those  which  they  pos¬ 
sessed  before. 

After  they  had  advanced  for  several  days  along  the  inland  road, 
however,  it  was  unanimously  resolved  to  return  to  the  shore  route.  This 
course  would  enable  them  more  easily  to  ascertain  the  situation  of  the 
other  chiefs  whom  they  had  left  behind  in  the  land  of  Antioch.  It 
would  also  make  it  possible  to  buy  the  supplies  which  they  needed  from 
ships  coming  from  Antioch  and  Laodicea. 

13.  The  count^s  armyy  vuhile  on  the  marchy  suffers  attack  from 
brigands.  The  count  makes  a  clever  counterattack,  A 
fortress  which  tries  to  resist  is  taken  by  storm.  The  camf  is 
f laced  before  Arka,  Envoys  from  the  surrounding  f laces 
come  to  the  chiefs. 

From  the  time  that  they  left  Maara,  everything,  during  the  entire 
march,  had  gone  very  prosperously  for  the  Christians.  The  only  an¬ 
noyance  was  that  brigands  kept  hovering  about  the  rear  of  the  expedi¬ 
tion  and,  from  time  to  time,  made  furtive  attacks  on  the  sick  and  aged 
who  were  unable  to  keep  up  with  the  pace  of  the  army.  As  a  result, 
some  of  these  people  were  killed  and  others  made  prisoners.  The  count 
met  these  attacks  very  shrewdly.  He  sent  Tancred,  Robert,  duke  of 


DISSENSION  AMONG  CRUSADERS 


317 

Normandy,  and  the  bishop  of  Albara  to  march  on  at  the  head  of  the 
column,  while  he  himself,  with  other  noted  men  of  valor,  remained 
behind  in  ambush.  At  the  right  moment  he  intended  to  attack  those 
miscreants  who  were  following  in  the  rear  of  the  advancing  army  to 
waylay  any  incautious  stragglers.  So  when  the  rascals  attacked  the  train 
according  to  their  usual  custom,  the  count  suddenly  emerged  from  his 
hiding  place,  attacked,  and  utterly  routed  them.  Then  he  returned  to 
the  expedition  with  exultation,  bringing  with  him  the  captured  horses 
and  the  booty  as  well  as  a  number  of  prisoners.  Thereafter,  the  Chris¬ 
tians  marched  along  in  safety  and  without  difficulty,  plentifully  sup¬ 
plied  with  all  things  needful. 

In  the  entire  region  through  which  the  Christians  passed,  there  was 
not  a  city  or  town  on  the  right  or  on  the  left  which  did  not  send  gifts 
to  the  army  and  its  leaders,  with  requests  for  treaties  of  friendship.  One 
city  only  there  was  where  the  people  felt  such  confidence  in  their  num¬ 
bers  and  the  strong  defenses  of  the  place  that  they  did  not  offer  a  mar¬ 
ket  or  ask  for  a  treaty  or  send  presents  to  the  leaders.  On  the  contrary, 
they  united  their  forces  and  tried  to  hinder  the  passage  of  the  expedi¬ 
tion.  When  the  Christians  perceived  this,  they  were  filled  with  right¬ 
eous  indignation.  As  one  man  they  fell  upon  their  opponents  and,  in  a 
short  time,  had  broken  up  their  ranks,  taken  some  prisoners,  and  seized 
the  place  by  force.  Flocks  and  herds,  as  well  as  horses  which  were  graz¬ 
ing  in  the  pastures  near  by,  were  driven  off  and  all  the  goods  of  the  foe 
seized. 

There  were  with  the  army  at  this  time  envoys  from  some  of  the 
neighboring  rulers  who  had  been  sent  to  ask  for  peace.  These  men 
witnessed  our  strength  and  daring.  Anxious  to  obtain  full  security  for 
their  lords,  they  returned  home  and  informed  those  who  had  sent 
them  about  the  habits  and  bravery  of  the  Christians.  Soon  they  came 
back  to  the  Christian  host  with  presents  of  horses  and  goods  of  various 
kinds. 

After  traversing  this  middle  region  for  several  days  in  complete 
security,  the  army  came  down  into  the  plain  not  far  from  the  sea.  Here, 
splendidly  defended  by  its  natural  position,  lay  an  ancient  city  called 
Arka.  Near  this  place,  not  far  from  the  walls,  the  Christians  estab¬ 
lished  their  camp.^^ 

Probably  February  14,  1099. 


DISSENSION  AMONG  CRUSADERS 


14*  Arka  Is  described.  Word  is  received  from  some  of  our 
feofle  who  are  held  frisoners  at  Trifoli  that  Arka  should 
be  besieged, 

Arka  is  a  city  of  the  province  of  Phoenicia.  It  is  situated  on  a  well- 
fortified  height  at  the  base  of  Mt.  Lebanon,  four  or  five  miles  from 
the  sea.  The  extensive  plain  in  which  it  lies  is  blessed  with  rich  and 
fertile  soil  and  pleasant  pasture  lands,  and  streams  of  running  water 
are  not  lacking.  Ancient  traditions  say  that  this  city  was  founded  by 
Aradius,  the  seventh  son  of  Canaan,  from  whom  it  received  its  name, 
which  was  later  corrupted  to  Archis. 

As  we  have  already  stated,  the  Christians  placed  their  camp  before 
this  city.  This  was  not  done  by  chance,  but  in  accordance  with  advice 
sent  them  in  letters  from  some  of  our  people  who  were  held  in  the 
bonds  of  the  enemy.  For  in  the  splendid  maritime  city  of  Tripoli,  five 
or  six  miles  from  Arka,  were  a  number  of  Christians  who  were  detained 
there  by  force.  From  the  very  beginning  of  the  siege  of  Antioch,  and 
still  more  after  the  conquest  of  that  city,  lack  of  provisions  had  forced 
the  Christians  to  wander  about  the  countryside  in  search  of  food.  Since 
they  did  not  observe  proper  precautions,  they  were  naturally  exposed 
to  captivity  by  the  enemy.  As  a  result,  almost  every  city  and  fortress 
in  that  vicinity  held  some  of  our  people  as  prisoners. 

In  the  city  of  Tripoli  just  mentioned,  more  than  two  hundred  Chris¬ 
tians  were  held  under  these  conditions.  When  they  heard  that  the  army 
of  Christians  was  approaching,  they  notified  the  leaders  that  Arka 
ought  not  to  be  passed  by.  It  should  by  all  means  be  besieged,  for  it 
could  probably  be  taken  in  a  few  days.  If  not,  the  leaders  would  be 
able  to  extort  a  large  sum  of  money  from  the  ruler  of  Tripoli  as  the 
price  of  sparing  that  city.  Then,  in  arranging  terms,  they  might  also 
obtain  the  release  of  their  brethren  who  were  prisoners  there. 

This  advice  was  followed.  The  Christians  hastened  at  once  to  Arka, 
encamped  in  a  circle  around  the  city,  and  began  the  siege.  They  had 
two  objects  in  view,  to  test  the  information  which  had  been  given  them 
and  also  to  occupy  the  time  while  they  were  waiting  for  the  other 
chiefs  who,  it  was  expected,  would  soon  follow  them. 


DISSENSION  AMONG  CRUSADERS 


319 


I5»  A  farty  of  Christians  leaves  the  camf  and  takes  the  city  of 
Antarados  by  force.  They  return  laden  with  rich  s foils  and 
continue  to  carry  on  the  siege  of  A rka. 

In  order  to  seek  the  provisions  so  necessary  to  their  existence,  a  force 
of  a  hundred  knights  and  two  companies  consisting  of  two  hundred 
foot  soldiers,  under  command  of  Raymond  Pilet,  left  this  camp  and 
went  out  on  a  foraging  expedition.  They  proceeded  as  far  as  the  city 
of  Antarados,  commonly  known  as  Tortosa,  which  is  about  twenty  miles 
from  Arka. 

Antarados  [Tortosa]  lies  on  the  seacoast.  About  two  miles  away  is  a 
small  island  where  in  earlier  times  was  the  ancient  city  of  Arados,  re¬ 
nowned  through  many  ages.  Ezekiel  the  prophet  mentions  this  place 
when  he  is  writing  to  the  prince  of  Tyre:  “The  inhabitants  of  Zidon  and 
Arvad  were  thy  mariners.”  And  again:  “The  men  of  Arvad,  with 
thine  army,  were  upon  thy  walls  round  about.”  The  place  now  under 
discussion  derived  its  name  from  this  earlier  city,  being  called  Antara¬ 
dos  because  it  lay  over  against  that  other  city  Arados.  Both  these  places 
are  in  the  province  of  Phoenicia  and  had  one  and  the  same  founder, 
Aradius,  the  youngest  [sic]  son  of  Canaan,  the  son  of  Ham,  the  son  of 
Noah. 

The  detachment  of  the  count’s  army  just  mentioned  proceeded  to 
Tortosa  and  made  a  vigorous  attack  upon  it.  The  citizens  resisted  with 
great  spirit,  however,  and  the  Christians  did  not  succeed  in  accomplish¬ 
ing  much,  so,  as  night  was  coming  on,  they  decided  to  put  off  further 
operations  till  morning.  When  reinforced  by  their  comrades,  who  were 
to  follow  the  next  day,  they  hoped  to  be  stronger  for  the  second  attack. 
But  the  citizens,  fearing  that  during  the  night  additional  forces  would 
arrive  which,  in  the  end,  they  would  not  be  able  to  withstand,  left  the 
city  with  their  wives  and  children  and  all  their  households  and  fled  to 
the  mountains  for  safety. 

At  break  of  dawn,  the  Christians  took  arms,  entirely  ignorant  of  the 
events  of  the  night.  With  shouts  of  cheer  to  one  another,  they  pro¬ 
ceeded  to  the  city  to  continue  the  assault  of  the  previous  day.  But  a 
nearer  approach  showed  that  the  place  was  empty.  Without  fear,  there¬ 
fore,  they  entered  boldly  and  were  rewarded  by  finding  quantities  of 
provisions  and  other  spoils.  Laden  with  plunder  to  their  heart’s  con- 

Eze.  27  :  8.  Eze.  27  :  1 1. 


DISSENSION  AMONG  CRUSADERS 


320 

tentj  they  returned  to  camp  and  recounted  to  their  comrades  all  that 
had  happened  to  them  while  away.  The  success  of  this  expedition 
brought  great  joy  to  the  entire  army. 

16.  Duke  Godjrey  arrives  at  Laodiceay  accomf anted  by  the 
count  of  Flanders  and  the  rest  of  the  forces.  He  effects  the 
release  of  Guinemer  from  frison  and  restores  his  fleet, 
Bohemond  accompanies  the  forces  on  their  departure  as  far 
as  Laodicea, 

About  the  beginning  of  March,  as  the  day  set  for  resuming  the  pil¬ 
grimage  approached,  the  Christians  who  had  remained  at  Antioch  be¬ 
gan  to  exert  great  pressure  to  induce  the  chiefs  to  start.  Urgently  they 
besought  Godfrey,  duke  of  Lorraine,  Robert,  count  of  Flanders,  and 
the  other  chief  to  set  out  on  the  march  and  lead  forward  the  people  who 
so  eagerly  longed  to  fulfil  their  vows.  They  cited  the  steadfast  loyalty 
of  the  count  of  Toulouse,  the  duke  of  Normandy,  and  Tancred  and 
praised  the  kindly  attitude  which  those  leaders  had  shown  toward  the 
people  of  God  in  thus  leading  them  faithfully  for  many  days  on  the 
way  of  the  Lord. 

By  these  words  and  others  of  similar  import,  the  leaders  just  men¬ 
tioned  were  also  spurred  to  action.  The  baggage  was  arranged  and  all 
things  necessary  for  the  march  made  ready.  With  them  they  led  the 
entire  body  of  knights  and  foot  soldiers,  all  of  whom  were  filled  with 
ardent  desire  to  proceed  on  the  way  to  Jerusalem.  On  March  i,  twenty- 
five  thousand  gallant  men,  splendidly  armed,  assembled  at  Laodicea  in 
Syria,  under  the  leaders  named  above.  Bohemond  and  his  army  ac¬ 
companied  them  as  far  as  Laodicea.  He  could  not  attend  them  further, 
however,  nor  could  he  remain  longer  at  that  place,  lest  he  might, 
without  good  reason,  be  neglecting  the  city  of  Antioch,  so  recently 
acquired.  The  conquered  city,  surrounded  by  enemies  as  it  was,  could 
not  be  left  undefended,  even  temporarily.^®  Yet,  mindful  of  his  alli¬ 
ance  with  the  other  chiefs  and  of  the  friendships  which  he  had  formed 
with  them  while  on  the  way  of  the  Lord,  the  prince  accompanied  them 

Bohemond’s  chief  concern  was  doubtless  about  the  Greeks,  who  continued  to 
claim  Antioch  under  the  terms  of  the  ag^reement  made  with  Alexius.  This  is  indicated 
by  the  letter  which  he,  thoug-h  in  the  name  of  all  the  leaders,  wrote  to  Pope  Urban  II 
(see  H.  Hagenmeyer,  Efts  tula  e  et  cliartae  ad  historiam  p-imi  belli  sacrt  sfectantes 
quae  sufersunt  aevo  aequalis  ac  genuinae^  no.  xvi,  translated  in  A.  C.  Krey,  The  First 
Crusade y  p.  195). 


DISSENSION  AMONG  CRUSADERS 


321 

as  far  as  Laodicea.  With  much  devotiouj  he  showed  them  all  possible 
courtesy  and  kindness,  that  the  memory  of  him  might  abide  with  them 
constantly  after  they  were  separated  from  one  another.  At  Laodicea  he 
parted  from  the  host.  Amid  tearful  sighs  of  regret,  he  saluted  the 
chiefs,  took  leave,  and  started  back  to  resume  diligent  care  of  the  city 
entrusted  to  him. 

Laodicea  is  a  noble  city  on  the  seacoast  and  dates  from  ancient  times. 
It  had  Christian  inhabitants  and  was  the  only  city  of  Syria  which  was 
under  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Greek  emperor.  Hither  had  come  one 
Guinemer  of  Boulogne,  who,  as  was  mentioned,  had  earlier  landed 
with  his  fleet  at  Tarsus  of  Cilicia,  while  Baldwin,  the  duke’s  brother, 

r 

was  holding  that  city.  Guinemer  had  made  an  unsuccessful  attempt  to 
storm  Laodicea  and  bring  it  under  his  power.  His  forces  were  insuffi¬ 
cient,  however,  and  he  was  seized  by  the  townspeople  and  thrown  into 
prison  with  practically  all  his  people.  Because  this  man  had  come  from 
the  land  of  Godfrey’s  father  and  had,  furthermore,  rendered  honor¬ 
able  service  to  his  brother  Baldwin  at  Tarsus,  the  duke  begged  the  gov¬ 
ernor  and  chief  men  to  release  him.  The  Laodiceans  did  not  venture  to 
oppose  the  word  of  the  duke  in  anything.  They  released  Guinemer 
with  all  his  comrades  and  surrendered  to  the  duke  the  fleet  in  which 
these  people  had  arrived.  Godfrey  at  once  restored  Guinemer  to  the 
command  of  his  vessels  and  directed  him  to  follow  his  own  advance 
on  land  with  equal  course  by  sea.  These  orders  were  obeyed.^® 

17*  The  duke  with  his  army  invests  Gabulum^  but  the  machi¬ 
nations  of  the  count  of  Toulouse  force  him  to  abandon 
the  siege.  He  hurries  to  Arka  and  joins  the  other  leaders. 

The  siege  of  that  city  is  unsuccessful. 

The  army  then  set  out  from  Laodicea  of  Syria,  reinforced  by  those 
Christians  who  were  found  in  that  city.  From  Antioch  and  Cilicia  and 
the  cities  in  that  vicinity  came  others  who  had  been  unable  to  leave 
earlier  on  account  of  private  affairs.  These  too  joined  the  host.  They 
followed  the  shore  route  as  far  as  the  city  of  Gabulum  [Jabala],  also 
known  as  Gibelin,  twelve  miles  from  Laodicea.  Here  the  camp  was 
placed  so  as  to  encircle  the  city,  and  siege  operations  were  carried  on 
for  some  time.  Finally  the  governor  in  charge,  a  procurator  of  the 
caliph  of  Egypt  (for  this  was  the  first  coast  city  subject  to  the  power  of 

See  Book  III,  note  23, 


DISSENSION  AMONG  CRUSADERS 


322 

the  Egyptians),^®  offered  the  duke  six  thousand  pieces  of  gold,  be¬ 
sides  numerous  giftSj  if  he  would  abandon  the  siege.  When  he  found 
that  Godfrey  scorned  his  sordid  gifts  and  could  not  be  bribed,  he  turned 
his  attention  to  other  schemes.  He  dispatched  messengers  to  the  count 
of  Toulouse,  on  whose  zealous  interest  he  counted,  and  offered  him  the 
same  amount  of  money  if  he  would  extricate  the  city  from  the  hands  of 
the  duke.  It  is  said  that  the  count  secretly  accepted  the  bribe.  He  then 
pretended  that  a  vast  horde  of  enemies  was  about  to  descend  from  the 
land  of  Persia  to  avenge  the  wrongs  which  their  nation  had  suffered  at 
Antioch  under  the  leadership  of  Karbuqa.  He  alleged  that  they  were 
preparing  to  renew  that  war  with  forces  far  larger  than  before.  Accord¬ 
ing  to  his  story,  he  had  received  reliable  and  detailed  information  about 
these  facts  from  messengers  whose  credibility  could  in  no  way  be 
doubted. 

He  then  sent  a  delegation  headed  by  the  venerable  bishop  of  Albara 
to  the  duke  and  the  count  of  Flanders  with  letters  earnestly  begging 
them  to  abandon  the  siege  of  Jabala  and  hasten,  with  brotherly  sym¬ 
pathy,  to  avert  the  common  peril.  As  soon  as  the  leaders  learned  that 
their  brethren  were,  to  all  appearance,  threatened  with  such  danger, 
they  immediately  raised  the  siege  and  set  forth  in  simplicity  of  heart. 
At  a  rapid  pace  they  passed  through  Valenia,  a  maritime  city  lying  be¬ 
low  the  castle  of  Margat,  and  then  through  Maraclea,  which  is  the  first 
Phoenician  city  as  one  comes  from  the  north.  Next  they  arrived  at 
Antarados,  also  called  Tortosa,  which  belongs  to  the  province  named 
above  and  is  similarly  situated  on  the  seashore.  This  place  they  found 
completely  deserted.  They  looked  with  admiration  at  a  neighboring 
island  opposite  the  city  on  the  west,  where  they  found  some  of  our 
ships  lying  in  a  convenient  harbor.  From  Tortosa  the  Christians  took 
advantage  of  the  shortest  routes  and,  in  a  few  days,  arrived  with  all 
the  host  before  the  walls  of  Arka.  Tancred  came  out  to  meet  them 
and  give  them  the  full  history  of  the  count’s  treachery.“^  After  listen- 

Most  of  the  seacoast  towns  had  been  recovered  from  the  Turks  by  the  Egyptians 
in  1089.  The  Turks,  who  had  no  navy,  had,  in  fact,  not  been  able  to  capture  all  of 
the  seaports,  even  though  they  captured  the  mainland  beyond  Jerusalem  (see  P.  K. 
Hitti,  History  of  the  ArabSy  pp.  634—35). 

The  inclusion  of  these  facts,  so  uncomplimentary  to  Count  Raymond,  suggests 
that  they  were  w^ritten  before  1174  and  that  they  were  overlooked  in  William’s  later 
revisions.  The  harshness  of  this  judgment  is  tempered  in  later  references  written  after 
1175.  Whether  he  was  led  to  modify  his  judgment  as  a  result  of  greater  experience 
in  affairs  of  state  or  as  a  result  of  his  friendship  with  Raymond  III  of  Tripoli,  which 
began  late  in  1 1 74,  is  not  clear. 


DISSENSION  AMONG  CRUSADERS 


323 

ing  to  this  report,  the  leaders  placed  their  camp  a  little  apart,  at  some 
distance  from  the  tents  of  the  forces  which  had  preceded  them. 

The  count  soon  perceived  that  the  hearts  of  the  other  chiefs  were 
estranged  from  him.  Accordingly,  he  sent  gifts  and  made  a  great  ef¬ 
fort  to  propitiate  them.  As  a  result,  all  the  chiefs  were  shortly  after¬ 
wards  reconciled  to  him,  with  the  exception  of  Tancred,  who  continued 
to  bring  grave  charges  against  him.  All  the  forces  were  now  united  as 
one  body  around  Arka. 

For  many  days  before  the  duke’s  arrival,  the  count  had  put  forth  all 
his  strength  in  vain  before  this  city.  Now,  however,  with  the  coming 
of  the  other  leaders,  he  hoped  that  the  city  would  be  easily  taken  and 
the  troublesome  siege  brought  to  the  desired  end.  The  result  proved 
contrary  to  his  hope,  however,  for  neither  before  nor  after  the  arrival 
of  the  troops  was  the  favor  of  the  Lord  with  the  Christians  in  that 
undertaking.  Again  and  again  they  assailed  the  city  and  invented  new 
methods  of  injuring  the  besieged  by  breaching  the  wall  or  by  fresh 
assaults,  but  just  so  often  were  they  checked  by  new  obstacles  and  all 
their  efforts  brought  to  naught.  Their  work  was  frustrated  and  ren¬ 
dered  of  no  avail,  and  they  were  plainly  given  to  understand  that,  as 
far  as  the  siege  of  Arka  was  concerned,  divine  favor  had  been  with¬ 
drawn  from  them.  All  in  vain  was  it  that  the  people  were  dying  and  il¬ 
lustrious  noblemen  sacrificing  their  lives  to  no  purpose. 

By  an  unlucky  chance,  two  illustrious  men  of  high  rank  met  the 
same  fate  before  the  walls  of  Arka.  Anselm  de  Ribemont,^“  a  man 
indefatigable  in  the  art  of  war  and  worthy  of  being  remembered  for¬ 
ever,  and  Pons  de  Balazune,-'^  a  nobleman  of  high  rank  and  a  friend  of 
the  count  of  Toulouse,  both  perished  there  from  the  blow  of  a  stone 
missile. 

Furthermore,  the  people  were  being  detained  at  Arka  against  their 
will,  for  their  one  desire  was  to  finish  the  pilgrimage  on  which  they  had 
started.  They  took  no  interest  in  the  work  and  cared  little  for  the  result 
of  the  siege,  especially  after  the  arrival  of  the  duke.  Even  the  count’s 

Anselm  de  Ribemont  was  a  vassal  of  the  archbishop  of  Rheims  and  leader  of 
a  considerable  force  from  that  region.  Two  of  his  letters  to  Archbishop  Manasses 
about  the  progress  of  the  crusade  have  been  preserved  (see  H.  £/>.,  Viii  and  XV,  trans¬ 
lated  in  Krey,  The  First  Crusade} . 

Pons  of  Balazun  or  Vallon,  a  vassal  of  the  bishop  of  Viviers,  had  agreed  to 
collaborate  with  Raymond  d’Aguilers  in  writing  a  history  of  the  crusade.  His  name 
appears  with  that  of  Raymond  at  the  head  of  the  latter’s  book.  How  much,  if  any, 
part  he  took  in  the  writing  is  not  known  (see  C.  Klein,  Raimund  vo  n  A  gutter s^  fassim). 


324  DISSENSION  AMONG  CRUSADERS 

servitors  and  the  intimate  friends  who  had  come  in  his  retinue  were 
kept  there  unwillingly  and  against  the  dictates  of  conscience  by  the 
count’s  strong  will.  They  finally  purposely  withdrew  in  the  hope  that 
the  count  might  be  induced  by  sheer  weariness  to  follow  the  other 
leaders  on  the  way  of  the  Lord. 

1 8.  T/ie  subject  of  the  Lance  of  the  Lord  again  arises,  Peter y 
the  dlscoverery  walks  through  the  raging  flames  but  dies  a 
few  days  later. 

At  this  timCj  the  matter  of  the  Lance  which  had  been  found  at  An¬ 
tioch  again  came  up.  Was  it  in  truth  that  which  had  drawn  forth  blood 
and  water  from  the  Lord’s  side,  or  was  the  whole  thing  a  fraud?  The 
people  had  grave  doubts  on  the  subject,  and  the  leaders  also  were  much 
perplexed.  Some  declared  that  this  was  the  actual  weapon  which  had 
pierced  the  side  of  the  Lord  when  He  hung  on  the  Cross  and  that  by 
divine  purpose  it  had  been  revealed  for  the  inspiration  of  the  people. 
Others  said  that  it  was  merely  a  proof  of  the  count’s  cunning,  a  fraud¬ 
ulent  trick  devised  for  his  own  advantage.  The  chief  author  of  this 
controversy  was  one  Arnulf,  the  friend  and  chaplain  of  the  count  of 
Normandy.  He  was  a  learned  man,  but  of  immoral  life,  a  man  who 
delighted  to  stir  up  discord.-^  Of  him  much  will  be  said  in  the  follow¬ 
ing  chapters. 

For  a  long  time  the  pilgrims  discussed  this  matter,  hesitating  be¬ 
tween  different  opinions.  At  length  to  convince  the  people  and  remove 
all  doubt,  Peter,  the  man  who  claimed  that  the  revelation  had  been 
made  to  him,  directed  that  a  great  fire  be  kindled.  With  the  help  of 
God,  he  would  convince  the  incredulous  through  actual  ordeal  by  fire 
that  no  trick  or  underhanded  practice  had  been  employed  in  the  matter. 
He  would  prove,  on  the  contrary,  that  by  divine  revelation  the  thing 
had  been  brought  to  light  for  the  consolation  of  the  people. 

A  huge  fire  was  accordingly  lighted,  the  heat  from  which  was  suffi¬ 
cient  to  terrify  those  standing  around  it.  On  the  Friday  before  the  Holy 
Easter  of  the  Lord,  on  that  day  when,  as  we  read,  the  Saviour  of  the 
world  suffered  for  our  salvation,  the  entire  people  assembled,  from 

Arnulf  de  Cheques  had  been  a  teacher  of  the  liberal  arts  in  Normandy,  where 
Cecilia,  oldest  daug^hter  of  William  the  Conqueror  and  sister  of  Robert  of  Normandy, 
was  one  of  his  pupils.  Another  pupil  was  the  knight  Ralph  of  Caen,  who  wrote  the 
panegyric  of  Tancred  (for  his  early  career  see  C.  W,  David,  Robert  Curthose^  App.  C). 


I 


DISSENSION  AMONG  CRUSADERS 


325 

the  least  even  unto  the  greatest,  that  a  complete  test  of  that  important 
question  might  be  made.  The  man  who,  of  his  own  accord,  was  about  to 
undergo  so  dangerous  an  experiment  was  called  Peter  Bartholomew. 
He  was  a  cleric,  of  slight  education,  and,  as  far  as  human  observation 
goes,  a  simple  and  sincere  man.  He  first  addressed  the  legions  as¬ 
sembled  about  him  3  then,  carrying  in  his  hand  the  Lance  of  the  Lord, 
he  passed  through  the  fire,  to  all  appearance  uninjured. 

This  act  of  his,  however,  not  only  failed  to  remove  doubt  from  the 
minds  of  the  populace,  but  it  raised  a  still  more  serious  question,  for 
within  a  few  days  Peter  died.  Since,  before  the  ordeal,  he  had  been 
apparently  hale  and  hearty,  some  people  declared  that  the  trial  by  fire 
had  caused  his  premature  death,  that,  by  lending  his  aid  to  the  decep¬ 
tion,  he  had  brought  about  his  own  destruction.  Others  maintained 
that  he  had  emerged  from  the  fire  untouched  and  uninjured,  but  that 
the  crowds,  in  the  fervor  of  their  enthusiasm,  had  rushed  upon  him 
with  such  violence  as  to  crush  and  seriously  injure  him.  This  they  de¬ 
clared  was  the  real  cause  of  his  death. 

Thus  the  matter  over  which  the  controversy  had  arisen  was  not 
conclusively  settled  but,  on  the  contrary,  was  left  still  more  uncertain.^^ 

19.  The  envoys  who  had  been  sent  to  Egyft  by  our  leaders 
return. 

About  this  time,  our  envoys  who  had  been  sent  down  into  Egypt  re¬ 
turned  to  the  leaders.  They  had  gone  thither  at  the  request  of  the 
Egyptian  legates  who  came  to  the  siege  of  Antioch  by  the  orders  of  the 
caliph  of  Egypt,  as  related  before.  For  a  year  these  envoys  had  been 
forcibly  detained  in  that  country,  both  by  violence  and  strategy.  With 
them  came  envoys  from  the  prince  of  the  Egyptians  bearing  messages 
whose  general  import  was  far  different  from  that  of  the  former  em- 

At  that  time  they  had  tried  most  earnestly  to  gain  the  good  will 
and  assistance  of  our  leaders  against  the  overweening  arrogance  of  the 

Count  Raymond  clung  to  his  belief  in  the  Lance  and  took  the  relic  along  to 
Constantinople,  where  he  gave  it  to  Emperor  Alexius.  It  was  displayed  there  among 
the  most  highly  prized  relics,  and  King  Amaury  was  to  see  it  there  later  (see  Book  XX, 
note  41),  No  official  ruling  was  made  by  the  church  regarding  it.  Raymond  d’Aguilers, 
the  count’s  chaplain,  had  taken  a  deep  personal  interest  in  Peter  Bartholomew,  with 
whom  he  had  shared  his  tent  after  the  discovery  of  the  Lance  at  Antioch.  The  chroni¬ 
cle  which  he  wrote  was  in  a  real  sense  a  brief  for  the  authenticity  of  the  Lance  and 
has  helped  to  keep  the  matter  an  open  question. 


326  DISSENSION  AMONG  CRUSADERS 

Turks  and  Persians.  Now,  however,  their  attitude  was  entirely  changed. 
They  seemed  to  imply  that  they  were  conferring  a  great  favor  on  the 
Christians  by  allowing  unarmed  pilgrims  to  go  to  Jerusalem  in  groups 
of  two  or  three  hundred  and  return  in  safety  after  completing  their 
prayers. 

The  leaders  of  the  Christian  forces  regarded  this  message  as  an 
insult.  They  forced  the  envoys  to  return  with  the  answer  that  the  army 
would  not  consent  to  go  thither  in  small  detachments,  according  to  the 
conditions  proposed.  On  the  contrary,  it  would  march  on  Jerusalem  as 
one  united  host  and  threaten  the  kingdom  of  their  master. 

The  reason  for  this  change  of  attitude  on  the  part  of  the  Egyptians 
rose  out  of  conditions  which  developed  after  our  victory  at  Antioch. 
At  that  time  the  affairs  of  the  Turks  were  in  a  critical  condition,  their 
military  power  was  shattered  throughout  the  entire  Orient,  and  their 
fame,  which  had  been  exalted  to  the  skies,  was  utterly  cast  down  to 
earth.  Whenever  they  came  into  conflict  with  other  nations  they  were 
uniformly  defeated  and  had  the  worst  of  every  engagement.  Because 
of  this  situation  the  power  of  the  king  of  Egypt  was  gradually  becom¬ 
ing  greater  than  that  of  the  Turks.  Then  through  the  efforts  of  a  cer¬ 
tain  Emireius  [Al-Afdal],-^  commander  in  chief  of  the  Egyptian  army, 
they  lost  Jerusalem,  the  city  which,  thirty  years  before,  they  had,  in 
their  turn,  wrested  from  the  Egyptians. 

The  Egyptians  perceived  that  the  power  of  their  enemies,  which 
they  had  formerly  dreaded  as  superior  to  their  own,  had  been  brought 
low  by  the  work  of  the  Christians  and  was  now  lying  prostrate  and 
broken  in  the  depths.  Hence  it  was  that  they  scorned  the  aid  of  our  peo¬ 
ple  which  formerly  they  had  so  earnestly  sought. 

20.  Envoys  from  the  emferor  arrive  to  comflaln  of  Bohemond* 

They  announce  the  aff roach  of  the  emferor.  The  leaders 
disagree.  A  battle  is  fought  with  the  feofle  of  Tripoli. 

The  enemy  Is  defeated.  The  Christians  return  In  triumph 
to  the  camp. 

Envoys  from  the  emperor  of  Constantinople  had  also  arrived.  They 
were  the  bearers  of  serious  complaints  concerning  the  conduct  of 

Al-Afdal,  whose  father  was  of  Armenian  birth,  became  vizier  of  the  caliph  in 
1095.  He  captured  Jerusalem  from  the  Turks  in  1098.  The  latter  had  held  it  since 
1071,  somewhat  less  than  thirty  years. 


DISSENSION  AMONG  CRUSADERS  327 

Bohemond.  They  claimed  that,  contrary  to  the  terms  of  the  agreement 
and  the  oath  of  fidelity  which  he  had  taken,  he  was  presuming  to 
retain  possession  of  Antioch.  Standing  in  the  presence  of  the  chiefs,  they 
alleged  that  all  who  had  passed  through  Constantinople  had  taken  an 
oath  of  fealty  to  their  lord  and  had  promised,  with  hand  on  the  holy 
scriptures,  that  they  would  not  venture  to  retain  any  fort  or  city  which 

itself,  but 

that  they  would,  on  the  contrary,  at  once  surrender  to  the  emperor’s 
control  all  such  places  that  they  might  take.  Concerning  the  other 
provisions  of  the  treaty  they  had  no  recollection  whatever. 

It  is  quite  clear  that  an  agreement  of  this  nature  was  made  between 
the  emperor  and  the  leaders  at  Constantinople.  At  the  end  of  the 
treaty,  however,  the  stipulation  had  been  added  that  Alexius  was  to  fol¬ 
low  them  without  delay,  with  all  his  retinue  and  a  large  force  of  sol¬ 
diers,  and  was  to  lend  his  assistance  as  their  needs  might  demand.  Ac¬ 
cordingly,  by  unanimous  consent,  the  leaders  responded  to  the  envoys’ 
claim  that  the  emperor  had  been  the  first  to  violate  the  terms  agreed 
upon.  Hence,  it  was  only  right  that  he  should  suffer  the  loss  of  what¬ 
ever  might  be  due  him  under  the  terms  of  the  treaty,  for  it  would  be 
unfair  that  faith  be  kept  with  one  who  tried  to  act  contrary  to  the  pact. 
According  to  the  agreement,  the  emperor  was  bound  to  assemble  his 
armies  and  follow  the  leaders  immediately.  He  was  to  arrange  that 
constant  opportunity  be  given  the  pilgrims  to  trade  with  vessels  coming 
by  sea  and  that  an  abundance  of  wares  be  offered  for  sale  to  them  all 
along  their  line  of  march.  Both  these  provisions  he  had  fraudulently 
neglected  to  fulfil,  although  he  could  have  done  so  without  difficulty. 
They  desired,  therefore,  that  the  action  which  they  had  taken  concern¬ 
ing  Antioch  be  considered  permanent  and  inviolate,  since  it  was  appar¬ 
ent  that  they  had  acted  within  their  rights.  It  was  their  will,  moreover, 
that  he  to  whom  it  had  been  conceded  by  the  willing  liberality  of  all 
should  possess  it  by  rightful  inheritance  forever. 

The  emperor’s  envoys  made  earnest  efforts  to  persuade  the  army  to 
wait  till  the  arrival  of  their  lord,  which  they  declared  would  be  about 
the  first  of  July.  They  added  that  he  would  give  ample  gifts  to  each 
of  the  chiefs  and  would  also  furnish  liberal  wages  to  the  people,  which 
would  enable  them  to  support  themselves  with  honor.  A  conference 
over  this  matter  was  held,  in  which  the  leaders  differed  radically  from 
one  another.  The  count  of  Toulouse  thought  it  would  be  to  their  ad- 


had  once  belonged  to  the  empire,  not  excepting  Jerusalem 


328  DISSENSION  AMONG  CRUSADERS 

vantage  to  wait  for  the  coming  of  this  great  prince.  He  advanced  this 
opinion  either  because  it  was  his  actual  belief  or  because,  under  that 
pretext,  he  was  trying  to  detain  the  leaders  and  the  people  until  he  had 
conquered  the  city  which  he  was  then  besieging.  For  he  felt  that  it 
would  reflect  disgrace  and  ignominy  upon  him  if  he  should  fail  in  his 
enterprise  and  be  unable  to  carry  out  his  purpose. 

Others  held  sentiments  exactly  the  opposite  of  these.  They  con¬ 
tended  that  it  would  be  far  wiser  to  resume  without  delay  the  pilgrim- 

r 

age  on  which  they  had  started  and  thus  bring  to  a  successful  end  the 
enterprise  on  behalf  of  which  they  had  suffered  so  many  hardships.  The 
judgment  of  these  latter  was  that  it  would  be  better  to  avoid  the  cun¬ 
ning  tricks  and  subtle  words  of  the  emperor,  which  they  had  so  often 
experienced,  rather  than  to  involve  themselves  anew  in  the  labyrinth 
of  his  shrewd  evasions,  from  which  later  they  might  find  it  difficult  to 
extricate  themselves. 

Over  this  matter  a  disagreement  arose  among  the  leaders,  and,  as 
their  wishes  were  totally  diverse,  it  was  impossible  to  bring  them  into 
harmony. 

Some  time  before  this  the  governor  of  Tripoli  had  offered  an  im¬ 
mense  sum  of  money  to  induce  the  Christians  to  raise  the  siege  and  re¬ 
move  the  troops  from  his  land.  Now,  when  he  learned  of  the  division 
that  had  occurred  among  the  leaders  of  the  army,  he  not  only  declined 
to  give  the  money  which  he  had  promised  but,  on  his  own  initiative, 
proposed  to  meet  the  Christians  and  try  the  fortune  of  war  with  them. 

The  result  was  that,  by  common  consent,  they  decided  to  declare 
battle.  The  bishop  of  Albara  and  some  of  the  other  chief  men  promi¬ 
nent  in  the  siege  were  left  to  guard  the  camp  [at  Arka] .  The  rest  drew 
up  their  lines  in  proper  battle  array  and  led  their  troops  toward  Tripoli. 

They  found  the  governor  with  the  entire  body  of  citizens  awaiting 
their  coming.  Both  cavalry  and  infantry  forces  were  drawn  up  intrep¬ 
idly  in  battle  formation  before  the  city.  For  more  than  two  successive 
months  the  count  of  Toulouse  had  been  trying  in  vain  to  take  Arka  but 
had  accomplished  nothing.  Hence  the  people  of  Tripoli  were  begin¬ 
ning  to  regard  the  Christians  with  contempt,  and,  as  time  went  on, 
they  feared  them  less  and  less.  They  believed  that  the  famous  valor  for 
which  these  people  had  been  so  renowned  had  disappeared,  for  there 
was  evidence  of  a  falling  away  from  the  resolute  courage  which  they 
had  been  wont  to  show. 


DISSENSION  AMONG  CRUSADERS  329 

When  the  Christians  reached  Tripoli  and  saw  the  enemy^s  forces 
ranged  against  them,  they  at  once  made  a  furious  charge  and,  at  the 
first  attack,  threw  the  opposing  cohorts  into  disorder  and  put  them  to 
flight.  Their  bold  persistence  forced  the  citizens  to  flee  for  refuge  into 
the  city,  whither  they  were  closely  pursued  by  the  Christians.  Seven 
hundred  of  the  enemy  were  killed,  but  our  forces  lost  only  three  or 
four  men.  There,  on  April  10,  the  army  celebrated  the  feast  of  Easter,^'^ 

21.  The  governor  of  Trifoli  obtains  a  treaty  from  the 
Christians y  at  the  cost  of  much  money  and  many  gifts.  By 
the  advice  of  the  faithful  living  in  those  farts y  the  leaders 
choose  the  shore  route. 

This  victory  won,  they  again  returned  to  the  camp.  Here,  however, 
the  entire  populace  at  once  loudly  demanded  that  the  leaders  abandon 
the  ruinous  siege  and  start  on  the  road  to  Jerusalem,  whither  all  so 
ardently  desired  to  go.  This  obstinate  persistence  finally  brought  about 
the  desired  result.  To  satisfy  the  people,  the  duke,  the  counts  of  Flan¬ 
ders  and  Normandy,  and  Tancred  decided  to  burn  the  camp  and 
abandon  the  siege  of  Arka.  The  count  of  Toulouse  was  most  reluctant 
to  give  up  his  purpose  and  strove  with  all  his  might  against  the  deci¬ 
sion.  In  spite  of  his  protest,  however,  the  march  was  directed  toward 
Tripoli,  that  the  pilgrimage  might  be  resumed.  Among  those  who  were 
most  active  in  bringing  this  about  were  some  who  had  been  with  Ray¬ 
mond's  camp  from  the  beginning.  Now,  however,  they  left  him  and 
zealously  followed  the  leaders  just  mentioned.^® 

When  the  count  discovered  this  and  realized  that  neither  by  prom¬ 
ises  nor  by  entreaties  could  they  be  recalled,  he  made  a  virtue  of  neces¬ 
sity  and  very  unwillingly  followed  the  others.  After  a  march  of  about 
five  miles,  they  reached  Tripoli  and  established  their  camp  before  that 
city.  The  governor  of  the  place,  who  had  charge  of  the  caliph’s  affairs 
in  that  region,  now  laid  aside  the  haughty  attitude  which  he  had  dis¬ 
played  a  short  time  before,  when  he  had  tried  to  treat  with  our  leaders 
on  equal  terms.  He  sent  a  delegation  to  undertake  peace  negotiations. 
He  offered  fifteen  thousand  pieces  of  gold  besides  gifts  of  horses  and 

Hagenmeyer  would  date  the  battle  somewhat  later,  about  April  i8,  1099,  and 
place  the  arrival  of  the  Egyptian  envoys  after,  instead  of  before,  this  battle  (see  H. 
Chron.j  nos.  366,  370). 

This  statement  is  fully  supported  by  Raymond  d’Aguilers.  The  start  of  the  final 
journey  to  Jerusalem  is  dated  May  13,  1099, 


330  DISSENSION  AMONG  CRUSADERS 

mules,  silks  and  precious  vases,  and  also  promised  to  restore  all  the 
Christian  captives  whom  he  was  holding  in  his  power.  On  these  terms, 
the  leaders  consented  to  leave  the  province  for  which  he  was  responsi¬ 
ble.  They  furthermore  agreed  to  spare  on  the  march  three  cities  which 
were  under  his  rule,  namely,  Arka,  Tripoli,  and  Biblos  [Jubail]  with 
their  dependencies.  In  addition  to  the  gifts  already  made,  he  sent  the 
Christians  flocks  and  herds  and  a  bountiful  supply  of  provisions,  that 
they  might  not  be  driven,  through  lack  of  food,  to  despoil  the  outlying 
fields  and  harm  the  farmers  who  were  cultivating  the  soil. 

High  up  on  the  lofty  range  of  Lebanon,  whose  towering  summits 
rise  far  above  those  cities  on  the  east  which  I  have  just  mentioned,  lived 
certain  Syrian  Christians.-®  These  people  had  come  down  to  offer  their 
congratulations  to  the  pilgrims  and  to  pay  them  their  tribute  of  broth¬ 
erly  affection.  Since  they  were  well  acquainted  with  the  country  all 
about,  the  leaders  called  these  people  and  consulted  with  them,  as  ex¬ 
perienced  men,  about  the  safest  and  easiest  road  to  Jerusalem.  In  all 
good  faith  the  Syrians  carefully  considered  the  advantages  and  the 
length  of  the  various  routes  leading  thither  and  finally  recommended 
the  shore  road  as  the  most  direct.  By  following  this,  the  pilgrims  would 
also  be  able  to  have  the  assistance  of  their  ships,  which  would  follow 
the  army  as  it  advanced. 

The  Christian  fleet  included  not  only  the  ships  of  Guinemer  and  his 
companions  which  had  come  from  Flanders,  Normandy,  and  England, 
as  we  have  said,  but  also  vessels  from  Genoa,  Venice,  and  Greece.  These 
often  came  from  Cyprus,  Rhodes,  and  other  islands,  laden  with  articles 
of  commerce  which  were  of  great  use  to  our  legions. 

In  addition  to  the  Syrian  Christians  just  mentioned,  the  pilgrims 
took  as  guides  for  the  march  persons  from  the  household  of  the  gover¬ 
nor  of  Tripoli.  They  proceeded  along  the  seacoast,  with  the  Lebanon 
range  on  their  left,  and  after  passing  Jubail  encamped  on  the  bank  of 
a  river  near  a  place  called  Maus.  There  they  rested  for  a  day,  while 
waiting  for  the  host  of  feeble  followers  and  those  who  could  not  keep 
up  with  the  pace  of  the  rest. 

These  were  Maronite  Christians  whose  later  affiliation  with  the  Roman  church 
is  told  by  William  (see  Book  XXII,  chap,  viii). 


DISSENSION  AMONG  CRUSADERS 


331 


22.  A gcnn  they  resume  the  march  and  pass  through  the  cities 
on  the  seacoast.  They  come  to  Lydda  and  Ramlah. 

On  the  third  day  they  encamped  before  the  city  of  Beirut  on  the 
bank  of  a  river  which  flows  past  the  town.  The  governor  of  the  place 
offered  them  money  and  a  bountiful  supply  of  provisions,  to  induce 
them  to  spare  the  crops  and  trees,  and  there  they  rested  for  one  night. 
The  next  day  they  reached  Sidon,  where  they  stretched  their  tents  along 
the  river  bank  in  order  to  have  the  advantage  of  the  water.  For  some 
reason  unknown  to  me,  the  governor  of  this  city  showed  our  leaders  no 
courtesy  or  favor  but,  overconfident  and  in  entire  reliance  upon  his 
own  strength,  began  to  harass  the  army,  although  the  attempt  was  not 
very  successful.  At  length,  some  of  our  people,  provoked  by  the  at¬ 
tempted  attacks  of  the  citizens,  could  endure  it  no  longer.  They  charged 
upon  the  foe,  killed  a  number,  and  forced  the  rest  to  retire  into  the 
city.  The  result  was  that  the  night  was  passed  peacefully  in  camp  with¬ 
out  further  molestation  from  the  enemy.  When  morning  came,  it  was 
decided  to  remain  there  for  a  short  time,  that  the  people  might  have 
a  chance  to  recuperate  somewhat.  Some  of  the  light-armed  troops  were 
thereupon  dispatched  to  obtain  the  necessary  food  from  the  neighbor¬ 
ing  countryside.  With  one  exception,  all  returned  in  safety  and  brought 
with  them  a  large  supply  of  foodstuffs,  together  with  flocks  and  herds. 
Walter  de  Verra,  however,  did  not  come  back  with  the  rest,  but  went 
on  farther  in  quest  of  still  more  plunder.  What  untoward  fate  befell 
him  was  never  known,  but  he  did  not  appear  again,  and  the  uncertainty 
surrounding  his  end  caused  his  comrades  much  grief. 

The  first  part  of  the  route  on  the  succeeding  day  was  through  a  coun¬ 
try  generally  hilly.  At  last,  however,  they  came  into  more  level  land. 
They  passed  on  the  right  the  ancient  city  Sarepta  of  the  Sidonians,  the 
nurse  of  Elijah,  the  man  of  God.^^  They  then  crossed  the  intervening 
river  and  came  to  Tyre,  the  famous  capital  of  that  region  and  the 
ancient  home  of  Agenor  and  Cadmus.  At  this  place  they  established 
their  camp  near  the  famous  fountain  of  the  Gardens,  a  well  of  living 
waters,  the  wonder  of  the  world.^^  There,  in  the  extensive  gardens,  full 
of  all  kinds  of  agreeable  conveniences,  they  remained  that  night. 

On  the  morrow,  they  again  girded  themselves  for  the  march  and, 

30IKi.  17:9-10. 

This  fountain  is  more  fully  described  later  (see  Book  XIII,  chap.  3). 


DISSENSION  AMONG  CRUSADERS 


332 

after  surmounting  the  difficulties  of  the  narrow  pass  between  the  over¬ 
hanging  mountains  and  the  sea,  once  more  descended  into  the  plain 
near  the  city  of  Acre.  On  the  banks  of  a  river  flowing  by  the  city  they 
stretched  their  tents.  The  citizens  and  the  governor  of  Acre  offered 
them  gifts  and  also  provided  them  with  a  market  under  good  condi¬ 
tions.  The  latter  showed  himself  very  friendly  toward  the  leaders  and 
entered  into  an  agreement  with  them.  If  they  should  succeed  in  taking 
Jerusalem  and  could  maintain  themselves  in  the  kingdom  for  the  space 
of  twenty  days  thereafter,  or  could  defeat  the  Egyptian  forces,  he 
promised  to  resign  the  city  of  Acre  to  them  without  difficulty. 

From  Acre  they  marched  along  between  Mt.  Carmel  and  the  sea, 
with  Galilee  on  the  left,  until  they  came  to  Caesarea,  the  metropolis  of 
Palestina  Secunda,  known  of  old  as  the  Tower  of  Straton.  Here  they 
encamped  by  a  river  which  has  its  source  in  the  marshes  near  the  city, 
and  here,  less  than  two  miles  from  Caesarea,  on  May  28,  they  cele¬ 
brated  the  holy  day  of  Penecost.^^ 

On  the  third  day  thereafter,  the  pilgrims  resumed  their  tedious 
march.  Leaving  the  coastal  cities  of  Antipatris  and  Joppa  [Jaffa]  on 
the  right,  they  traversed  an  extensive  plain,  crossed  the  Eleutheria,  and 
came  to  Lydda,  which  is  Diospolis.  At  Lydda  is  still  shown  the  glorious 
tomb  of  the  illustrious  martyr  George,  whose  mortal  remains  are  be¬ 
lieved  to  repose  therein  in  the  Lord.  Here  to  honor  the  memory  of  this 
saint,  that  pious  and  orthodox  prince  of  the  Romans,  the  Emperor 
Justinian,  whose  name  is  ever  held  in  remembrance,  had,  with  zealous 
devotion,  caused  a  church  to  be  erected.^^  Shortly  before  the  Christians 
arrived,  however,  the  enemy,  in  anticipation  of  their  coming,  had  razed 
this  church  to  the  ground,  for  they  feared  lest  the  pilgrims  might  con¬ 
vert  the  long  beams  used  in  its  construction  into  machines  and  hurling 
engines  for  storming  the  city. 

Not  far  from  here,  as  our  leaders  learned,  there  was  a  noble  city 
called  Ramlah.  They,  accordingly,  sent  the  count  of  Flanders  with  five 
hundred  knights  to  ascertain  what  the  attitude  of  the  citizens  of  the 
place  was  and  what  proposals  they  intended  to  make.  The  reconnoiter- 

May  28—29,  1099. 

St.  George,  who  is  regarded  as  a  native  of  Lydda,  was  martyred,  according  to 
legend,  at  Nicomedia  April  23,  303.  He  is  a  patron  saint  of  the  region  around  Con¬ 
stantinople,  where  the  strait  was  named  in  his  honor  the  arm  of  St.  George.  He  was 
also  highly  esteemed  by  the  crusaders,  and  Robert  of  Flanders  is  said  to  have  refused 
rich  gifts  from  the  emperor  in  favor  of  a  relic  of  St.  George,  which  he  carried  along 
in  his  tent. 


DISSENSION  AMONG  CRUSADERS  333 

ing  party  drew  near  to  the  city,  and,  as  no  one  came  out  to  meet  them, 
they  entered  through  the  wide-open  gates  and  discovered  that  the 
place  was  utterly  deserted.  The  news  that  the  Christians  were  at  hand 
had  preceded  them,  and,  during  the  course  of  the  previous  night,  the 
citizens  had  departed  with  their  wives  and  children  and  all  their  house¬ 
holds,  so  that  the  city  was  empty.  The  count  at  once  dispatched  a  mes¬ 
senger  to  the  legions  with  this  news  and  advised  them  to  hasten  to  the 
city  without  delay.  Accordingly,  as  soon  as  their  customary  prayers 
had  been  made,  the  Christians  marched  on  to  Ramlah,  where  they 
remained  three  days,  in  the  full  enjoyment  of  corn,  wine,  and  oil. 

They  established  as  bishop  over  the  church  at  that  place  one  Robert, 
a  Norman  by  birth,  from  the  bishopric  of  Rouen.  To  him  they  granted, 
as  a  possession  forever,  the  cities  of  Lydda  and  Ramlah  with  their  out¬ 
lying  dependencies,  thus  dedicating  the  first  fruits  of  their  labors  with 
complete  devotion  to  the  illustrious  martyr  George.^^ 

23.  The  feofle  of  Jerusalem  fortify  that  city  with  great  care 
against  the  coming  of  the  Christians,  They  flace  therein 
valiant  men^  armSy  and  provisions ,  Most  of  the  Christian 
population  is  driven  out  of  the  city. 

Meanwhile  widespread  reports  had  warned  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusa¬ 
lem  of  our  approach.  They  knew  full  well  that  the  great  host  which 
was  said  to  be  drawing  near  had  but  one  aim  in  view,  namely,  to  gain 
possession  of  Jerusalem.  Accordingly,  they  applied  themselves  with 
the  utmost  diligence  and  zeal  to  fortifying  the  city.  They  vied  with  one 
another  in  collecting  and  bringing  into  the  city  the  necessary  food  and 
all  kinds  of  weapons,  as  well  as  wood,  iron,  and  steel — everything,  in 
short,  that  might  be  of  use  to  those  under  siege. 

During  the  course  of  that  same  year,  the  prince  of  Egypt  had  suc¬ 
ceeded  in  wresting  the  sovereignty  of  Jerusalem  from  the  Turks  and 
had  recovered  the  city.  As  soon  as  he  learned  that  our  army  had  left 
Antioch,  he  at  once  ordered  that  all  the  towers  and  walls  of  the  Holy 
City  be  repaired.  Moreover,  in  order  to  win  the  loyal  good  will  of  the 
citizens,  he  directed  that  generous  payments  be  given  them  from  his 
own  treasury  and  remitted  in  perpetuity  the  tributes  and  customs.  De- 

The  memorial  church  to  St.  George  was  erected  about  midway  between  the  ad¬ 
jacent  towns  of  Ramlah  and  Lydda.  Hence  the  bishop  of  this  diocese  was  indiscrimi¬ 
nately  called  the  bishop  of  Ramlah,  Lydda,  or  St.  George.  This  was  the  first  Latin 
bishop  of  the  patriarchate  of  Jerusalem. 


DISSENSION  AMONG  CRUSADERS 


334 

sirous  of  taking  advantage  of  such  privileges  and  eager  at  the  same 
time  to  provide  for  their  own  safety  and  welfare,  the  people  exerted 
themselves  to  obey  the  royal  will.  They  called  in  the  residents  of  neigh¬ 
boring  cities  and  carefully  strengthened  the  defenses  of  the  city  by 
reinforcements  of  many  well-armed  and  gallant  men. 

All  then  assembled,  as  with  one  mind,  in  the  vast  and  spacious  hall 
of  the  Temple  to  consider  how  to  anticipate  and,  if  possible,  prevent 
our  advance.  To  this  end  they  decided  to  slay  all  the  Christian  inhabit¬ 
ants  and  then  to  overthrow  from  its  very  foundations  the  church  of 
the  Resurrection  of  the  Lord  and  utterly  destroy  the  Sepulchre  of  the 
Lord  contained  therein.  This  action  would,  they  hoped,  keep  away,  in 
the  future,  the  great  concourse  of  pilgrims  who  flocked  thither  to  visit 
these  places  for  the  sake  of  prayer.  On  further  consideration,  however, 
they  feared  that  such  a  course  would  intensify  the  hatred  of  the  Chris¬ 
tians.  It  might  even  goad  them  to  still  more  furious  efforts  for  the 
destruction  of  the  people  of  Jerusalem.  Accordingly  these  plans  were 
changed.  They  extorted  all  the  money  and  goods  in  the  possession  of 
the  Christian  inhabitants  and  demanded  as  tribute  fourteen  thousand 
pieces  of  gold.  This  was  to  be  paid  by  the  patriarch  who  at  that  time 
presided  over  the  city,  by  the  Christian  dwellers  in  Jerusalem,  and  by 
the  monasteries  in  the  vicinity. 

The  entire  possessions  of  the  Christians  living  in  Jerusalem  were  not 
sufficient  to  pay  this  sum.  It  became  necessary,  therefore,  for  the  venera¬ 
ble  patriarch  to  make  a  voyage  to  Cyprus  In  order  to  obtain  the  means 
of  satisying  this  exorbitant  demand.  Money  was  also  needed  to  relieve, 
in  some  measure  at  least,  his  own  needs  and  the  poverty  of  the  faith¬ 
ful.  From  the  true  believers  in  that  island  he  intended  to  beg  alms 
and  pious  gifts  which  he  might  send  to  keep  alive  that  exhausted  and 
famishing  people  of  God  who  dwelt  In  Jerusalem  and  the  borders 
thereof.^^ 

Yet  even  these  exactions  did  not  seem  to  satisfy  the  infidels.  After 
they  had  extorted  from  the  faithful  all  they  owned,  by  means  of  in¬ 
quisitions  and  torture,  they  drove  them  out  of  the  city  with  the  excep¬ 
tion  of  the  old  men,  the  sick,  and  the  women  and  children.  Up  to  the 
very  time  of  our  coming,  these  exiles  were  languishing  away  in  the  little 
villages  near  the  city,  in  hourly  anticipation  of  death.  They  dared  not 
enter  Jerusalem,  but  even  outside  there  was  no  place  of  safety  or  refuge 

See  Book  I,  chap,  n. 


DISSENSION  AMONG  CRUSADERS  335 

for  them,  surrounded  as  they  were  by  their  persecutors.  Their  every 
movement  was  viewed  with  suspicion  by  the  inhabitants  of  the  villages, 
who  laid  upon  them  the  most  degrading  and  intolerable  tasks. 

In  the  city  beloved  of  God  there  was  living  at  this  time  a  certain 
man  of  consecrated  life,  renowned  for  his  piety,  Gerald  by  name.  He 
was  in  charge  of  the  hospital,  mentioned  above,  where  the  poor  were 
lodged  who  came  to  Jersualem  for  the  sake  of  prayer  and  where  they 
received  refreshment  suited  to  the  conditions  of  time  and  place.®® 

The  infidels  believed  that  this  man  had  a  secret  fund  laid  aside  and 
feared  that  he  might  be  able  to  injure  them  when  our  army  arrived. 
They  therefore  beat  him  and  cast  him  into  prison.  There  he  was  sub¬ 
jected  to  torture  so  terrible  that  the  joints  of  both  his  hands  and  feet 
were  wrenched  apart  and  his  limbs  became  practically  useless. 

24.  The  feofle  of  Bethlehem  send  envoys  to  the  leaders.  Tan- 
cred  h  disfatched  to  that  city.  He  takes  possession  of  the 
church  and  the  place. 

The  army  passed  three  days  at  Ramlah.  They  then  appointed  guards 
to  protect  the  better  fortified  part  of  the  city  from  the  wiles  of  the 
foe  and  made  ready  to  resume  the  march  toward  their  objective.  At 
dawn  on  the  following  day,  under  the  guidance  of  experienced  men 
who  knew  the  country  well,  they  arrived  at  Nicopolis. 

Nicopolis  is  one  of  the  cities  of  Palestine.  It  is  mentioned  in  the 
holy  books  of  the  Evangels  as  the  village  of  Emmaus.  St.  Luke  the 
Evangelist  says  that  it  was  threescore  furlongs  from  Jerusalem.®'^  In 
the  sixth  book  of  the  Historia  tripartita^  Sozomenus  speaks  of  this  place 
as  follows:  ^^After  the  Romans  had  conquered  Judea  and  laid  waste 
Jerusalem,  Emmaus  was  called  Nicopolis  in  commemoration  of  that 
victory.  Before  the  city,  at  the  crossing  of  the  roads  where  Christ  is 
known  to  have  walked  with  Cleopas  after  His  resurrection  as  if  on  the 
way  to  another  village,  there  is  a  spring  of  health-giving  waters.  Here 
the  ills  of  men  are  washed  away  and  the  various  diseases  to  which  the 
lower  animals  are  subject  are  likewise  cured.  In  explanation  of  this 
belief,  tradition  says  that  on  this  same  walk  Christ  appeared  to  His 
disciples  at  that  spring  and  himself  bathed  their  feet  in  its  waters ;  hence 
from  that  time  on  it  became  a  cure  for  all  ailments.”  These  are  the 


See  Book  I,  chap.  lo. 


Lu.  24:  13. 


DISSENSION  AMONG  CRUSADERS 


336 

statements  made  by  the  historian  mentioned  above  about  the  village 
of  Emmaus. 

The  Christians  passed  that  night  peacefully  in  the  enjoyment  of 
abundant  water  and  a  goodly  supply  of  the  necessary  food.  About  mid¬ 
night  envoys  arrived  from  the  faithful  who  lived  at  Bethlehem.  They 
came  to  beg  Duke  Godfrey  most  earnestly  that  he  would  send  part  of 
his  forces  thither.  For  the  enemy  from  all  the  towns  and  the  country¬ 
side  in  the  vicinity  were  repairing  in  haste  to  Jerusalem,  not  only  to 
aid  in  the  defense  of  the  city,  but  also  to  find  a  place  of  safety  for  them¬ 
selves.  The  faithful  at  Bethlehem  were  in  terror,  therefore,  lest  these 
infidels  might  invade  their  city  and  pull  down  the  church  which  the 
Christians  had  repeatedly  redeemed  from  destruction  at  the  hand  of 
these  same  enemies  by  the  payment  of  large  sums  of  money. 

The  requests  of  these  faithful  brethren  were  heard  with  loving  piety. 
The  duke  ordered  an  hundred  light-armed  horsemen,  picked  men  from 
his  own  following,  to  hasten  at  once  to  Bethlehem  for  the  assistance  of 
the  Christians  there.  Tancred  was  to  share  in  the  expedition  and  act 
as  the  leader.  Under  the  guidance  of  the  envoys,  the  party  arrived  at 
their  destination  at  daybreak.  There  they  were*  received  by  the  citizens 
with  great  honor,  and,  to  the  accompaniment  of  hymns  and  spiritual 
songs,  they  were  escorted  by  the  people  and  clergy  to  the  church.  With 
intense  joy  they  looked  upon  the  place  of  the  blessed  birth  and  the 
manger  where  once  the  Saviour  lay.  Then  amid  enthusiastic  rejoicing, 
again  to  the  accompaniment  of  psalms  and  votive  hymns,  the  citizens 
raised  Tancred’s  standard  over  the  church  in  sign  of  victory. 

Meanwhile,  the  hearts  of  those  who  remained  behind  were  yearning 
to  proceed  on  the  way.  The  knowledge  that  they  were  close  to  the 
venerated  places,  love  and  reverence  for  which  had  enabled  them  to 
endure  even  unto  this  third  year  so  many  privations  and  dangers, 
prevented  them  from  sleeping.  Eagerly  they  longed  for  the  coming 
of  the  dawn,  that  they  might  see  the  successful  end  of  their  journeyings 
and  the  happy  consummation  of  their  long  pilgrimage.  The  watches  of 
the  night  seemed  prolonged  beyond  their  usual  length  even  to  the 
extent  of  unduly  encroaching  on  the  morrow.  To  their  yearning  hearts, 
all  delay  was  intolerable  and  perilous,  for,  as  says  the  proverb,  ^^To  the 
longing  heart,  no  haste  seems  sufficient”  j  and  still  another,  “Desire 
increases  with  delay.” 


DISSENSION  AMONG  CRUSADERS 


337 


* 


25.  The  army  froceeds  on  the  march  and  arrives  at  J erusalem. 

In  the  meantlmey  however y  a  skirmish  occurs  In  which  some 
oj  the  enemy  ferish. 

When  it  became  known  in  the  camp  that  the  duke  had  received  mes¬ 
sengers  from  the  people  of  Bethlehem  during  the  night  and  had  sent 
troops  from  the  army  to  their  aid,  the  people  rose  in  wrath  and  incited 
one  another  to  rebellion.  They  waited  for  no  permission  to  depart  nor 
for  a  favorable  time  such  as  the  dawn  presents  j  but  chiding  further 
delay,  they  started  out  in  the  dead  of  night,  in  entire  disregard  of  the 
opposition  of  their  leaders. 

They  had  gone  but  a  short  distance  and  the  sky  was  already  begin¬ 
ning  to  grow  bright  when  a  certain  energetic  nobleman,  Gaston  de 
Beziers,  with  a  band  of  thirty  light-armed  knights,  left  the  rest  and 
began  to  hurry  on  toward  Jerusalem.  He  hoped  to  find  flocks  and  herds 
outside  the  walls  which  he  might  seize  and  drive  back  to  the  army. 
As  he  had  expected,  he  found  near  the  city  some  cattle  guarded  by  a 
few  shepherds  who  fled  in  terror  to  the  city  as  soon  as  they  caught  sight 
of  our  men. 

Meanwhile,  Gaston,  driving  before  him  the  cattle  deserted  by  their 
keepers,  was  returning  to  the  army.  But  the  shouts  of  the  shepherds 
had  roused  the  citizens.  They  at  once  seized  their  weapons  and  vigor¬ 
ously  pursued  Gaston  toward  the  camp,  in  the  hope  of  recovering  the 
booty  thus  violently  seized. 

In  dismay  at  the  numbers  of  his  pursuers,  the  distinguished  knight 
at  once  abandoned  his  spoils  and  fled  for  safety.  With  his  followers  he 
had  taken  a  position  on  a  certain  hill  to  await  the  result  of  the  affair, 
when  suddenly  Tancred  with  his  hundred  knights  appeared  from  a 
valley  near  by.  He  was  on  his  way  back  to  the  camp  from  Bethlehem. 
Gaston  hurried  toward  him  and  related  all  the  misfortunes  that  had 
befallen  him.  The  two  leaders  at  once  joined  forces  and  reversed  their 
march  in  pursuit  of  the  enemy,  who  were  driving  back  their  cattle. 
Before  the  latter  could  reach  the  city,  our  people  fell  upon  them  sud¬ 
denly,  killed  many,  and  put  the  rest  to  flight.  With  the  recovered  booty, 
for  a  second  time  taken  by  force,  the  Christian  leaders  then  returned 
with  rejoicing  to  the  camp. 

When  asked  where  they  had  seized  their  plunder,  they  replied  that 


DISSENSION  AMONG  CRUSADERS 


338 

it  was  from  the  fields  in  the  vicinity  of  Jerusalem.  As  the  word  Jerusa¬ 
lem  fell  upon  the  ears  of  the  pilgrims — Jerusalem  the  city  for  whose 
sake  they  had  endured  so  many  hardships — fervent  devotion  so  over¬ 
whelmed  them  that  they  could  not  restrain  their  tears  and  sighs.  Fall¬ 
ing  upon  the  ground,  they  adored  and  glorified  God,  who  had  granted 
His  faithful  people  the  privilege  of  serving  Him  worthily  and  com- 
mendably,  the  Lord  who  had  mercifully  deigned  to  hear  the  prayers 
of  His  people  and  had  deemed  them  worthy,  according  to  their  hope, 
to  reach  the  city  so  ardently  desired. 

As  they  approached  still  closer  and  could  gaze  upon  the  Holy  City 
now  so  near  at  hand,  the  pilgrims,  most  of  whom  were  walking  bare¬ 
footed,  gave  utterance  to  their  spiritual  joy  with  heartfelt  tears  and 
sighs.  With  ever-increasing  fervor,  they  pressed  on  toward  their  goal 
and,  in  a  short  time,  were  standing  before  Jerusalem.  There  they 
placed  their  tents  around  the  city  in  the  order  designated  by  the  in¬ 
dividual  chiefs. 

Here,  indeed,  the  prophetic  utterance  of  Isaiah  seemed  to  be  ful¬ 
filled  and  the  word  of  the  Lord  to  be  made  actual  fact ;  ^‘Lif t  up  thine 
eyes  unto  Jerusalem  and  see  the  power  of  the  Lord.  Behold  thy  Re¬ 
deemer  Cometh  to  release  thee  from  thy  bonds.”  And  likewise, 
^^Awake,  awake,  stand  up,  O  Jerusalem:  loose  thyself  from  the  bonds 
of  thy  neck,  O  captive  daughter  of  Sion.” 

Is.  51:  17  (the  passage  resembles  this  verse,  but  is  William’s  own  version). 

This  is  a  contraction  of  Is.  51:17  and  52:  2. 


HERE  ENDS  THE  SEVENTH  BOOK 


THE  EIGHTH  BOOK  BEGINS 


END  OF  THE  PILGRIMAGE:  JERUSALEM 

CAPTURED 

I.  A  descriftion  of  the  situation  of  the  Holy  Cltyy  wherein  are 
also  mentioned  the  districts  and  the  f  laces  which  are  Included 
within  Its  boundaries » 

It  is  a  well-known  fact  that  Jerusalem,  the  Holy  City  beloved  of  God, 
is  situated  on  lofty  hills,  and  ancient  authorities  say  that  it  was  located 
in  the  tribe  of  Benjamin.  To  the  west  lie  the  land  of  Simeon  and  the 
region  of  the  Philistines.  To  the  west  likewise  is  the  Mediterranean 
sea,  which  is  twenty-four  miles  distant  at  the  nearest  point,  hard  by  the 
ancient  city  of  Jaffa.  Between  Jerusalem  and  the  sea  is  the  village  of 
Emmaus,  which,  as  has  been  said,  was  later  called  Nicopolis,  the  place 
where  the  Lord  appeared  to  two  of  His  disciples  after  the  resurrection. 

There  also  lies  Modin,  the  happy  stronghold  of  the  holy  Maccabees  j 
there  is  Nobe,  the  sacred  village  where  David  and  his  servants,  when 
ahungered,  ate  the  bread  of  the  Covenant,  with  the  consent  of  Ahim- 
elech  the  priest.^  There  is  situated  Diospolis  also,  which  is  Lydda, 
where  Peter  restored  to  health  the  paralytic  who  had  lain  on  his  bed 
from  his  eighth  year.^  There  too  is  Jaffa,  where  the  same  Peter  raised 
from  the  dead  the  disciple  named  Tabitha,  full  of  good  works  and 
alms,  and  restored  her  alive  to  the  saints  and  widows.^  It  was  at  Jaffa 
also  that  Peter,  while  lodging  at  the  house  of  Simon  the  Tanner,  re¬ 
ceived  the  messenger  of  Cornelius,  as  is  contained  in  the  Acts  of  the 
Apostles.^ 

On  the  east,  about  fourteen  miles  distant  from  the  city,  are  the 
waters  of  the  Jordan  and  the  adjacent  desert,  once  so  well  known  to 
the  sons  of  the  prophets.  There  too  is  the  wooded  valley  where  now  lies 
the  sea  of  Salt,  known  also  as  the  lake  of  Asphalt  or  the  Dead  sea. 
Before  the  Lord  destroyed  Sodom,  all  this  region,  as  we  read  in  Gene¬ 
sis,  was  watered  like  the  garden  of  the  Lord.® 

On  this  side  of  Jordan  lies  the  city  of  Jericho,  which  was  conquered 

^ISa.  2^0.9:32-35.  ®  Ac.  9:36-43. 

^  Ac.  10.  ®  Ge.  13  :io. 


x 


END  OF  THE  PILGRIMAGE 


340 

by  Joshua,  Moses’s  successor,  rather  by  prayer  than  by  battle.  Here  it 
was  that  later  the  Lord,  in  passing,  restored  sight  to  the  blind  man.^ 
Here*  also  is  Galgala,  the  place  to  which  Elijah  withdrew. 

Beyond  Jordan  lie  Gilead,  Bashan,  Ammon,  and  Moab,  which  after¬ 
ward  fell  by  lot  to  Reuben,  Gad,  and  to  the  half  of  the  tribe  of  Ma- 
nassah.'^  All  this  region  is  known  today  by  the  general  term  of  Arabia. 

South  of  Jerusalem  was  the  lot  of  Judah,  where  is  Bethlehem,  the 
usual  abiding  place  of  the  Saviour  and  the  happy  place  of  the  Lord’s 
birth  and  cradle.  Here  is  the  city  of  Tekoah,  the  home  of  the  prophets 
Habakkuk  and  Amos,  and  Hebron,  also  known  by  the  name  of  Caria- 
tharbe,  where  are  the  revered  tombs  of  the  holy  patriarchs. 

North  of  Jerusalem  lies  the  city  of  Gibeon,  famous  for  the  victory 
of  Joshua,  the  son  of  Nun,  and  the  scene  of  the  miracle  when  the  sun 
stood  still.®  This  is  the  land  of  the  tribe  of  Ephraim,  in  which  are 
found  Shiloh,  once  the  guardian  of  the  tabernacle  of  the  Lordj  Sichar, 
land  of  the  Samaritan  woman  who  talked  with  the  Lordj  and  Bethel, 
worshipper  of  the  golden  calf  and  witness  of  the  sin  of  Jeroboam. 
Here  also  is  Sebaste,  where  John  the  Baptist,  Elijah,  and  Abdias  are 
buried.  This  place  was  later  called  Samaria,  from  the  hill  Shemer  on 
which  it  is  built  and  where  the  capital  of  the  kings  of  Israel  once  was. 
Hence,  even  today  this  entire  region  is  known  as  Samaria.  To  the  north 
also  lies  Neapolis  [Nablus],  which  was  formerly  called  Sichem,  from 
the  name  of  its  founder.  Here  it  was,  according  to  the  words  of  the 
book  of  Genesis,^  that  Simeon  and  Levi,  the  sons  of  Jacob,  in  revenge 
for  the  disgrace  brought  upon  their  sister  Dinah  through  the  guilty 
passion  of  Sichem,  son  of  Hemen,  slew  both  Sichem  and  his  sons  with 
the  sword  and  burned  the  city  to  the  ground. 


2.  Reviews  the  many  names  by  which  the  ctiy  has  been  called 
and  relates  how  David  made  it  the  cafital  of  his  kingdom. 
How  the  Emferor  Hadrian  transferred  it  from  the  slope  to 
the  top  of  the  mountain.  And  some  further  remarks  on  its 
situation. 


Jerusalem,  the  capital  city  of  Judea,  is  located  in  a  spot  entirely  lack¬ 
ing  in  streams  and  springs,  woods  and  pasture  lands.  According  to  the 
histories  of  olden  times  and  to  the  traditions  of  Oriental  peoples,  this 
city  was  at  first  called  Salem,  and  later  Jebus.  After  David  had  ruled 


°  Mat.  20 129  S. 


^  Jos.  22. 


®  Ge.  34:25  ff. 


®  Jos.  10. 


END  OF  THE  PILGRIMAGE 


seven  years  in  Hebron,  he  drove  the  Jebusite  population  from  Salem, 
enlarged  the  city,  and  made  it  the  seat  of  his  kingdom,  calling  it  Jeru¬ 
salem.  Of  this  one  may  read  in  I  Chronicles  as  follows:  ^^Then  David 
departed  and  all  Israel  with  him  to  Jerusalem,  that  is  Jebusj  where 
the  Jebusites  were,  the  inhabitants  of  the  land.  And  the  inhabitants  of 
Jebus  said  to  David,  Thou  shalt  not  come  hither.  Nevertheless  David 
took  the  castle  of  Zion,  which  is  the  city  of  David.  And  David  said. 
Whosoever  smiteth  the  Jebusites  first  shall  be  chief  and  captain.  So 
Joab  the  son  of  Zeruiah  went  first  up,  and  was  chief.  And  David  dwelt  in 
the  castle  3  therefore  they  called  it  the  city  of  David.  And  he  built  the 
city  round  about,  even  from  Millo  round  about.  And  Joab  repaired 
the  rest  of  the  city.” 

Still  later,  when  David’s  son  Solomon  was  ruling,  this  city  was  called 
Hierosolyma,  that  is,  the  Jerusalem  of  Solomon. 

Egesippus  and  Josephus,  illustrious  and  well-known  writers  of  his¬ 
tory,  relate  that,  because  of  the  sins  of  the  people  of  Judah,  Titus  the 
son  of  Vespasian,  that  magnificent  prince  of  the  Romans,  besieged 
Jerusalem  in  the  forty-second  year  after  the  passion  of  the  Lord  and, 
having  besieged  it,  took  it  and  threw  it  down  from  its  very  foundations. 
Thus,  in  fulfillment  of  the  word  of  the  Lord,  there  remained  not  one 
stone  upon  another. 

Jerusalem  was  later  restored  by  Aelius  Hadrian,  emperor  of  the 
Romans,  the  fourth  in  succession  after  Titus,  whence  it  was  called 
Aelia  in  honor  of  him,  as  may  be  read  in  the  reports  of  the  synod  of 
Nicaea:  ^^Let  the  bishops  of  Aelia  be  honored  by  all,”  etc.^^ 

The  original  site  of  the  city  was  on  the  steep  slope  of  the  hill.  It 
faced  both  east  and  south  and  occupied  the  slope  of  both  Mt.  Sion  and 
Mt.  Moriah.  Only  the  Temple  and  the  citadel  Antonia  lay  upon  the 
heights.  Hadrian  moved  the  entire  city  to  the  top  of  the  mountain, 
so  that  the  place  of  the  Lord’s  passion  and  resurrection,  which  formerly 
lay  outside  the  city,  was  included  within  the  circuit  of  the  same  when 
it  was  rebuilt. 


Jerusalem  is  smaller  than  the  largest  cities  and  yet  larger  than  the 
ordinary.  In  form  it  is  an  oblong  quadrangle,  one  side  being  longer 
than  the  others.  It  is  enclosed  on  three  sides  by  deep  ravines.  On  the 


east  lies  the  valley  of  Jehoshaphat,  which  the  prophet  Joel  mentions 
as  follows:  “when  I  shall  bring  again  the  captivity  of  Judah  and  Jeru?^ 


I  Chron.  1 1 :  4—8.  Mat.  24:  2.  Canon  VII,  first  council  of  Nicaea. 


END  OF  THE  PILGRIMAGE 


342 

Salem,  I  will  also  gather  all  nations,  and  will  bring  them  down  into  the 
valley  of  Jehoshaphat  and  will  plead  with  them  there  for  my  people 
and  for  my  heritage  Israel.” 

At  the  bottom  of  this  valley  a  noble  church  has  been  built  in  honor 
of  the  Mother  of  God.  It  is  believed  that  she  is  buried  there,  and  her 

r 

glorious  sepulchre  is  still  shown  to  the  throngs  who  flock  to  the  place. 
Through  this  valley  flows  the  brook  Cedron,  swelled  in  winter  by 
torrential  rains.  St.  John  the  Evangelist  mentions  this,  saying,  Jesus 
^Vent  forth  .  .  .  over  the  brook  Cedron,  where  there  was  a  gar¬ 
den.” 

Adjoining  this  valley  on  the  south  is  another  ravine  called  Hinnom. 
In  the  distribution  of  the  land  to  the  children  of  Israel,  this  was  the 
limit  of  the  lots  assigned  to  Ben  and  Judah,  as  is  written  in  Joshua: 
“And  the  border  went  up  by  the  valley  of  the  son  of  Hinnom  unto  the 
south  side  of  the  Jebusitej  the  same  is  Jerusalem  j  and  the  border  went 
up  to  the  top  of  the  mountain  that  lieth  before  the  valley  of  Hinnom 
westward.”  Here  is  still  shown  the  field  which  Judas,  that  most 
wicked  of  traders,  bought  with  the  money  received  as  the  price  of  be¬ 
traying  the  Saviour  to  the  Jews.  This  field,  known  as  Acheldama,  has 
been  set  aside  as  a  burial  place  for  pilgrims. 

We  read  further  about  this  valley,  in  the  Chronicles,  in  connection 
with  Ahax:  “he  burnt  incense  in  the  valley  of  .  .  .  Hinnom,  and 
burnt  his  children  in  the  fire,  after  the  abominations  of  the  heathen 
whom  the  Lord  had  cast  out  before  the  children  of  Israel.” 

Jerusalem  is  bounded  on  the  west  by  a  part  of  this  same  valley,  in 
which  there  was  an  ancient  pool,  famous  in  the  times  of  the  kings  of 
Judah.  From  this  point  the  valley  extends  to  the  upper  pool  generally 
called  the  lake  of  the  Patriarch,  which  is  close  to  the  ancient  cemetery 
in  the  cave  of  the  Lion. 

The  city  is  approached  on  the  north  by  a  level  road.  There  is  still 
shown  the  place  where  the  Jews  stoned  Stephen,  the  first  martyr — ^the 
spot  where,  even  as  he  was  breathing  forth  his  spirit,  he  knelt  and 
prayed  for  his  persecutors. 


Joel  3 :  1—2. 
Jos.  15:8. 


Jno.  18:1. 

II  Chron.  28:3. 


END  OF  THE  PILGRIMAGE 


343 


3.  Exflatns  what  fart  oj  the  two  hills  is  contained  within  the 
circuit  of  the  wall.  Also  the  situation  of  the  church  of  the 
Resurrection  of  the  Lord  and  the  Temfle  of  the  Lord  on  the 
heights.  The  form  of  both  churches  is  described, 

Jerusalem  lies  upon  two  hills,  according  to  the  words  of  David,  who 
said:  “His  foundation  is  in  the  holy  mountains.”  The  summits  of 
these  hills  lie  almost  entirely  inside  the  circuit  of  the  walls  and  are 
separated  from  each  other  by  a  little  valley  which  divides  the  city  into 
two  parts.  The  peak  on  the  west  is  called  Sion,  whence  the  city  also  is 
frequently  so  designated,  as,  “The  Lord  loveth  the  gates  of  Zion 
more  than  all  the  dwellings  of  Jacob.” 

The  other  hill  to  the  east  is  called  Mt.  Moriah.  Mention  of  this  is 
made  in  II  Chronicles  as  follows:  “And  Solomon  began  to  build  the 
house  of  the  Lord  at  Jerusalem  in  Mount  Moriah,  where  the  Lord 
appeared  unto  David  his  father,  in  the  place  that  David  had  prepared 
in  the  threshing-floor  of  Oman,  the  Jebusite.” 

On  the  west,  almost  on  the  very  summit  of  the  mount  is  the  church 
which  is  called  Sion^  and,  not  very  far  from  it,  is  the  tower  of  David. 
This  is  of  very  massive  construction.  With  its  towers,  walls,  and  the 
outworks  attached  to  it,  it  rises  high  above  the  city  below  and  forms  the 
citadel. 

On  the  same  height,  but  on  the  slope  facing  the  east,  is  situated  the 
church  of  the  Holy  Resurrection,  circular  in  shape.  As  this  church  lies 
on  the  slope  of  the  hill  just  mentioned,  which  towers  above  in  close 
proximity  to  it,  the  interior  would  have  been  very  dark.  Its  roof,  how¬ 
ever,  built  of  beams  rising  aloft  and  interwoven  with  most  skilful 
workmanship  into  the  form  of  a  crown,  is  so  constructed  that  it  is  al¬ 
ways  open  to  the  sky,  which  arrangement  provides  the  necessary  light 
for  the  interior.  Under  this  wide  opening  lies  the  sepulchre  of  the 
Saviour. 

Before  the  coming  of  our  Latin  peoples,  the  place  of  the  Lord’s 
passion,  which  is  called  Calvary  or  Golgotha,  was  outside  the  limits  of 
this  church.  It  was  here  that  the  wood  of  the  Vivifying  Cross  was  said 
to  have  been  found.  Here  also,  according  to  tradition,  the  body  of  the 
Saviour  when  taken  down  from  the  Cross  was  annointed  with  oint¬ 
ment  and  wrapped  with  fragrant  spices  in  a  linen  winding  cloth,  ac- 

Ps.  87:  I.  Ps.  87:2.  II  Chron.  3:  i. 


END  OF  THE  PILGRIMAGE 


344 

cording  to  the  burial  customs  of  the  Jews.  At  that  time  there  was  only 
a  rather  small  chapel  here,  but  after  the  Christians,  assisted  by  divine 
mercy,  had  seized  Jerusalem  with  a  strong  hand,  this  building  seemed 
to  them  too  small.  Accordingly,  they  enlarged  the  original  church  and 
added  to  it  a  new  building  of  massive  and  lofty  construction,  which 
enclosed  the  old  church  and  in  marvellous  wise  included  within  its 
precincts  the  holy  places  just  described. 

On  Mt.  Moriah  to  the  east  and  on  the  southern  slope  lies  the  Tem¬ 
ple  of  the  Lord.  It  was  built  on  the  place  where,  according  to  the  ac¬ 
count  in  the  second  book  of  Samuel,^^  and  II  Chronicles,-^  David  the 
king  bought  a  field  from  Araunah,  or  Oman,  the  Jebusite.  It  was  there 
that  he  was  commanded  to  build  an  altar  to  the  Lord,  on  which  he 
afterwards  offered  a  burnt  offering  and  peace  offerings.  There  he  called 
upon  the  Lord  and  heard  Him  in  the  fire  from  heaven  upon  the  altar 
of  burnt  offering.  In  that  same  place  also,  Solomon,  after  his  father^s 
death,  built  the  Temple  at  the  Lord’s  command. 

From  ancient  histories,  we  learn  what  the  shape  of  this  temple  was, 
how  it  fell  under  Nebuchadnezzar,  king  of  Babylon,  and  was  rebuilt 
under  Cyrus,  king  of  Persia,  by  Zerubbabel  and  Jesu,  the  high  priest  j 
likewise,  how  that  same  temple  and  the  entire  city  was  later  destroyed 
by  Titus,  the  prince  of  the  Romans. 

It  suffices  merely  to  mention  here  who  designed  this  building  and 
to  describe  its  form,  for  In  the  first  chapter  of  this  work  we  have  al¬ 
ready  said  that  Omar,  son  of  Khattab,  the  third  in  succession  from  the 
seducer  Muhammad  and  the  inheritor  of  his  error  and  his  power,  was 
the  builder  of  this  temple.  To  the  truth  of  this  assertion  ancient  in¬ 
scriptions  upon  the  walls  of  the  building  both  within  and  without 
give  ample  testimony.^^ 

The  description  of  the  edifice  is  as  follows.  On  a  plateau  as  long  and 
as  wide  as  the  distance  to  which  an  arrow  can  be  shot  is  a  quadrangle 
with  equidistant  sides,  surrounded  by  a  wall  of  moderate  height.  This 
quadrangle  is  entered  on  the  west  through  two  gates,  one  of  which  is 
called  the  Beautiful  gate.  It  was  here,  according  to  the  account  in  the 
Acts  of  the  Apostles,  that  Peter  raised  the  man,  ^dame  from  his  moth- 

II  Sa.  24:  i6  if.  21  jj  Chron.  3:1. 

This  cross  reference,  which  William  states  correctly,  suggests  that  he  inserted 
this  material — probably  the  first  four  chapters  of  this  book — for  the  benefit  of  his 
reading  audience  after  1180.  It  would  not  have  been  required  by  Amaury,  and  it  does 
interrupt  the  narrative. 


END  OF  THE  PILGRIMAGE 


345 

er’s  womb/’  who  sat  there  begging  alms  from  the  passers-by.-’^  The 
exact  name  of  the  other  gate  we  do  not  recall.  There  is  one  gate  in  the 
north  wall  and  another  in  the  east  side,  called  now  the  Golden  gate. 

To  the  south  is  the  royal  palace,  generally  known  as  the  Temple  of 
Solomon.  Above  each  of  the  gates  leading  to  the  city  and  at  each  cor¬ 
ner  of  the  quadrangle  just  mentioned  rise  lofty  towers,  to  which,  at 
stated  hours,  the  priests  of  the  Saracen  superstition  were  wont  to  ascend 
to  call  the  people  to  prayer.  Some  of  these  towers  still  remain,  but 
others  have  disappeared  through  various  mishaps.  Within  these  pre¬ 
cincts  no  one  was  allowed  to  live  j  in  fact,  no  one  could  even  enter  here 
except  with  bare  feet  freshly  washed.  Guards  were  stationed  at  each 
door  to  insure  strict  obedience  to  this  order.  In  the  center  of  the  area 
thus  enclosed  is  another  court  somewhat  higher,  which  is  likewise  a 
perfect  square,  the  sides  being  equidistant  at  all  points.  On  the  west  and 
south  two  stairways  lead  up  to  this  court,  but  on  the  east  there  is  only 
one  approach.  At  each  corner  of  this  court  was  a  little  chapel.  Some  of 
these  still  remain,  but  others  have  been  torn  down  to  make  room  for 
more  recent  buildings. 

In  the  center  of  this  upper  court  rises  the  Temple,  in  form  an  octagon 
with  equal  sides.  Both  within  and  without,  the  walls  are  adorned  with 
marble  slabs  and  mosaic  work.  The  roof  is  spherical  and  is  very  skil¬ 
fully  covered  with  lead.  Both  the  upper  and  lower  courts,  with  their 
porticoes,  are  paved  with  white  marble.  Thus  the  rain  which  in  winter 
falls  in  great  abundance  from  the  Temple  itself,  as  well  as  that  which 
comes  from  elsewhere,  descends  pure  and  clear  into  the  many  cisterns 
which  lie  within  the  enclosure  just  described. 

In  the  center  of  the  Temple,  within  the  inner  row  of  columns,  is  a 
rock,  not  very  high,  which  contains  a  grotto.  Here  it  was,  according  to 
tradition,  that  the  angel  sat  when  he  struck  down  the  people  by  the 
Lord’s  command,  in  punishment  for  David’s  presumption  in  number¬ 
ing  them.  Nor  was  the  sword  sheathed  until  the  Lord  again  com¬ 
manded  that  they  be  spared.  David  afterwards  bought  this  field  for 
six  hundred  shekels  of  gold,  full  weight,  and  erected  an  altar  there,  as 
we  have  related.  Before  the  Latins  came  and,  in  fact,  for  fifteen  years 
afterward,  this  place  lay  bare  and  exposed.  Later,  it  was  covered  with 
white  marble  by  those  who  held  it.  An  altar  and  choir  were  built  above 
it,  and  there  a  priest  celebrates  the  sacred  offices. 

Ac.  3  :  1—8. 


3+6 


END  OF  THE  PILGRIMAGE 


4,  Relates  how  the  city  is  situated  in  an  arid  sfot  without  water* 

Of  the  fool  of  Silo  am  also  and  of  how  the  citizens  y  at  the 
news  of  our  af  fro  achy  filled  uf  the  sf  rings  and  cisterns* 

The  city  of  Jerusalem,  worshipper  of  God,  is  situated  in  the  land  of 
Judea,  which  is  also  known  as  Palestina  Prima,  The  name  Judea,  how¬ 
ever,  dates  from  the  time  when  the  ten  tribes  separated  from  Reho- 
boam,  son  of  Solomon,  to  follow  Jeroboam,  son  of  Nabath.  The  two 
tribes  of  Ben  and  Judah  alone  adhered  to  Rehoboam,  and  hence  the 
land  belonging  to  these  two  peoples  is  called  Judea  from  the  name  of 
Judah.  As  we  read  in  the  Evangels:  ^^They  returned  into  the  land  of  Ju¬ 
dah.”  Hence  Rehoboam  and  his  successors  were  called  kings  of  Judah, 
but  the  rulers  of  the  other  ten  tribes  were  known  as  the  kings  of  Israel 
or  Samaria. 

Palestine  is  also  called  Philistia,  a  name  derived  from  that  of  the 
Philistines.  There  are  said  to  be  three  Palestines.  The  first  of  these  is 
Judea  properly  so  called,  whose  capital  is  Jerusalem.  The  second  has 
as  its  chief  city  Caesarea  Maritima.  The  capital  of  the  third  is  Bethsan 
or  Scythopolis,  over  which  the  church  of  Nazareth  now  holds  control. 
Regardless  of  the  name  by  which  it  may  be  called,  Judea  certainly 
formed  part  of  the  Land  of  Promise  and  of  Syria,  as  is  proved  by  the 
words  of  that  treatise  in  which  one  reads  as  follows:  “In  Syria,  and 
especially  in  the  region  of  Palestine  which  is  a  part  of  Syria  and  the 
land  where  the  Lord  deigned  to  appear  in  the  flesh,  it  is  customary  to 
make  a  free  use  of  parables.” 

This  region  lies  practically  in  the  center  of  the  Land  of  Promise, 
according  to  the  description  of  the  boundaries  thereof,  which  reads  as 
follows:  “From  the  wilderness  and  this  Lebanon,  even  unto  the  great 
river,  the  river  Euphrates  .  .  .  and  unto  the  great  sea  toward  the 
going  down  of  the  sun,  shall  be  your  coast.” 

The  city  lies  in  arid  surroundings,  entirely  lacking  in  water.  Since 
there  are  no  rills,  springs,  or  rivers,  the  people  depend  upon  rain  water 
only.  During  the  winter  season  it  is  their  custom  to  collect  this  in  cis¬ 
terns,  which  are  numerous  throughout  the  city.  Thus  it  is  preserved  for 
use  during  the  year.  Hence  I  am  surprised  at  the  statement  of  Solinus 
that  Judea  is  famous  for  its  waters.  He  says  in  the  Polyhistor:  ^^Judea 

Jos.  1 : 4, 


END  OF  THE  PILGRIMAGE 


347 

is  renowned  for  its  waters,  but  the  nature  of  these  varies.”  I  cannot 
account  for  this  discrepancy  except  by  saying  either  that  he  did  not 
tell  the  truth  about  the  matter  or  that  the  face  of  the  earth  became 
changed  later.  It  is  indeed  well  known  that  Hezekiah,  king  of  Judah, 
the  friend  of  the  Lord,  stopped  by  the  springs  outside  the  city  when 
he  heard  that  the  army  of  Sennacherib,  the  son  of  Salmanassar,  was  at 
hand.  Concerning  this  we  read  as  follows  in  the  second  book  of 
Chronicles:  ^^And  when  Hezekiah  saw  that  Sennacherib  was  come, 
and  that  he  was  purposed  to  fight  against  Jerusalem,  he  took  counsel 
with  his  princes  and  his  mighty  men  to  stop  the  waters  of  the  fountains 
which  were  without  the  city.  ...  So  there  was  gathered  much  peo¬ 
ple  together,  who  stopped  all  the  fountains,  and  the  brook  that  ran 
through  the  midst  of  the  land,  saying.  Why  should  the  kings  of  As¬ 
syria  come,  and  find  much  water?” 

The  most  important  of  these  springs  is  the  one  called  the  fountain 
of  Gihon,  which  is  mentioned  in  the  same  book  as  follows:  ^^This  same 
Hezekiah  also  stopped  the  upper  watercourse  of  Gihon,  and  brought 
it  straight  down  to  the  west  side  of  the  city  of  David.” 

Gihon  lies  to  the  south  in  the  midst  of  the  valley  of  Hinnom,  in  Jeru¬ 
salem,  where  now  stands  the  church  built  in  honor  of  the  blessed 
martyr  Procopius.  It  is  here  that  Solomon  is  said  to  have  been  an- 
nointed  king,  according  to  the  account  in  the  first  book  of  Kings:  “Take 
with  you  the  servants  of  your  lord,  and  cause  Solomon  my  son  to  ride 
upon  mine  own  mule,  and  bring: him  down  to  Gihon:  and  let  Zadok 
the  priest  and  Nathan  the  prophet  anoint  him  there  king  over  Israel 
and  Judah  j  and  blow  ye  with  the  trumpet,  and  say,  God  save  King 
Solomon.” 

It  is  evident,  however,  that  these  events  occurred  before  the  time  of 
Solinus,  for  a  perusal  of  the  Polyhistor  clearly  shows  that  this  writer 
lived  later  than  the  reign  of  Titus,  that  prince  of  the  Romans  who  de¬ 
stroyed  Jerusalem,  and  prior  to  that  of  Aelius  Hadrian,  who  repaired 
it.  In  the  fortieth  chapter  of  this  work  we  read  as  follows:  “Jerusalem 

Solinus  Polyhistor  xxxv.  William’s  critical  attitude  here  toward  this  postclassical 
writer  is  that  of  a  modern  scholar.  In  this  chapter  he  tests  his  source,  both  by  the  ob¬ 
served  facts  of  geography  and  by  his  knowledge  of  ancient  history.  The  contrast  be¬ 
tween  William’s  acceptance  of  so  much  legendary  material  in  the  previous  book — 
probably  written  about  1171 — and  the  more  critical  attitude  displayed  in  this  chapter — 
probably  written  in  1182 — reflects  his  growth  as  an  historian. 

2®  II  Chron.  32:  2-5.  II  Chron.  32:30.  I  Ki.  i :  3 3-3 4- 


END  OF  THE  PILGRIMAGE 


348 

was  the  capital  of  Judea,  but  it  was  destroyed.  Jericho  then  became  the 
capital,  but  it  too  ceased  to  be  the  head  after  it  was  conquered  in  the 
war  with  Artaxerxes.” 

About  two  or  three  miles  beyond  the  city  there  are  some  springs, 
but  they  are  few  in  number  and  furnish  only  a  small  supply  of  water. 
About  a  mile  from  Jerusalem  on  the  south,  however,  where  the  two 
valleys  named  above  meet,  is  the  famous  pool  of  Siloam,  whither  the 
Lord  sent  the  man  who  was  blind  from  birth  that  he  might  bathe  and 
receive  his  sight. This  is  a  small  pool  which  springs  up  in  the  lowest 
part  of  the  valley.  Its  waters  are  neither  sweet  nor  constant,  for  the 
flow  is  intermittent  and  its  waters  are  said  to  bubble  forth  only  every 
other  day. 

As  soon  as  the  citizens  learned  that  the  Christian  army  was  ap¬ 
proaching,  they  stopped  up  the  outlets  of  the  springs  and  reservoirs 
round  about  the  city  as  far  as  the  fifth  or  sixth  milestone,  in  the  hope 
that  the  Christians  would  be  compelled  by  thirst  to  abandon  the  siege 
of  the  city.  This  action  caused  our  army  infinite  suffering  during  the 
siege  which  followed,  as  will  be  related  in  the  following  chapters. 

Those  shut  up  within  the  city,  on  the  other  hand,  had  a  great  abun¬ 
dance  of  water.  In  addition  to  the  rain  water  which  had  been  stored  up, 
water  was  brought  in  from  springs  outside.  This  was  carried  by  con¬ 
duits  into  two  immense  pools  just  outside  the  temple  precincts  but 
within  the  city  limits.  One  of  these  is  still  called  the  sheep  pool,  be¬ 
cause  it  was  used  for  washing  the  animals  destined  for  sacrifice.  The 
evangelist  John  mentions  that  this  pool  had  five  porches  and  says  that 
from  time  to  time  an  angel  went  down  into  it  and  troubled  the  waters  j 
whoever  first  stepped  into  the  pool  after  that  was  healed.  Here  it  was 
that  the  Lord  healed  the  paralytic  and  bade  him  take  up  his  bed  [and 
walk] 

5.  Names  the  time  when  the  Christian  army  arrived  be j ore 
the  city ;  gives  the  number  of  our  forces  and  that  of  the  foe; 
and  explains  the  order  hi  which  the  camp  was  arranged. 

On  June  7,  in  the  year  of  the  Incarnation  of  the  Lord  1099,  ^he  legions 
of  the  Christian  army  encamped  before  Jerusalem.^-  The  number  of 

Solinus  Polyhistor  XXXV.  ®^Jno.  9:7.  ^  .  2-12. 

This  account  of  the  siege  and  capture  of  Jerusalem  is  based  upon  those  of  the 
anonymous  author  of  the  Gestay  Raymond  d’Aguilers,  Albert  of  Aix,  and  Fulcher 


END  OF  THE  PILGRIMAGE 


349 

pilgrims  of  both  sexes  and  of  every  age  and  condition  is  said  to  have 
been  about  forty  thousand,  but  in  this  great  throng  there  could  not 
have  been  more  than  twenty  thousand  foot  soldiers  and  fifteen  hun¬ 
dred  knights.  The  rest  of  the  multitude  consisted  of  a  helpless  throng, 
sick  and  feeble. 

Report  said  that  within  Jerusalem  there  were  forty  thousand  brave 
warriors,  splendidly  equipped.  For  from  the  fortresses  in  the  vicinity 
and  also  from  the  country  near  by  great  numbers  had  flocked  to  Jeru¬ 
salem.  They  had  fled  before  the  face  of  the  army,  not  only  to  seek 
safety  for  themselves,  but  to  aid  in  the  defense  of  the  royal  city  against 
the  danger  which  threatened.  They  brought  with  them  reinforcements 
of  armed  men  and  supplies  of  food. 

As  the  Christians  approached  the  city,  they  held  an  earnest  confer¬ 
ence  with  people  well  acquainted  with  the  locality  in  regard  to  the 
direction  from  which  the  place  might  be  most  easily  and  conveniently 
attacked.  As  the  deep  gorges  referred  to  above  prevented  an  assault 
from  the  east  or  south,  the  leaders  decided  to  attack  from  the  north. 
Accordingly,  the  camp  was  so  arranged  that  it  extended  from  the  gate 
known  today  as  the  gate  of  St.  Stephen,  which  faces  north,  to  the  gate 
which  lies  below  the  tower  of  David  on  the  west  side  of  the  city  and 
which,  like  the  tower  itself,  is  called  by  the  name  of  that  king. 

The  camp  was  laid  out  as  follows:  First  in  order  came  the  camp  of 
Godfrey,  duke  of  Lorraine,  and  next  to  this  the  camp  of  Robert,  count 
of  Flanders.  The  third  place  was  occupied  by  Robert,  count  of  Nor¬ 
mandy  j  the  fourth  by  the  troops  of  Tancred  and  some  of  the  other 
nobles  who  established  themselves  about  the  tower  on  the  corner, 
which  was  later  named  for  Tancred.  The  count  of  Toulouse  and  those 
with  him  continued  the  blockade  from  this  tower  to  the  west  gate. 
Later,  however,  Raymond  found  that  this  position  offered  but  little 
prospect  of  success  for  attacking  the  city  on  that  side.  For  his  camp  was 
dominated  by  the  tower  which  rose  above  it  and  which  served  as  a 
strong  protection  for  the  gate  at  its  base.  The  close  neighborhood  of 
the  valley  which  lay  between  his  camp  and  the  city  also  hindered  his 
efforts.  Accordingly,  by  the  advice  of  certain  shrewd  men  well  ac¬ 
quainted  with  the  vicinity,  he  transferred  a  part  of  his  camp  to  the  hill 

of  Chartres,  as  well  as  upon  William’s  own  knowledge  of  the  region  and  of  local 
traditions.  The  reader  may  compare  his  account  with  that  of  the  strictly  contemporary 
accounts  which  are  translated  by  Duncalf  (F.  Duncalf  and  A.  C.  Krey,  Parallel  Source 
Problems  in  Medieval  History ^  Problem  3). 


END  OF  THE  PILGRIMAGE 


350 

on  which  Jerusalem  is  built.  This  position  was  between  the  city  and 
the  church  of  Sion  which  lies  about  a  bowshot  from  Jerusalem  to  the 
north.  The  count  left  a  part  of  his  camp  in  its  original  position.  This 
he  is  said  to  have  done  with  two  objects  in  view:  he  wished  his  men 
to  have  an  easier  approach  to  the  city  for  the  purpose  of  assault,  and  he 
intended  also  to  protect  the  church  of  Sion  from  harm  at  the  hand  of 
the  enemy.  This  is  the  place  where  the  Saviour  is  believed  to  have 
supped  with  his  disciples  and  where  he  washed  their  feet.  Here  the 
Holy  Spirit  is  said  to  have  descended  upon  the  disciples  in  tongues  of 
fire  on  the  holy  day  of  Pentecost.  Furthermore,  ancient  tradition  says 
that  this  is  where  Mary,  the  Holy  Mother  of  God,  died.  Here,  too,  is 
shown  the  tomb  of  Stephen,  the  first  martyr. 

6.  On  the  third  day  ajter  the  establishment  oj  the  siege  lines y  the 
city  is  attacked.  Guided  by  a  certain  faithful  Christiany  they  go 
into  the  woods  and  cut  down  trees  with  which  to  construct 
engines. 

This,  then,  was  the  arrangement  of  the  camp,  as  just  described. 
Scarcely  half  of  the  city  was,  however,  inclosed  by  the  siege  lines.  From 
the  north  gate,  generally  called  the  gate  of  St.  Stephen,  to  the  corner 
tower  which  overlooks  the  valley  of  Jehoshaphat,  and  from  that  tower 
to  the  opposite  angle  of  the  city  on  the  south  above  the  slope  of  the 
same  valley,  and  from  there  to  the  south  gate,  which  is  now  called  the 
gate  of  Mt.  Sion,  the  city  remained  unblockaded. 

On  the  fifth  day  after  our  army  took  up  its  position  before  the  walls, 
public  proclamation  was  made  by  the  heralds  that  all  from  the  least 
to  the  greatest,  well  armed  and  defended  by  their  shields,  should  be 
ready  to  begin  the  attack.  And  so  it  was  done.  For  all,  rising  as  with 
one  mind  to  the  task,  attacked  the  city  vigorously  at  the  various  points 
besieged.  With  such  valiant  energy  was  the  work  carried  on  that  the 
outer  fortifications  were  soon  demolished  and  the  enemy  compelled 
to  retreat  in  consternation  to  the  protection  of  the  inner  walls.  In  fact, 
the  citizens  now  began  to  doubt  whether  further  resistance  would  be 
possible.  If  the  Christians  had  had  scaling  ladders  or  machines  with 
which  to  seize  the  ramparts,  they  might  without  question  have  taken 
the  city  on  this  day  when  they  attacked  it  with  such  enthusiasm.  But 
after  they  had  labored  in  vain  from  earliest  dawn  until  about  the 
seventh  hour,  they  realized  that  without  engines  they  could  hope  to 


END  OF  THE  PILGRIMAGE 


351 

accomplish  but  little.  Further  operations  were,  therefore,  deferred  un¬ 
til  engines  could  be  built.  With  these  they  hoped,  by  the  aid  of  God,  to 
renew  the  attack  with  more  success. 

The  chiefs  now  zealously  turned  their  attention  to  the  problem  of 
obtaining  material  suitable  for  constructing  siege  engines.  Nothing  of 
the  kind  seemed  to  be  afforded  by  the  country  near  by.  Fortunately, 
however,  there  happened  to  be  in  the  camp  at  this  time  a  native  Syrian 
Christian.  This  man  guided  some  of  the  leaders  to  a  retired  valley  six 
or  seven  miles  from  Jerusalem  where  tall  trees  grew.  Although  these 
were  not  entirely  suitable  for  the  purpose,  yet  a  sufficient  number  were 
found  which  could  be  used  in  the  emergency.  Workmen  and  carpenters 
were  summoned  in  adequate  numbers  j  the  trees  were  cut  down  and 
transported  by  camels  and  wagons  to  the  city.  They  then  called  to¬ 
gether  artisans  and  others  who  were  skilled  in  that  kind  of  work,  and 
all  applied  themselves  with  unwearied  zeal  to  the  ax  and  other  tools 
used  in  building  operations.  Thus,  with  great  enthusiasm  and  dili¬ 
gence,  they  constructed,  from  the  material  at  hand,  towers  and  hurl¬ 
ing  machine  called  mangons  or  fetraries  and  also  battering  rams  and 
scrofhae  [sows]  for  the  purpose  of  overthrowing  the  walls.^^  Work¬ 
ers  who  lacked  sufficient  independent  means  to  give  their  labor  without 
pay  received  wages  from  gifts  offered  by  the  devotion  of  the  people. 
Not  one  of  the  chiefs,  in  fact,  with  the  exception  of  the  count  of  Tou¬ 
louse,  whose  resources  were  always  greater  than  those  of  the  rest,  had 
money  enough  to  pay  the  wages  of  the  builders.  Without  contribu¬ 
tions  from  the  people,  the  count  paid  from  his  private  treasury  the 
necessary  wages  to  his  own  workers  and,  in  addition,  supplied  money 
to  many  nobles  whose  means  had  become  exhausted. 

While  the  greater  chiefs  were  thus  engaged  in  these  important  mat¬ 
ters,  other  nobles  and  distinguished  men,  with  banners  unfurled,  led 
the  people  to  places  where  low  bushes  and  shrubs  indigenous  to  the 
country  were  to  be  found.  From  these,  pliant  twigs  and  withes  were 
cut  and  carried  back  to  the  camp  on  the  backs  of  horses,  asses,  and  all 
kinds  of  pack  animals,  there  to  be  made  into  wickerwork  coverings  to 
supplement  the  more  important  work  of  the  builders.  There  was  great 
activity  everywhere.  All  labored  with  untiring  zealj  nor  was  there  in 
that  great  company  a  single  idle  man  or  one  who  indulged  in  leisure, 

See  Book  III,  note  8j  Charles  Oman,  A  History  of  the  Art  of  War  in  the  Middle 
Ages,  I,  135-37* 


END  OF  THE  PILGRIMAGE 


352 

but  everyone  without  distinction  did  the  work  best  suited  to  his  condi¬ 
tion.  Whatever  might  be  of  use,  that  it  was  esteemed  honorable  to  do. 
Rich  and  poor  alike  applied  themselves  to  the  task  together,  nor  was 
any  difference  of  rank  even  thought  of  where  the  zeal  of  all  was  equal 
and  a  like  enthusiasm  prevailed.  The  man  of  higher  position  because  of 
his  services  showed  himself  all  the  more  eager  to  assist,  while  the  man 
of  lesser  degree  was  also  admitted  to  his  share  of  attention.  All  felt 
that  whatever  had  been  accomplished  on  the  pilgrimage  would  be  as 
nothing  unless  they  were  permitted  to  obtain  the  fruit  of  their  labors 
and  to  enter  the  city — ^the  end  for  which  they  had  endured  so  many 
adversities.  They  regarded  as  of  little  consequence  whatever  demand 
was  made  of  them,  if  only  it  might  contribute  to  that  one  thing  and 
they  themselves  be  deemed  worthy  to  see  the  fulfillment  of  their  vows. 

7 .  'The  feofle  faint  from  lack  of  water.  A  gam  and  agatUy  while 
seeking  that  and  the  other  necessities  of  life  at  a  distance y  they 
fall  by  the  hand  of  the  foe. 

The  army  now  began  to  suffer  terribly  from  thirst,  for,  as  has  been 
stated,  Jerusalem  lies  in  an  arid  land  entirely  without  water.  There  are 
no  streams  or  springs  or  even  wells  of  fresh  water  except  at  a  distance. 
Moreover,  as  soon  as  the  infidels  heard  that  the  Christians  were  near, 
they  stopped  up  these  sources  also.  They  caused  dirt  and  all  sorts  of 
refuse  to  be  thrown  into  them,  that  the  place  might  be  rendered  unfit 
for  a  long-continued  siege.  The  cisterns  and  reservoirs  for  rain  water 
were  so  injured  that  they  would  not  hold  water  or  were  maliciously 
concealed  that  they  might  not  furnish  refreshment  to  the  thirsting  pil¬ 
grims  in  their  desperate  need.  Still  the  people  of  Bethlehem  and  the 
faithful  who  dwelt  at  Tekoah,  city  of  the  prophets,  frequently  visited 
the  army,  and,  under  the  guidance  of  these  people,  the  pilgrims  went 
out  to  springs  four  or  five  miles  distant  from  the  place  of  siege.  There, 
under  difficult  conditions,  they  jostled  and  pushed  and  tried  to  prevent 
one  another  from  drawing  water.  After  long  delays  caused  by  their  own 
quarrelsome  conduct,  they  conveyed  the  muddy  water,  one  draught 
of  which  would  afford  a  thirsty  man  but  slight  refreshment,  back  to 
camp  in  skins,  where  they  sold  it  for  a  large  price  in  small  portions. 

The  fountain  of  Siloam  near  the  city,  already  described,  did  not  af¬ 
ford  a  sufficient  supply  for  the  suffering  people,  for  its  waters,  insipid 
as  they  were,  did  not  bubble  forth  at  regular  intervals.  The  oppressive 


END  OF  THE  PILGRIMAGE 


353 

weather  and  the  intense  heat  of  June  redoubled  the  anguish  of  the  pil¬ 
grims  by  increasing  the  importunate  demands  of  thirst.  The  nature  of 
their  work,  also,  and  the  dust  raised  thereby  brought  on  a  dryness  of 
the  mouth  and  chest.  So  they  used  to  go  out  in  separate  parties  and 
scatter  over  the  land  in  diligent  search  for  water.  When,  sometimes, 
these  small  bands  thought  they  had  found  the  long-sought  waters, 
suddenly  they  came  upon  a  great  throng  bent  on  the  same  quest.  Con¬ 
sequently,  even  when  the  springs  were  found,  quarrels  often  arose  j 
and,  since  each  party  tried  to  hinder  the  other,  frequently  a  fight  would 
result.  Those  who  were  on  foot  were  able  to  relieve  their  sufferings  in 
some  measure  by  making  a  sparing  use  of  the  water  when  found,  but 
those  who  had  many  horses  were  beset  by  much  difficulty,  for  they 
had  to  lead  the  thirsty  animals  four  or  five  miles  to  water. 

Through  the  fields,  with  slow  step  and  failing  strength,  wandered 
neglected  animals  for  which  their  masters  were  unable  to  provide. 
Horses,  mules,  and  asses,  as  well  as  flocks  and  herds,  wasted  away 
with  parching  thirst  and  died  by  inches.  As  a  result,  the  very  air  in 
the  camp  was  tainted  by  the  pestilential  stench  which  rose  from  their 
decaying  bodies. 

During  this  siege,  merciless  thirst  afflicted  the  people  not  less  than 
had  the  lack  of  food  before  Antioch.  Regardless  of  caution,  they  reck¬ 
lessly  scattered  over  the  surrounding  country  and  roamed  about  in 
search  of  food  and  the  necessary  fodder  for  the  horses.  The  enemy, 
well  aware  of  this  habit  of  foraging,  often  stealthily  issued  forth  from 
the  unguarded  parts  of  the  city  and  attacked  these  bands.  Thus  many 
were  slain,  and  their  horses  carried  off.  Others  were  luckier  and  suc¬ 
ceeded  in  escaping  by  flight,  albeit  not  without  wounds. 

Each  day  our  ranks  grew  less  than  on  the  previous  day.  Almost 
daily  many  perished  by  the  various  accidents  to  which  mankind  is  sub¬ 
ject.  Nor  did  fresh  recruits  come  from  elsewhere  to  take  the  places  and 
assume  the  duties  of  those  who  had  succumbed. 

The  enemy’s  forces,  on  the  other  hand,  were  ever  increasing,  and 
their  numbers  multiplied,  for  through  the  unblockaded  portions  their 
allies  had  free  access  to  the  city.  Thither  they  hastened  and  joined  the 
forces  of  the  citizens  for  our  destruction. 


354 


END  OF  THE  PILGRIMAGE 


8.  The  citizens  build  machines  and  frefare  to  resist.  They  im- 
fose  many  forced  services  on  the  faithful  who  dwell  with 
them  in  the  city. 

During  this  time  our  forces  were  exerting  themselves  to  the  utmost. 
They  built  engines,  wove  wickerwork  frames,  and  spliced  ladders  to¬ 
gether  with  the  greatest  care.  The  besieged,  likewise,  were  ever  on  the 
alert  to  meet  wile  with  wile  and  made  good  use  of  every  device  for 
resistance.  There  was  in  the  city  an  adequate  supply  of  beams  cut  from 
tall  trees,  which,  before  the  Christians  arrived,  had  been  brought  in 
with  wise  forethought  for  the  defense  of  Jerusalem.  In  emulation  of 
our  example,  they  built  from  these,  inside  the  walls,  machines  equal 
to  ours  in  height,  but  of  better  material.  This  they  did  with  the  great¬ 
est  enthusiasm,  that  their  engines  might  not  be  inferior  to  ours  either 
in  construction  or  in  material.  Guards  were  maintained  constantly  on 
the  walls  and  towers,  who  watched  intently  all  that  was  done  in  our 
army,  especially  in  regard  to  devices  which  pertained  to  engines  of 
war.  Every  detail  observed  was  at  once  reported  to  the  chief  men  of 
Jerusalem,  who  strove  with  emulous  skill  to  imitate  the  work  of  the 
ChristianSj  that  they  might  meet  all  our  efforts  with  equal  ingenuity. 
This  was  comparatively  easy,  for  the  people  of  Jerusalem  had  at  their 
command  many  more  skilled  workmen  and  building  tools,  as  well  as 
larger  supplies  of  iron,  copper,  ropes,  and  everything  else  necessary, 
than  had  our  people.  All  citizens  were  compelled  by  a  general  edict  to 
assist  in  the  work.  But  on  the  faithful  who  dwelt  in  the  city  under  the 
yoke  of  bondage  extra  heavy  duties  were  laid.  They  were  forced  to 
render  all  sorts  of  unusual  services.  Heavy  payments  of  money  were 
extorted  from  them  by  violence,  and  they  were  dragged  off  to  prison 
in  chains,  for  the  infidels  feared  that  their  good  will  toward  the  Chris¬ 
tians  might  lead  them  to  disclose  secret  conditions  in  the  city.  None  of 
the  faithful  dared  to  ascend  the  walls  or  even  appear  in  public  unless 
he  was  laden  with  some  burden  which  he  was  dragging  along  like  a 
pack  horse.  They  were  compelled  to  carry  heavy  loads,  and  those  who 
were  skilled  in  any  trade  were  forced  to  exercise  it.  At  the  slightest 
accusation  of  any  chance  informer,  they  were  hurried  off  to  punish¬ 
ment.  They  were  obliged  to  receive  into  their  homes  refugees  from 
the  surrounding  castles  and  villages  who  had  fled  to  Jerusalem  and  to 
supply  them  with  the  necessaries  of  life.  Although  their  means  were 


END  OF  THE  PILGRIMAGE  355 

insufEcient  to  provide  even  a  meager  and  wretched  living  for  their 
own  households  and  dependents,  yet  they  had  to  share  their  substance 
with  strangers,  while  they  themselves  were  the  first  to  do  without.  If 
anything  was  needed  for  the  public  work,  the  first  act  of  the  infidels 
was  to  break  into  the  homes  of  the  faithful.  There  they  took  by  force 
from  the  owner  whatever  they  needed.  At  any  place  and  at  any  hour 
of  night  or  day,  the  Christians  were  liable  to  be  summoned.  If,  for  any 
reason,  they  did  not  respond  at  the  first  call,  without  a  moment’s  delay 
they  were  ignominiously  seized  by  the  hair  or  beard  and  dragged  off 
in  such  a  piteous  condition  that  even  an  enemy  might  have  been  moved 
to  tears. 

To  the  crushing  burden  of  their  sufferings  and  hardships  there 
seemed  to  be  neither  limit  nor  end.  Wearied  beyond  endurance,  they 
had  reached  the  point  of  utter  desperation  where  they  desired  rather 
to  die  in  the  Lord  than  to  continue  their  life  on  earth.  In  fact,  their 
miserable  existence  was  not  far  from  being  a  living  death,  since  not 
even  once  a  day  were  they  granted  time  to  take  refreshment  or  a  little 
respite  for  necessary  sleep. 

Any  unlucky  accident  was  attributed  entirely  to  them.  They  could 
not  go  in  or  out  of  their  own  houses  freely  without  rousing  suspicion. 
They  were  subject  to  insults  at  the  hand  of  anyone,  and  every  oppor¬ 
tunity  was  given  to  bring  false  accusations  against  them. 

9.  A  fleet  from  Genoa  arrives  at  Jaffa.  Guides  are  sent  from 
the  army  to  conduct  these  feofle  to  the  flace  of  siege.  On  the 
wayy  the  escort  falls  Into  an  ambush  laid  by  the  ene^ny. 

While  these  things  were  happening  at  the  siege  before  Jerusalem,  a 
messenger  arrived  with  the  information  that  ships  from  Genoa  had 
arrived  at  the  port  of  Jaffa.^^  The  newcomers  requested  the  leaders  to 
send  an  escort  from  the  army  under  whose  protection  and  guidance 
they  might  safely  proceed  to  Jerusalem. 

Jaffa  is  a  city  on  the  seacoast,  concerning  which  Solinus  speaks  as 
follows  in  the  thirty-ninth  chapter  of  his  work,  T>e  memorabilibus 
mundi:  Jaffa  is  the  oldest  city  in  the  whole  world,  for  it  was  founded 
before  the  flood.  One  may  see  there  a  rock  which  still  bears  traces  of 
the  chains  which  bound  Andromeda,  who  was  exposed  at  that  place  to 
the  sea  monster,  according  to  an  authentic  story.  Marcus  Scaurus,  in 


®^This  fleet  arrived  June  17,  1099. 


END  OF  THE  PILGRIMAGE 


356 

fact,  during  his  aedileship  exhibited  the  bones  of  that  beast  at  Rome 
together  with  other  marvellous  things.  The  fact  is  noted  in  the  annals, 
and  the  actual  measurements  of  the  beast  given.  The  ribs  were  more 
than  forty  feet  long,  and  the  height  of  the  monster  was  greater  than 
that  of  the  elephants  of  India.  The  vertebrae  were  more  than  half  a 
foot  in  width.” 

In  his  epitaph  on  St.  Paula,  Jerome  also  testifies  to  the  same  thing  in 
these  words:  “She  saw  Jaffa  also,  the  port  to  which  Jonas  fled^  the  same 
city,  to  borrow  from  the  tales  of  the  poets,  which  witnessed  Andromeda 
bound  to  the  rock.” 

In  response  to  this  request,  the  count  of  Toulouse,  who  had  more 
abundant  resources  than  the  rest,  with  the  consent  of  all  sent  thither 
one  of  the  nobles  of  his  suite,  Geldemar,  surnamed  Carpinel,  in  com¬ 
mand  of  a  company  of  thirty  knights  and  fifty  foot  soldiers.  After  the 
party  had  started,  however,  the  leaders  began  to  realize  that  this  force 
was  not  sufficient  for  so  difficult  a  task.  They  therefore  begged  the 
count  to  send  additional  troops.  He  acquiesced  and  dispatched  fifty 
additional  knights  to  reinforce  the  first  party,  under  the  command  of 
two  able  and  distinguished  men,  Raymond  Pilet  and  William  de 
Sabran. 

Geldemar,  who  had  already  started  ahead  of  this  party,  marched 
down  into  the  plain  around  Lydda  and  Ramlah  and  there  encountered 
a  company  of  the  enemy,  six  hundred  strong.  They  at  once  attacked 
him  and  killed  four  of  his  knights  and  many  more  foot  soldiers.  Al¬ 
though  few  in  number,  the  Christians  resisted  as  well  as  they  could. 
They  were  cheering  one  another  on  to  the  fight,  when,  fortunately,  the 
two  leaders  who  were  following  them  arrived  before  the  engagement 
was  over  and  threw  themselves  into  the  fray.  With  united  forces  they 
fell  upon  the  foe,  and,  by  the  help  of  divine  mercy,  killed  two  hun¬ 
dred  and  compelled  the  rest  to  flee.  In  this  skirmish,  however,  the 
Christians  lost  two  nobles,  Gilbert  de  Treves  and  Aicard  de  Mont- 
merle.  The  news  of  their  fate  caused  no  little  sorrow  to  the  army. 

After  this  victory  had  been  vouchsafed  from  on  high,  the  detach¬ 
ments  proceeded  on  their  way  to  Jaffa  according  to  their  intention  and 
reached  there  in  safety.  The  sailors  greeted  them  with  rejoicing,  and 
all  shared  in  the  refreshment  which  comes  from  mutual  affection 
and  pleasant  converse. 

Solinus  Polyhistor  XXXIV. 


Jerome  Ef.  xxvii. 


END  OF  THE  PILGRIMAGE 


357 

At  Jaffa  they  remained  for  a  while  until  those  who  had  comeTy  ship 
could  arrange  their  baggage  and  prepare  for  the  march.  Suddenly, 
the  Egyptian  fleet  appeared  one  night  before  the  city.  It  had  been  lying 
near  Ascalon,  waiting  for  an  opportunity  to  injure  the  Christians.  At 
these  tidings  the  people  hurried  down  to  the  shore.  At  first  they  tried 
to  protect  the  ships  from  the  schemes  of  the  foe.  They  soon  perceived, 
however,  that  their  force  was  too  small  to  resist  so  many.  They  there¬ 
fore  dismantled  the  vessels  and  carried  away  the  sails,  ropes,  and  all  the 
rest  of  the  equipment,  and,  laden  with  these  things,  they  then  with¬ 
drew  to  the  citadel. 

One  ship,  however,  was  absent  on  a  predatory  expedition.  When  it 
returned,  laden  with  spoils,  the  enemy’s  fleet  was  in  possession  of  the 
port  of  Jaffa.  It  therefore  continued  on  its  course  and,  borne  by  favor¬ 
ing  breezes,  arrived  in  safety  at  Laodicea. 

Jaffa  was  at  this  time  an  utter  wilderness  entirely  without  inhabit¬ 
ants.  The  citizens  had  but  little  confidence  in  the  city’s  fortifications, 
and  shortly  before  the  Christians  arrived  they  had  abandoned  the 
place.  Our  troops  occupied  the  citadel  only.  When  all  was  ready  for 
departure,  the  newcomers  set  out  for  Jerusalem  with  all  their  posses¬ 
sions,  under  the  military  escort  which  had  been  sent  to  guide  them. 
They  were  received  with  much  joy  by  the  legions  encamped  before 
Jerusalem,  to  whom  their  presence  brought  promise  of  much  assist¬ 
ance,  For  they  were  experienced  men,  skilled  in  the  art  of  building,  as 
sailors  usually  are.  They  were  expert  at  felling  trees,  smoothing  and 
fitting  beams,  and  erecting  machines  in  the  least  possible  time.  More¬ 
over,  they  brought  with  them  a  great  variety  of  things  which  proved 
of  much  help  to  the  expeditionary  forces.  By  the  aid  of  these  people 
the  pilgrims  easily  accomplished  works  which  before  their  arrival  had 
seemed  difficult  and  well-nigh  impossible. 

10.  Those  who  had  come  hy  sea  froceed  to  the  army.  They  lend 
able  assistance  in  constructing  the  engines.  The  count  of 
Toulouse  and  Tancred  are  reconciled  to  each  other. 

Those  who  had  remained  behind  at  the  place  of  siege  continued  faith¬ 
fully  to  press  on  the  work  of  building  machines  and  had  already  com¬ 
pleted  the  greater  part  of  that  task.  The  duke  and  the  counts  of  Flan¬ 
ders  and  Normandy  had  entrusted  the  general  oversight  of  the  work 
to  Gaston  de  Bearn,  an  able  and  magnificent  man,  and  had  begged 


END  OF  THE  PILGRIMAGE 


358 

him  to  exercise  a  careful  watch  over  the  workmen  that  they  might  not 
neglect  their  tasks.  The  chiefs  themselves  often  led  the  people  out  in 
large  companies  to  cut  timber,  which  was  then  brought  back  to  camp 
for  the  various  building  operations.  Some  cut  and  piled  up  shrubs  and 
bushes  and  branches  of  saplings  to  be  used  in  making  wickerwork  cov¬ 
erings  for  the  outside  of  engines.  Others  stripped  off  the  hides  of  ani¬ 
mals,  clean  and  unclean  alike,  which  had  either  died  of  thirst  or  had 
been  killed.  These  skins  were  to  be  hung  over  the  wickerwork  to  pro¬ 
tect  it  from  harm  in  case  the  enemy  should  throw  fire  from  above  to 
destroy  the  machines. 

The  zealous  interest  of  the  duke  and  the  two  counts  just  mentioned 
inspired  great  activity  in  the  troops  along  the  section  on  the  north 
side  of  the  wall.  The  same  enthusiasm  also  prevailed  along  that  part 
of  the  fortifications  which  extended  from  the  tower  on  the  corner  to 
the  west  gate  beneath  the  tower  of  David.  Here  the  forces  of  Lord 
Tancred  and  the  other  nobles  whose  camps  were  in  that  section  car¬ 
ried  on  the  same  work  with  no  less  diligence. 

On  the  south  the  army  of  the  count  of  Toulouse  and  his  entire  fol¬ 
lowing  were  working  with  indefatigable  zeal  and  diligence.  Even 
greater  enthusiasm  prevailed  at  this  point,  for  Raymond  possessed 
more  ample  means  than  the  other  leaders  and  had  also  recently  ob¬ 
tained  fresh  reinforcements  of  men  and  supplies.  All  who  had  come 
from  the  ships  had  joined  his  camp.  They  had  brought  with  them 
many  supplies,  such  as  ropes,  hammers,  and  other  iron  tools  most 
necessary  for  the  work  of  building  machines.  Among  their  number 
were  excellent  workmen,  accustomed  to  building  and  setting  up  ma¬ 
chines,  as  we  have  said — experienced  men  who  were  able  to  suggest 
many  devices  for  bringing  the  work  to  a  speedy  conclusion.  The  noble 
William  Embriacus,  who  commanded  the  Genoese,  also  gave  much 
time  and  effort  to  the  task  of  constructing  the  machines. 

For  four  weeks  the  entire  army  toiled  with  all  its  strength,  and  at 
last  after  great  effort  the  task  was  completed.  The  leaders  then  con¬ 
ferred  together  and  fixed  a  day  for  making  the  attack  on  the  city. 

During  this  time,  however,  a  serious  disagreement  had  arisen  be¬ 
tween  the  count  of  Toulouse  and  Lord  Tancred,  and  there  was  discord 
also  among  some  of  the  other  nobles  for  various  reasons.  It  seemed 
necessary,  therefore,  to  the  chiefs,  as  well  as  to  the  bishops,  the  clergy, 
and,  in  fact,  to  the  entire  people,  that  full  and  loving  harmony  should 


END  OF  THE  PILGRIMAGE  359 

first  of  all  be  restored  to  their  ranks.  Then,  with  sincere  hearts,  they 
would  be  able  to  implore  divine  aid. 

II*  ^  jcist  is  'proclaiTned,  The  entire  com f any  of  'pilgrims  goes  up 
to  the  Mount  of  Olives. 

A  FAST  was  accordingly  proclaimed  to  the  people  by  public  decree  for  a 
certain  day.  Clad  in  their  sacerdotal  robes  and  with  bare  feet,  the 
bishops  and  clergy  led  their  people  with  the  utmost  reverence  to  the 
Mount  of  Olives.  In  their  hands  they  bore  crosses  and  relics  of  the 
saints.  There  the  venerable  Peter  the  Hermit  and  Arnulf,  a  learned 
man,  a  friend  of  the  count  of  Normandy,  preached  to  the  people.  With 
eloquent  words  they  besought  all  to  show  a  spirit  of  forbearance 
toward  one  another. 

The  Mount  of  Olives  lies  about  a  mile  distant  over  against  the  city 
on  the  east,  beyond  the  valley  of  Jehoshaphat.  Hence  St.  Luke  speaks 
of  it  as  a  sabbath  day’s  journey  from  Jerusalem.^'^  It  was  from  this 
mount  that,  forty  days  after  His  resurrection,  our  Saviour  ascended 
into  heaven  before  the  eyes  of  His  disciples  and  a  cloud  received  Him 
from  their  sight. 

When  the  faithful  reached  this  place,  they  implored  aid  from  on 
high  with  deep  humility  and  contrition,  amid  heartfelt  sobs  and  sighs. 
The  leaders  became  reconciled  to  one  another,  and  all  the  people 

again  entered  into  a  state  of  mutual  love.  Then  they  went  down  from 

% 

the  mount  and  once  more  ascended  to  the  church  of  Mt.  Sion  which,  as 
has  been  said,  was  situated  near  the  city  on  the  south,  at  the  top  of  the 
mount. 

Meanwhile  the  citizens  were  filled  with  wonder  as  to  the  meaning 
of  this  procession  round  the  city.  From  the  walls  and  towers,  with 
bows  and  ballistae,  they  kept  hurling  missiles  on  the  crowded  ranks 
of  the  Christians,  whence  some  of  our  people  who  did  not  exercise  due 
caution  received  wounds.  To  show  their  scorn  and  contempt  for  the 
Christians,  the  infidels  had  set  up  crosses  on  the  walls,  and  on  these 
they  vented  all  kinds  of  shameful  insults.  They  even  spit  upon  them 
and  in  other  ways  indulged  their  feelings  with  filthy  abuse.  With 
brazen  insolence  they  kept  pouring  forth  blasphemous  words  and 
taunts  against  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  and  His  doctrine  of  salvation.  Al¬ 
though  filled  with  wrath  such  as  sacrilege  alone  can  awaken,  the  Chris- 

Ac.  I ;  1 2. 


END  OF  THE  PILGRIMAGE 


360 

tians  proceeded  to  carry  out  their  vows  in  entire  devotion  and  at  length 
arrived  at  the  church,  their  destination. 

After  prayers  had  once  more  been  completed  there,  the  day  was 
appointed  on  which,  as  with  one  accord,  they  were  to  attack  the  city. 
Then,  after  the  procession  around  the  city  had  been  completed,  the 
army  returned  to  camp.^^  Commands  were  given  that  if  anything  was 
lacking  for  the  successful  completion  of  the  task,  it  should  be  supplied 
immediately,  that  there  might  be  no  delay  from  lack  of  attention  to 
detail,  when  the  moment  for  the  attack  arrived. 

12.  During  the  nighty  the  duke  and  the  two  illustrious  counts 
move  their  camf»  T he  engines  are  set  uf  in  'position  round  the 
city . 

The  day  set  for  attacking  the  city  approached.  On  the  night  before, 
the  duke  and  the  two  illustrious  counts  moved  their  camp.  For  they 
perceived  that  the  section  of  the  wall  which  they  had  been  blockading 
was  particularly  well  defended  by  machines,  weapons,  and  valiant 
warriors.  Well  aware  that  there  was  more  to  be  feared  from  that  side, 
the  infidels  had  fortified  it  all  the  more  strongly.  In  view  of  these  de¬ 
fenses,  the  leaders  saw  that  they  could  not  hope  to  accomplish  much 
on  the  following  day.  It  appeared  to  them,  and  rightly,  that  the  other 
side  of  Jerusalem,  which  had  not  been  invested,  was  being  guarded 
with  less  care.  Accordingly,  that  night,  with  remarkable  foresight  and 
great  labor,  they  transferred  their  machines  and  the  siege  tower,  piece 
by  piece,  before  the  parts  were  put  together,  to  that  part  of  the  city 
which  lies  between  the  gate  of  St.  Stephen  and  the  tower  at  the  corner 
on  the  north,  overlooking  the  valley  of  Jehoshaphat.  The  camp  also 
was  moved  thither.  Strenuous  work  throughout  the  entire  night  en¬ 
abled  them  to  transport  and  assemble  the  engines  and  to  locate  them 
in  their  proper  places  before  the  sun  rose.  The  movable  tower  was  ap¬ 
plied  to  the  fortifications  at  a  place  where  the  wall  was  somewhat 
lower  and  the  approach  more  level  and  more  easily  accessible.  It  was 
so  placed  that  the  defenders  in  their  towers  and  the  fighters  in  this 
siege  engine  might  almost  seem  to  be  contending  in  a  hand-to-hand 
struggle.  The  task  thus  accomplished  was  not  slight,  for  ere  sunrise  the 
engines  had  been  moved  half  a  mile  from  the  former  location  of  the 

This  procession  occurred  July  8,  1099. 


END  OF  THE  PILGRIMAGE  361 

camp,  the  parts  assembled,  and  the  machines  set  up  in  their  new  posi¬ 
tions. 

At  dawn  the  citizens  hurried  to  the  walls  to  see  what  the  Christians 
were  doing  outside.  To  their  amazement  they  found  that  a  part  of  the 
camp  which  for  the  last  two  days  had  stood  there  had  disappeared 
with  all  its  martial  equipment.  They  scanned  the  vicinity  and  the  cir¬ 
cuit  of  the  wall  carefully  and  discovered  that  the  duke’s  camp  had 
been  moved  and  the  engines  set  up  in  the  place  just  described. 

Throughout  that  same  night,  in  other  parts  of  the  city,  in  the  same 
way  that  they  had  placed  their  camps  in  the  order  related,  the  other 
chiefs  also  had  continued  their  work.  They  too  had  kept  vigilant 
watch  and  had  set  up  their  engines.  Practically  simultaneously,  the 
count  of  Toulouse  attached  the  tower  which  he  had  had  made  with 
such  care  to  the  ramparts  between  the  church  of  Mt.  Sion  and  the 
city,  and  the  other  chiefs  who  occupied  the  position  around  the  tower 
at  the  corner,  now  known  as  the  tower  of  Tancred,  also  moved  up  to 
the  wall,  with  equal  care  and  effort,  a  wooden  tower,  which  in  height 
and  solid  construction  almost  matched  the  others. 

The  appearance  and  workmanship  of  the  three  machines  was  very 
similar.  They  were  square  structures,  and  the  side  facing  the  city  was 
protected  by  a  double  covering.  By  a  skilful  device  the  outer  one  of  the 
two  could  be  let  down  in  such  a  manner  as  to  form  a  bridge  between 
the  tower  and  the  wall.  This  furnished  the  soldiers  a  means  of  access 
to  the  city.  This  maneuver  did  not  leave  the  side  of  the  machine  ex¬ 
posed,  however,  for  when  the  outer  covering  was  let  down,  the  second 
layer  beneath  it  afforded  quite  as  much  protection  as  that  of  the  other 
sides. 

13.  The  city  is  stormed.  The  battle  is  j ought  with  intense  fury 
on  both  sidesy  but  the  affearance  of  night  futs  an  end  to  the 
engagement. 

At  daybreak,  according  to  arrangement,  the  entire  Christian  army 
stood  before  the  city,  fully  armed  and  ready  for  the  attack.  One  single 
purpose  fired  the  hearts  of  all — either  to  restore  Jerusalem  to  the  en¬ 
joyment  of  Christian  liberty  or  to  give  up  their  lives  for  Christ’s  sake. 
There  was  not  one  person  in  that  great  throng,  whether  aged  or  sick 
or  even ’very  young,  who  did  not  fervently  and  zealously  long  for 


END  OF  THE  PILGRIMAGE 


362 

battle.  Even  women,  regardless  of  sex  and  natural  weakness,  dared  to 
assume  arms  and  fought  manfully  far  beyond  their  strength.  Thus  the 
Christians  advanced  with  one  accord  to  battle.  All  tried  to  push  the 
newly  constructed  engines  closer  to  the  wall  so  that  they  might  more 
easily  attack  those  who  were  putting  up  a  strenuous  resistance  on  the 
ramparts  and  the  towers. 

The  citizens,  determined  for  their  part  to  withstand  their  enemies 
to  the  utmost,  sent  forth  showers  of  arrows  and  missiles.  Stones,  hurled 
both  by  hand  and  from  the  machines,  fell  with  fearful  force,  as  the 
infidels  tried  by  every  device  to  keep  our  people  from  approaching  the 
wall.  But  the  Christians,  protected  by  their  shields  and  the  wicker¬ 
work  screens  which  they  held  out  before  them,  showed  no  less  activity. 
Showers  of  darts  rained  from  their  bows  and  ballistae,  and  volleys  of 
stone  missiles  poured  forth  from  the  engines  as  the  pilgrims,  undis¬ 
mayed,  strove  to  approach  closer  to  the  fortifications.  They  were  seek¬ 
ing  to  weaken  the  courage  of  their  foes  and  granted  them  not  a  mo¬ 
ment’s  respite.  Some,  stationed  inside  the  movable  tower,  kept  trying 
to  push  it  forward  by  means  of  poles  j  others  at  the  engines  sent  huge 
rocks  crashing  against  the  walls,  in  the  hope  that  the  constant  collision 
and  continual  blows  might  weaken  them  so  that  they  would  fall.  Still 
others,  armed  with  smaller  weapons  called  mangonSy  threw  stones  of 
lesser  size  and  toiled  zealously  to  prevent  the  defenders  on  the  ram¬ 
parts  from  harming  our  fighters. 

Yet  those  who  were  trying  to  push  forward  the  engine  were  not  as 
successful  as  they  desired,  for  a  wide  and  deep  ditch  before  the  bul¬ 
warks  greatly  hindered  the  progress  of  the  machine 5  nor  did  those 
who  were  attempting  to  make  a  breach  in  the  walls  meet  with  satis¬ 
factory  results.  For  from  the  outer  walls  the  citizens  had  hung  sacks 
filled  with  straw  and  chaff,  together  with  ropes  and  tapestries,  huge 
beams,  and  mattresses  stuffed  with  silk.  The  soft  and  yielding  char¬ 
acter  of  these  buffers  rendered  the  blows  of  the  missiles  ineffective  and 
defeated  all  the  efforts  of  the  assailants.  Moreover,  the  enemy  had 
likewise  set  up  engines  within  the  city  which  much  exceeded  ours  in 
number.  From  these,  arrows  and  stones  were  continually  hurled  to 
hinder  the  work  of  the  Christians.  Thus,  as  both  sides  were  exerting 
themselves  to  the  utmost  and  fighting  with  bitter  hatred,  the  conflict 
continued  from  morning  to  night.  It  was  persistent  and  terrible  be¬ 
yond  belief  j  spears  and  arrows  fell  like  hail  upon  both  armies,  and 


END  OF  THE  PILGRIMAGE  363 

stone  missiles,  hurled  from  the  opposing  hosts,  collided  in  the  very 
air  and  brought  death  in  many  a  varied  form  to  the  fighters. 

Equal  labor  and  equal  danger  fell  to  the  lot  of  all,  whether  they 
were  fighting  under  the  banner  of  the  duke  or  under  those  of  the  count 
of  Toulouse  and  the  other  leaders,  for,  as  has  been  mentioned,  the 
attack  was  being  made  simultaneously  in  three  places  with  equal  fervor 
and  enthusiasm.  The  work  of  the  Christians  was  much  increased,  how¬ 
ever,  by  the  fact  that  it  was  necessary  to  fill  up  the  moat  with  rubbish, 
stones,  and  earth  before  a  road  could  be  made  along  which  to  move 
the  machines. 

Equally  arduous  and  more  trying,  however,  was  the  task  of  the  de¬ 
fenders  as  they  endeavored  to  hinder  the  besieging  forces.  They  con¬ 
tinued  to  put  up  a  valiant  resistance  against  the  equally  strenuous  ef¬ 
forts  of  the  besiegers.  In  their  desperate  efforts  to  burn  the  engines  of 
the  Christians  they  hurled  down  burning  brands,  darts  laden  with 
burning  sulphur,  pitch,  fasta^  oil,  or  anything  that  would  furnish  fuel 
to  the  flames.  Moreover,  so  skilfully  were  the  blows  of  the  huge 
engines  which  had  been  built  within  the  city  directed  against  those  of 
the  Christians  outside  that  the  supports  of  the  latter  soon  began  to 
weaken  and  the  sides  became  perforated.  The  fighters  who  had  as¬ 
cended  to  the  upper  stories  of  the  tower  to  attack  the  city  from  that 
height  were  greatly  alarmed  and  barely  escaped  being  thrown  to  the 
ground.  At  length,  however,  by  pouring  on  quantities  of  water  from 
above,  the  Christians  succeeded  in  thwarting  the  efforts  of  the  fire 
throwers,  and  the  fury  of  the  flames  was  checked. 

14.  Both  besiegers  and  defenders  'pass  the  night  In  a  state  of  ex¬ 
treme  anxiety. 

The  approach  of  night  put  an  end  to  this  conflict  so  courageously  waged 
in  the  midst  of  extreme  danger,  yet  even  then  the  result  was  indecisive. 
During  the  watches  of  the  night,  the  fighters  obtained  some  measure 
of  bodily  rest,  yet  the  never-ceasing  turmoil  of  spirit  prevented  sleep 
and  caused  them  to  labor  no  less.  Their  hearts,  harassed  by  biting 
cares,  surged  within  them  as,  ever  mindful  of  their  purpose,  they 
eagerly  waited  for  the  dawn,  when  they  might  again  return  to  the 
combat.  Ardently  they  longed  to  try  once  more  the  fortune  of  battle, 
for  they  had  faith  in  the  Lord  that  they  were  about  to  draw  a  better 
lot  and  win  the  palm  of  victory. 


END  OF  THE  PILGRIMAGE 


364 

Nevertheless,  their  anxiety  was  great  lest  the  enemy,  by  some  means, 
might  furtively  set  fire  to  the  engines.  Hence  they  maintained  a  con¬ 
tinual  watch  over  them  and  passed  a  sleepless  night. 

The  besieged  were  tortured  by  no  less  biting  fear.  Their  especial 
dread  was  that  the  foe,  whose  intrepid  attack  they  had  witnessed  on 
the  day  just  passed,  might  seize  the  opportunity  ajfforded  by  the  silence 
of  midnight  to  gain  entrance  to  the  city,  either  by  making  a  breach  in 
the  wall  or  by  scaling  the  fortifications.  Throughout  the  entire  night, 
therefore,  they  too  with  zealous  care  patrolled  the  circuit  of  the  forti¬ 
fications  with  the  watchful  diligence  of  those  to  whom  it  was  a  matter 
of  life  and  death.  In  each  tower  were  stationed  officers  of  the  night 
watch . 

Meanwhile,  the  elders  and  those  upon  whom  rested  the  chief  re¬ 
sponsibility  for  the  city  kept  making  the  rounds  of  the  streets.  They 
admonished  others  also  to  keep  a  diligent  watch  for  the  sake  of  their 
wives  and  children,  their  own  property,  and  the  public  weal.  Carefully 
they  scrutinized  the  gates  and  ways,  that  no  opportunity  might  be  given 
for  the  wiles  of  the  enemy. 

Thus  both  armies  were  afflicted  with  similar  anxieties,  nor  did  their 
watchful  solicitude  grant  them  any  time  for  repose.  The  incessant  men¬ 
tal  turmoil,  which  kept  their  hearts  and  minds  in  agitation,  was  far 
more  trying  for  both  sides  than  the  actual  conflict  on  the  field  of  battle 
which  they  had  endured  the  day  before. 

15.  On  the  following  day  the  conflict  is  resumed.  The  city  is 
assailed  more  furiously  than  before.  Sorceresses  ferishy  who 
had  been  brought  for  the  furfose  of  bewitching  our  machines. 

The  night  was  drawing  to  a  close,  and  the  first  rays  of  light  were  al¬ 
ready  beginning  to  announce  the  approach  of  the  longed-for  day.  The 
people,  animated  with  the  most  intense  zeal,  were  again  summoned 
to  the  conflict.  Each  man  returned  at  once  to  the  post  of  duty  which 
had  been  assigned  him  on  the  previous  day.  Some,  at  the  hurling  ma¬ 
chines,  kept  throwing  immense  stones  of  great  weight  against  the 
walls.  Others,  from  lower  positions  in  the  siege  engine,  exerted  all 
their  skill  and  strength  in  pushing  it  forward.  Still  others,  stationed  on 
the  top  story  of  the  same  machine,  harried  the  foe  in  the  opposite 
towers  with  showers  of  missiles  from  their  bows  and  ballistae  or  with 
any  other  weapons  at  hand.  So  persistent  and  effective  was  this  bom- 


END  OF  THE  PILGRIMAGE  365 

bardment  that  the  defenders  dared  not  raise  a  hand  and  were  forced  to 
remain  within  the  ramparts.  When  the  moat  had  been  filled  and  the 
forewalls  breached,  some  of  the  besiegers  worked  with  all  their  might 
to  push  the  tower  nearer.  Meanwhile  a  still  larger  force  kept  up  a 
constant  hail  of  stones  and  arrows  to  drive  back  the  defenders  from  the 
ramparts,  so  that  they  might  not  hinder  those  who  were  pushing  the 
engine  forward. 

But  as  the  citizens  saw  the  efforts  of  the  Christians  increase,  they  too 
endeavored  the  more  diligently  to  meet  every  stratagem  with  a  like 
stratagem  and  to  repel  force  by  force.  They  too  kept  hurling  back 
darts  and  stone  missiles  in  retaliation  against  the  besiegers  and  against 
those  who  were  trying  to  advance  the  tower,  and  displayed  an  ad¬ 
mirable  energy  which  successfully  hindered  their  progress.  And  in  the 
hope  of  putting  an  end  to  our  effort  once  for  all,  they  hurled  down  fire 
upon  the  machines  in  fragile  jars  and  in  every  other  possible  way. 
They  also  threw  down  sulphur  and  pitch,  grease  and  fat,  wax,  dry 
wood  and  stubble — anything,  in  fact,  that  might  help  to  feed  the 
flame  by  acting  as  fuel.  As  a  result,  in  both  armies  frightful  havoc  was 
wrought,  and  many,  both  knights  and  foot  soldiers,  perished  by  vari¬ 
ous  mishaps  and  unforeseen  accidents.  Some  were  crushed  to  atoms 
by  missiles  hurled  from  the  engines  3  others  collapsed  suddenly,  pierced 
through  both  breastplate  and  shield  by  the  showers  of  arrows  and 
spears.  Some  died  immediately,  struck  by  sharp  rocks  hurled  either 
by  hand  or  from  the  machines.  Others  lived  on  with  shattered  limbs 
disabled  for  many  days  or,  perchance,  forever.  Nevertheless,  these 
many  perils  could  not  deter  the  contestants  from  their  undertaking  nor 
lessen  their  fervent  determination  to  fight.  Nor  was  it  easy  to  judge 
which  people  contended  with  the  greater  enthusiasm. 

It  does  not  seem  right,  however,  to  pass  over  in  silence  a  notable 
event  which  is  said  to  have  happened  that  day.  Among  their  other 
machines  outside  the  walls,  the  Christians  had  one  which  caused  dread¬ 
ful  slaughter  among  the  defenders  by  the  violent  impetus  with  which 
it  hurled  forth  rocks  of  immense  weight.  When  the  infidels  perceived 
that  no  skill  of  theirs  could  prevail  against  this,  they  brought  two  sor¬ 
ceresses  to  bewitch  it  and  by  their  magic  incantations  render  it  power¬ 
less.  These  women  were  engaged  in  their  magic  rites  and  divinations 
on  the  wall  when  suddenly  a  huge  millstone  from  that  very  engine 
struck  them.  They,  together  with  three  girls  who  attended  them,  were 


366  END  OF  THE  PILGRIMAGE 

crushed  to  death  and  their  lifeless  bodies  dashed  from  the  wall.  At  this 
sight  great  applause  rose  from  the  ranks  of  the  Christian  army  and 
exultation  filled  the  hearts  of  all  in  our  camp.  On  the  other  hand,  deep 
sorrow  fell  upon  the  people  of  Jerusalem  because  of  that  disaster. 

1 6.  A  sign  from  heaven  affears  on  the  Mount  of  Olives »  Those 
who  but  a  short  time  before  had  retired  exhausted  return 
eagerly  to  the  fight. 

Although  the  conflict  had  endured  unto  the  seventh  hour  of  the 
day,  the  result  was  still  doubtful  without  definite  victory  for  either 
side.  The  Christians,  wearied  beyond  their  strength,  were  now  begin¬ 
ning  in  despair  to  relax  their  strenuous  efforts.  The  tower  was  almost 
completely  wrecked  by  the  continual  battering  to  which  it  had  been 
subjected,  and  the  other  machines  were  smoking  from  contact  with 
the  firebrands  which  had  been  hurled  upon  them.  It  seemed  best  under 
the  circumstances  to  draw  them  back  a  little  and  defer  continuing  the 
combat  until  the  morrow.  The  people  were  now  beginning  to  feel 
doubtful  of  success,  their  courage  was  giving  way,  and  gradually  they 
were  falling  out  of  the  ranks.  The  enemy,  on  the  contrary,  waxed  ever 
more  insulting  and  flung  out  the  challenge  to  battle  with  more  bold¬ 
ness  than  usual.  At  this  crisis,  divine  aid  came  to  the  relief  of  the  faith¬ 
ful  and,  in  their  desperate  need,  brought  them  aid  according  to  their 
wish.  For  on  the  Mount  of  Olives  appeared  a  warrior  who  never  was 
seen  thereafter.  Waving  a  splendid  gleaming  shield,  he  gave  the  le¬ 
gions  the  signal  to  return  and  renew  the  combat. 

Duke  Godfrey  and  his  brother  Eustace  had  stationed  themselves  in 
the  upper  story  of  the  movable  tower,  that  they  might  take  part  in  the 
attack  and  also  see  that  the  siege  engine  was  properly  protected.  When 
the  duke  caught  sight  of  this  wondrous  vision  he  was  filled  with  joy 
and  at  once  began  with  loud  shouts  to  call  back  the  people  and  the 
more  important  leaders.  Thereupon,  led  by  the  mercy  of  God,  the  en¬ 
tire  people  returned  in  exaltation  of  spirit  to  the  fray.  So  enthusiastic 
were  they  that  it  seemed  as  if  they  were  beginning  the  battle  anew 
with  fresh  strength.  Even  those  who  had  lately  withdrawn,  suffering 
under  the  burden  of  wounds  or  fainting  from  exhaustion,  now  returned 
voluntarily  and  advanced  to  the  attack  with  redoubled  strength  and 
increased  ardor.  The  leaders  and  those  distinguished  men  who  formed 
the  support  of  the  army  led  the  way  and,  by  their  example,  inspired 


END  OF  THE  PILGRIMAGE 


367 

the  rest  with  courage.  The  women  also,  that  they  might  have  their 
share  in  the  work,  cheered  the  fighters  to  renewed  courage  by  their 
words  and  brought  them  water  in  small  vessels  that  they  might  not 
faint  upon  the  field  of  battle. 

Joy  reigned  in  the  camp  as  if  victory  were  already  assured.  Within 
an  hour  the  moat  had  been  filled,  the  outer  wall  broken  down,  and  the 
siege  engine  applied  by  force  to  the  walls. 

It  has  been  already  stated  that  the  citizens  had  hung  from  the  ram¬ 
parts  immensely  heavy  beams  of  great  length  to  deaden  the  blows  of 
the  machines.  Our  fighters  in  the  siege  tower  succeeded  in  cutting  the 
ropes  which  held  two  of  these  buffers.  They  fell  to  the  ground,  where 
they  were  caught  by  men  below  although  not  without  great  risk.  They 
were  immediately  carried  inside  the  machine  and  used  to  reinforce 
the  bridge  which,  as  will  be  explained  later,  was  thrown  across  from 
the  movable  tower  to  the  wall.  For  the  timbers  which  formed  the 
bridge  were  weak  and  would  not  have  supported  the  weight  of  the 
people  who  were  to  cross  it,  had  it  not  been  strengthened  by  these 
solid  beams  which  were  placed  beneath  it. 

17.  The  count  of  Toulouse  and  his  forces  attack  the  city  with 
equal  vigor  on  the  south. 

While  the  assault  on  the  northern  side  of  the  city  was  being  carried 
on  with  such  vigor,  the  count  of  Toulouse  and  those  who  were  with 
him  were  attacking  from  the  south  with  equal  fervor.  For  three  suc¬ 
cessive  days  they  had  worked  without  respite  to  fill  up  the  moat.  When 
this  was  finished,  they  applied  a  siege  engine  to  the  wall  by  force,  in 
such  a  position  that  the  defenders  in  the  towers  and  the  Christians  in 
the  siege  engines  could  almost  have  wounded  one  another  with  their 
lances.  The  enthusiasm  of  the  fighters  everywhere  was  equal  and  their 
perseverance  the  same.  They  pressed  on  the  work  with  more  than 
usual  energy  because  a  certain  servant  of  Christ,  who  dwelt  on  the 
Mount  of  Olives,  had  promised  them  confidently  that  on  this  day 
Jerusalem  would  be  taken.  The  sign  of  the  waving  shield  from  the 
Mount  of  Olives,  which  they  too  had  seen,  had  likewise  kindled  their 
ardor  greatly  and  made  them  still  more  sure  that  victory  would  be 
theirs.  The  work  of  both  these  Christian  hosts  seemed  to  progress  with 
equal  pace.  It  seemed,  indeed,  as  if  it  were  directed  with  equal  care  by 
the  same  great  Leader,  who  had  determined  to  repay  the  devotion  of 


368  END  OF  THE  PILGRIMAGE 

His  servants  with  a  fitting  reward.  It  was  indeed  time  that  the  fruit  of 
such  mighty  efforts  and  the  recompense  for  military  service  so  faith¬ 
fully  rendered  should  be  received, 

1 8.  The  duke  and  his  comrades  lower  the  bridge  from  the 
wooden  tower  to  the  wall  and  introduce  their  troofs.  The 
city  is  takeny  the  gate  is  ofenedy  and  our  troofs  enter  Jeru^ 

Salem » 

The  legions  of  the  duke  and  the  two  counts,  who,  as  we  have  stated, 
were  attacking  the  city  on  the  north,  had,  by  the  aid  of  God,  succeeded 
in  shattering  the  outworks  and  filling  up  the  moat.  The  enemy,  now 
utterly  exhausted,  could  resist  no  longer.  Accordingly,  the  Christian 
troops  were  able  to  approach  the  wall  without  danger,  for  only  here 
and  there  were  found  adversaries  bold  enough  to  try  to  attack  them 
through  the  loopholes. 

At  the  duke’s  command,  the  fighters  in  the  siege  engines  had  set  on 
fire  sacks  of  straw  and  cushions  stuffed  with  cotton.  Fanned  into  a 
blaze  by  the  north  wind,  these  poured  forth  such  dense  smoke  into  the 
city  that  those  who  were  trying  to  defend  the  wall  could  scarcely  open 
their  mouths  or  eyes.  Bewildered  and  dazed  by  the  torrent  of  black 
smoke,  they  abandoned  the  defense  of  the  ramparts.  As  soon  as  this 
situation  became  apparent,  the  duke  ordered  the  beams  which  had 
been  rescued  from  the  enemy  to  be  brought  aloft  at  once  and  so  placed 
that  one  end  rested  on  the  machine  and  the  other  on  the  wall.  He  then 
caused  the  movable  side  of  the  siege  tower  to  be  lowerd.  This,  sup¬ 
ported  by  the  heavy  beams  which  had  been  placed  beneath  it,  formed  a 
bridge  of  sufficient  strength.  Thus  material  which  the  enemy  had 
brought  in  for  their  own  benefit  was  turned  to  their  injury. 

When  the  bridge  had  been  adjusted  in  this  manner,  the  noble  and 
illustrious  Duke  Godfrey,  accompanied  by  his  brother  Eustace,  led  the 
way  into  the  city  and  encouraged  the  rest  to  follow.  They  were  fol- 


Later  writers  in  the  West  attached  much  more  importance  to  the  distinction  of 
being  first  to  enter  Jerusalem  than  did  those  who  were  actually  present.  The  crusaders 
doubtless  crowded  into  the  city  so  rapidly,  once  started,  that  it  must  have  been  exceed- 
ingly  diflEcult,  if  not  impossible,  to  determine  who  was  first.  The  chroniclers  actually 
present  agree  that  Godfrey’s  army  was  the  first  to  gain  entrance,  that  of  Raymond 
last.  The  anonymous  author  of  the  Gesta  mentions  a  “Letholdus”  as  the  first  in  God¬ 
frey’s  army.  This  is  doubtless  the  same  person  as  the  ‘‘Litholf”  of  Albert  and  the 
“Ludolf”  of  William,  and  Albert  may  be  right  in  giving  Tournai  as  his  birthplace  and 
saying  that  he  was  accompanied  by  a  brother,  ‘‘Engelbert,”  whom  William  calls 


END  OF  THE  PILGRIMAGE 


369 

lowed  immediately  by  the  two  noble  brothers  Ludolf  and  Gislebert, 
natives  of  the  city  of  Tournai,  who  well  deserve  to  be  remembered 
forever.  Then  a  host  of  cavalry  and  infantry  crossed,  so  many  in  num¬ 
ber  that  neither  the  engine  nor  the  bridge  could  support  more.  When 
the  enemy  perceived  that  the  Christians  were  in  possession  of  the  wall 
and  that  the  duke  had  already  raised  his  standard,  they  abandoned  the 
ramparts  and  towers  and  betook  themselves  to  the  narrow  streets. 

As  soon  as  our  people  observed  that  the  duke  and  a  majority  of 
the  leaders  had  seized  the  towers,  they  did  not  wait  to  ascend  the 
machine,  but  vied  with  one  another  in  raising  to  the  walls  the  scaling 
ladders  with  which  they  were  well  supplied.  For,  in  obedience  to  a 
public  proclamation,  each  pair  of  knights  had  prepared  a  ladder  to  be 
used  in  common.  By  means  of  these,  without  waiting  for  the  duke^s 
command,  they  now  joined  the  others  on  the  wall. 

Immediately  following  Godfrey  came  the  count  of  Flanders,  the 
duke  of  Normandy,  and  the  gallant  Tancred,  a  warrior  praiseworthy 
in  every  respect.  With  these  also  mounted  Hugh  the  Elder,  count  of 
St.  Polj  Baldwin  du  Bourg^  Gaston  de  Bearn  j  Gaston  de  Beziers  3 
Gerard  de  Roussillon  3  Thomas  de  La  Fere  3  Conan  the  Breton  3  Count 
Rainbald  from  the  city  of  Orange  3  Ludovic  de  Moncons3  Conon  de 
Montague,  and  Lambert  his  son  3  as  well  as  many  others  whose  names 
and  number  I  do  not  recall. 

As  soon  as  the  duke  saw  that  all  these  knights  had  entered  safely,  he 
sent  some  of  their  number  with  an  honorable  escort  to  open  the  north 
gate,  now  the  gate  of  St.  Stephen,  that  the  people  who  were  waiting 
outside  might  enter.  This  was  unbarred  without  delay,  and  the  entire 
army  rushed  in  pell-mell  without  order  or  discipline. 

It  was  a  Friday  at  the  ninth  hour.  Verily,  it  seemed  divinely  or¬ 
dained  that  the  faithful  who  were  fighting  for  the  glory  of  the  Saviour 
should  have  obtained  the  consummation  of  their  desires  at  the  same 
hour  and  on  the  very  day  on  which  the  Lord  had  suffered  in  that  city 
for  the  salvation  of  the  world.  It  was  on  that  day,  as  we  read,  that  the 


“Giselbert.’^  Later  Western  writers  naturally  sought  a  local  hero  for  the  honor  and 
usually  joined  him  to  Lethold  as  sharer  in  the  honor.  Thus  Ralph  of  Caen,  whom 
Archer  and  Kingsford  cite,  had  the  Norman,  Bernard  de  St.  Valery,  join  Lethold. 
Hagenmeyer,  after  examining  the  various  claims,  concluded  that  the  probable  basis 
for  selection  in  most  cases  was  the  fact  that  they  were  the  first  of  their  respective  armies 
to  enter  the  city  (see  H.  Hagenmeyer,  Anonymi  geUa  Francorum  et  aliorum  Hiero- 
solymitanoruifiy  p.  466,  note  18). 


END  OF  THE  PILGRIMAGE 


370 

first  man  was  created  and  the  second  was  delivered  over  to  death  for 
the  salvation  of  the  first.  It  was  fitting,  therefore,  that,  at  that  very 
hour,  those  who  were  members  of  His  body  and  imitators  of  Him 
should  triumph  in  His  name  over  His  enemies. 

19.  The  duke  rides  hither  and  thither  through  the  city  with  his 
followers  and  works  havoc  beyond  description^  The  count  of 
Toulouse  forces  an  entrance  on  the  south  side  and  introduces 
his  men,  So  me  of  the  citizens  retreat  to  the  citadel. 

The  duke  and  those  who  were  with  him  then  united  their  forces  and, 
protected  by  their  shields  and  helmets,  swept  hither  and  thither 
through  the  streets  and  squares  of  the  city  with  drawn  swords.  Regard¬ 
less  of  age  and  condition,  they  laid  low,  without  distinction,  every 
enemy  encountered.  Everywhere  was  frightful  carnage,  everywhere 
lay  heaps  of  severed  heads,  so  that  soon  it  was  impossible  to  pass  or  to 
go  from  one  place  to  another  except  over  the  bodies  of  the  slain.  Al¬ 
ready  the  leaders  had  forced  their  way  by  various  routes  almost  to  the 
center  of  the  city  and  wrought  unspeakable  slaughter  as  they  ad¬ 
vanced.  A  host  of  people  followed  in  their  train,  athirst  for  the  blood 
of  the  enemy  and  wholly  intent  upon  destruction. 

Meanwhile,  the  count  of  Toulouse  and  the  leaders  who  were  fight¬ 
ing  with  him  in  the  vicinity  of  Mt.  Sion  were  entirely  ignorant  that  the 
city  had  been  taken  and  that  the  victory  was  ours.  But  the  loud  shouts 
of  the  Christians  as  they  entered  Jerusalem  and  the  fearful  cries  which 
arose  as  the  massacre  of  the  infidels  proceeded  brought  consternation 
to  the  defenders  in  that  section  of  the  city.  They  were  at  a  loss  to  ac¬ 
count  for  the  unusual  clamor  and  the  ominous  uproar.  All  too  soon 
they  discovered  that  the  city  had  been  entered  by  force  and  the  legions 
of  the  Christians  introduced.  Without  delay  they  abandoned  the  towers 
and  fortifications  and  fled  in  different  directions,  intent  on  safety  alone. 
The  majority  took  refuge  in  the  citadel,  because  that  was  close  at  hand. 

The  army  let  down  the  bridge  unopposed,  raised  their  ladders  to  the 
walls,  and  entered  the  city  without  the  slightest  hindrance  on  the  part 
of  the  enemy.  As  soon  as  they  themselves  were  admitted,  they  threw 
open  the  south  gate  which  was  the  nearest  to  them  and  let  in  the  rest 
of  the  people.  It  was  here  that  the  illustrious  and  valiant  count  of  Tou¬ 
louse  entered,  accompanied  by  Isoard,  count  of  Die,  Raymond  Pilet, 
William  de  Sabran,  the  bishop  of  Albara,  and  many  other  nobles 


END  OF  THE  PILGRIMAGE  371 

whose  names  and  number  no  history  has  preserved  for  us.^®  In  one 
united  body  these  forces,  armed  to  the  teeth,  swarmed  everywhere 
through  the  midst  of  the  city,  and,  with  a  common  purpose,  wrought 
fearful  havoc.  For  when  those  who  had  escaped  the  ravages  of  the  duke 
and  his  people  fled  to  other  parts  of  the  city  and  believed  that  in  some 
way  they  had  avoided  death,  they  encountered  this  company.  Thus, 
while  they  were  trying  to  avoid  Scylla,  they  fell  into  the  more  serious 
peril  of  Charybdis.  So  frightful  was  the  massacre  throughout  the  city, 
so  terrible  the  shedding  of  blood,  that  even  the  victors  experienced 
sensations  of  horror  and  loathing. 

I 

20.  'The  citizens  take  refuge  in  the  court  of  the  Tern  fie,  Tancred 
fursues  them  thither,  A  frightful  massacre  results y  and  a  vast 
amount  of  blood  is  shed  there. 

The  greater  part  of  the  people  had  taken  refuge  in  the  court  of  the 
Temple  because  it  lay  in  a  retired  part  of  the  city  and  was  very 
strongly  defended  by  a  wall,  towers,  and  gates.  But  their  flight  thither 
did  not  save  them,  for  Tancred  immediately  followed  with  the  largest 
portion  of  the  whole  army.  He  forced  his  way  into  the  Temple  and, 
after  terrible  carnage,  carried  off  with  him,  according  to  report,  a  vast 
amount  of  gold,  silver,  and  jewels.  It  is  believed,  however,  that  later, 
after  the  tumult  had  quieted  down,  he  restored  these  treasures  un¬ 
touched. 

After  the  other  leaders  had  slain  all  whom  they  encountered  in  the 
various  parts  of  the  city,  they  learned  that  many  had  fled  for  refuge  to 
the  sacred  precints  of  the  Temple.  Thereupon  as  with  one  accord  they 
hurried  thither.  A  crowd  of  knights  and  foot  soldiers  was  introduced, 
who  massacred  all  those  who  had  taken  refuge  there.  No  mercy  was 
shown  to  anyone,  and  the  whole  place  was  flooded  with  the  blood  of 
the  victims. 

It  was  indeed  the  righteous  judgment  of  God  which  ordained  that 
those  who  had  profaned  the  sanctuary  of  the  Lord  by  their  supersti¬ 
tious  rites  and  had  caused  it  to  be  an  alien  place  to  His  faithful  people 

William,  who  was  much  more  conscious  of  the  honor  than  were  the  contemporary 
chroniclers,  included  all  who  were  mentioned  by  any  of  them  as  among  the  first  to 
enter  and  added  a  number  of  others  who  doubtless  were  or  might  have  been  in  the 
group.  His  mention  of  Godfrey  and  Eustace  as  first  is  pardonable,  since  nearly  all  the 
writers  mentioned  them,  and  Albert,  who  made  a  special  point  of  the  two  brothers 
from  Tournai,  said  that  Godfrey  and  Eustace  were  in  the  same  tower. 


372  END  OF  THE  PILGRIMAGE 

should  expiate  their  sin  by  death  and,  by  pouring  out  their  own  blood, 
purify  the  sacred  precincts. 

It  was  impossible  to  look  upon  the  vast  numbers  of  the  slain  with¬ 
out  horror  j  everywhere  lay  fragments  of  human  bodies,  and  the  very 
ground  was  covered  with  the  blood  of  the  slain.  It  was  not  alone  the 
spectacle  of  headless  bodies  and  mutilated  limbs  strewn  in  all  directions 
that  roused  horror  in  all  who  looked  upon  them.  Still  more  dreadful 
was  it  to  gaze  upon  the  victors  themselves,  dripping  with  blood  from 
head  to  foot,  an  ominous  sight  which  brought  terror  to  all  who  met 
them.  It  is  reported  that  within  the  Temple  enclosure  alone  about  ten 
thousand  infidels  perished,  in  addition  to  those  who  lay  slain  every¬ 
where  throughout  the  city  in  the  streets  and  squares,  the  number  of 
whom  was  estimated  as  no  less. 

The  rest  of  the  soldiers  roved  through  the  city  in  search  of  wretched 
survivors  who  might  be  hiding  in  the  narrow  portals  and  byways  to 
escape  death.  These  were  dragged  out  into  public  view  and  slain  like 
sheep.  Some  formed  into  bands  and  broke  into  houses  where  they  laid 
violent  hands  on  the  heads  of  families,  on  their  wives,  children,  and 
their  entire  households.  These  victims  were  either  put  to  the  sword 
or  dashed  headlong  to  the  ground  from  some  elevated  place  so  that 
they  perished  miserably.  Each  marauder  claimed  as  his  own  in  per¬ 
petuity  the  particular  house  which  he  had  entered,  together  with  all  it 
contained.  For  before  the  capture  of  the  city  the  pilgrims  had  agreed 
that,  after  it  had  been  taken  by  force,  whatever  each  man  might  win  for 
himself  should  be  his  forever  by  right  of  possession,  without  molesta¬ 
tion.  Consequently  the  pilgrims  searched  the  city  most  carefully  and 
boldly  killed  the  citizens.  They  penetrated  into  the  most  retired  and 
out-of-the-way  places  and  broke  open  the  most  private  apartments  of 
the  foe.  At  the  entrance  of  each  house,  as  it  was  taken,  the  victor  hung 
up  his  shield  and  his  arms,  as  a  sign  to  all  who  approached  not  to  pause 
there  but  to  pass  by  that  place  as  already  in  possession  of  another.^^ 

This  is  an  early  instance  of  the  use  of  coats  of  arms  as  a  means  of  identification 
and  the  establishment  of  claims.  Doubtless  the  shields  already  bore  markings  of  in¬ 
dividual  ownership,  which  were  later  to  be  elaborated  in  the  heraldic  markings  still 
treasured  by  genealogists. 


END  OF  THE  PILGRIMAGE 


373 


21.  The  city  becomes  qmety  the  tumult  subsides y  and  weafons  are 
laid  aside  for  frayer.  The  Christians  go  about  J erusalem  to 
visit  the  holy  f  laces.  The  day  is  fassed  in  solemn  rites. 

When  the  city  had  been  entirely  conquered  and  the  infidels  killed, 
when  the  tumult  had  somewhat  died  down,  the  leaders  met  to  confer 
with  one  another.  For  the  sake  of  better  protection,  they  directed  that, 
before  arms  were  laid  down,  guards  should  be  assigned  to  each  tower 
and  responsible  men  stationed  as  doorkeepers  at  each  city  gate.  This 
guard  was  to  be  maintained  until,  by  common  agreement  and  the  pub¬ 
lic  decree  of  the  leaders,  someone  should  be  placed  over  Jerusalem 
who  would  be  able  to  undertake  entire  responsibility  for  it  and  to  ad¬ 
minister  all  things  according  to  his  will.  They  rightly  feared  the  trick¬ 
ery  of  the  enemy  who  surrounded  them  and,  with  wise  foresight, 
dreaded  sudden  attacks. 

When  at  last  the  city  had  been  set  in  order  in  this  way,  arms  were 
laid  aside.  Then,  clad  in  fresh  garments,  with  clean  hands  and  bare 
feet,  in  humility  and  contrition,  they  began  to  make  the  rounds  of  the 
venerable  places  which  the  Saviour  had  deigned  to  sanctify  and  make 
glorious  with  His  bodily  presence.  With  tearful  sighs  and  heartfelt 
emotion  they  pressed  kisses  upon  these  revered  spots.  With  especial 
veneration  they  approached  the  church  of  the  Passion  and  Resurrec¬ 
tion  of  the  Lord.  Here  the  leaders  were  met  by  the  clergy  and  the  faith¬ 
ful  citizens  of  Jerusalem.  These  Christians  who  for  so  many  years  had 
borne  the  heavy  yoke  of  undeserved  bondage  were  eager  to  show 
their  gratitude  to  the  Redeemer  for  their  restoration  to  liberty.  Bear¬ 
ing  in  their  hands  crosses  and  relics  of  the  saints,  they  led  the  way 
into  the  church  to  the  accompaniment  of  hymns  and  sacred  songs. 

It  was  a  pleasant  sight  and  a  source  of  spiritual  joy  to  witness  the 
pious  devotion  and  deep  fervor  with  which  the  pilgrims  drew  near  to 
the  holy  places,  the  exultation  of  heart  and  happiness  of  spirit  with 
which  they  kissed  the  memorials  of  the  Lord’s  sojourn  upon  earth.  On 
all  sides  were  tears,  everywhere  sighs,  not  such  as  grief  and  anxiety 
are  wont  to  cause,  but  such  as  fervent  devotion  and  the  satisfaction  of 
spiritual  joy  produce  as  an  offering  to  the  Lord.  Not  alone  in  the 
church  but  throughout  all  Jerusalem  arose  the  voice  of  a  people  giving 
thanks  unto  the  Lord  until  it  seemed  as  if  the  sound  must  be  borne  to 


END  OF  THE  PILGRIMAGE 


374 

the  very  heavens.  Verily,  of  them  might  it  well  be  said,  “The  voice  of 
rejoicing  and  salvation  is  in  the  tabernacles  of  the  righteous.’^ 

Works  of  mercy,  inspired  by  pious  devotion,  were  carried  on  ac¬ 
tively  throughout  the  whole  city.  Many  tearfully  confessed  to  the 
Lord  crimes  which  they  had  committed  and  bound  themselves  by 
vows  never  again  to  be  guilty  of  such  sins.  Others  with  lavish  generos¬ 
ity  poured  forth  all  their  means  upon  the  old,  the  sick,  and  the  needy. 
They  regarded  it  as  the  supreme  blessing  and  all-sufEcient  wealth  that 
they  had  been  divinely  permitted  to  witness  that  day.  Still  others  went 
about  to  the  venerable  places  on  their  bare  knees  and  with  sobs  of  deep 
emotion  bedewed  everything  with  their  tears,  as  they  directed  their 
words  to  the  Lord,  “Rivers  of  waters  run  down  mine  eyes.” 

Why  should  I  say  more?  It  would  be  difficult  to  express  in  words 
the  intense  and  holy  devotion  of  that  faithful  people.  Deeply  grateful 
for  the  divine  favor  which  had  deigned  to  reward  their  great  labors, 
they  eagerly  vied  with  each  other  in  works  of  charity.  Ever  present 
before  them  was  the  thought  of  the  mercy  which  had  been  vouchsafed 
them  from  on  high.  For  what  man  was  so  iron-hearted,  so  adamantine, 
that  his  spirit  did  not  melt  within  him  when  he  was  permitted  to  par¬ 
take  of  the  worthy  fruit  of  that  great  pilgrimage  and  receive  the  re¬ 
ward  for  the  warfare  he  had  waged?  To  those  of  deeper  spiritual  na¬ 
ture,  this  privilege  seemed  to  have  been  granted  as  a  pledge  of  that 
future  recompense  which  the  Lord  has  promised  to  bestow  upon  His 
saints,  that  through  the  gifts  received  in  this  present  life  they  might 
have  a  sure  hope  of  reward  hereafter.  This  pilgrimage  to  Jerusalem 
which  they  were  now  making  on  earth  seemed  to  promise  a  definite  as¬ 
surance  that  they  would  also  take  part  at  last  in  that  future  one  in  the 
life  hereafter.^^ 

Then  the  bishops  and  priests  celebrated  mass  in  the  churches,  of¬ 
fered  prayer  for  the  people,  and  gave  thanks  to  the  Lord  for  the 
mercies  conferred  upon  them. 

22.  The  bishof  of  Puy  and  others  who  had  fallen  asleep  in  the 
Lord  during  the  pilgrimage  are  seen  in  the  city  and  appear  to 
many. 

On  that  same  day,  Adhemar,  bishop  of  Puy,  that  man  of  noble  char¬ 
acter  and  immortal  memory  who  departed  from  this  life  at  Antioch, 

Ps.  1 18 :  136.  Ps.  121:3. 


Ps.  1 1 7 :  15. 


.END  OF  THE  PILGRIMAGE  375 

as  has  been  relatedj  was  seen  in  the  Holy  City  by  many  witnesses.  In 
fact,  not  a  few  venerable  men  worthy  of  entire  confidence  steadfastly 
assert  that  with  their  own  eyes  they  saw  him  ascend  the  walls  as  the 
first  and  encourage  the  rest  to  follow.  During  the  course  of  the  same 
day,  he  appeared  again  and  again  to  numerous  people  as  they  were 
going  about  to  the  venerable  places.  Many  others  of  the  dead  also  who, 
subject  to  divine  obedience,  had  entered  into  the  sleep  of  the  just  in 
Christ  during  the  course  of  the  pilgrimage  were  seen  by  many  wit¬ 
nesses  visiting  the  holy  places  with  the  rest.  Through  this  fact  it  became 
evident  that  those  who  had  been  called  from  this  temporal  life  to  the 
enjoyment  of  eternal  blessedness  were  not  deprived  of  their  hearths 
desire,  but  accomplished  to  the  full  that  which  they  had  sought  with 
such  fervent  devotion.  Thus  there  was  afforded  us  a  substantial  proof 
of  the  future  resurrection.^^ 

Just  as  at  the  resurrection  of  the  Lord  many  saints  who  had  fallen 
asleep  also  rose  in  the  body  and  appeared  to  many  in  the  Holy  City, 
so  it  was  fitting  that  the  former  miracle  should  be  renewed  for  the 
benefit  of  the  faithful  as  they  cleansed  the  place  of  the  holy  resurrec¬ 
tion  from  the  superstitions  of  the  Gentiles.  Furthermore,  it  was  well 
that  those  who  had  surrendered  themselves  in  such  pious  obedience  to 
the  risen  Lord  should  be  believed  to  have  risen  again  in  the  spirit. 

These  and  many  other  signs  of  similar  nature  were  manifested  abun- 
.  dandy  to  the  people  of  God,  through  divine  grace,  as  miracles  rather 
than  as  wonders.  Hence,  such  joy  of  both  heart  and  mind  and  such 
spiritual  exultation  prevailed  among  the  people  that  they  forgot  the 
countless  hardships  which  they  had  endured  and  counted  themselves 
blessed  because  they  had  been  permitted  to  see  that  divine  favor. 

There  went  up  from  the  Holy  City  a  shout  of  spiritual  rejoicing  to 
the  Lord,  and,  as  if  by  direct  command  from  Him,  solemn  rites  were 
celebrated  again  and  again  j  so  that  these  words  of  the  prophet  seemed 
to  be  literally  fulfilled:  “Rejoice  ye  with  Jerusalem,  and  be  glad  with 
her,  all  ye  that  love  her.” 

This  vision  of  Adhemar  was  reported  by  Raymond  d’Aguilers.  William’s  use  of  it 
to  prove  immortality  is  particularly  interesting  in  view  of  his  conversation  with  King 
Amaury  on  the  subject  (see  Book  XIX,  chap.  3). 

Is.  66:  10. 


376 


END  OF  THE  PILGRIMAGE 


23.  The  jaithjul  dwelling  at  Jerusalem  give  heartfelt  thanks  to 
Peter  the  Hermit y  to  whom  they  had  intrusted  their  message ; 
they  show  him  welUdeserved  honor. 

There  were  Christians  living  in  Jerusalem  who  had  seen  the  venera¬ 
ble  Peter  the  Hermit  in  that  city  four  or  five  years  earlier.  At  that 
time  the  lord  patriarch  and  the  other  leading  men  of  both  clergy  and 
people  had  given  him  letters  which  they  hoped  would  rouse  the 
princes  of  the  kingdoms  of  the  West  in  their  behalf.  As  these  people 
again  recognized  him,  they  paid  him  humble  reverence  on  bended 
knees,  for  they  recalled  with  gratitude  his  first  coming  and  the  friend¬ 
ship  which  he  had  deigned  to  conclude  with  them.  Heartily  they 
thanked  him  that,  moved  by  piety  alone,  he  had  so  faithfully  and  in- 
defatigably  accomplished  the  mission  which  they  had  laid  upon  him. 
Above  all  they  praised  the  Lord,  who  is  glorified  through  His  serv¬ 
ants,  that  He  had  directed  the  paths  of  this  man  far  beyond  the  hope 
of  mortals.  For  it  was  indeed  the  Lord  who  had  rendered  Peter’s 
speech  so  effective  that  both  peoples  and  kingdoms  were  induced  to 
undergo  great  hardships  without  murmuring  for  the  name  of  Christ. 
In  very  truth  the  words  of  this  man  seemed  to  have  proceeded  from 
the  Lord,  who  said,  “So  shall  my  word  be  that  goeth  forth  out  of  my 
mouth:  it  shall  not  return  unto  me  void,  but  it  shall  accomplish  that 
which  I  please,  and  it  shall  prosper  in  the  thing  whereto  I  sent  it.” 

Accordingly,  individually  and  as  a  whole,  the  people  vied  with  one 
another  in  showing  him  honors  of  all  kinds.  To  him  alone,  after  the 
Lord,  they  ascribed  their  release  from  the  hard  servitude  which  they 
had  endured  for  so  many  years  and  the  restoration  of  the  Holy  City  to 
its  original  state  of  liberty.^® 

As  we  have  already  said,  the  patriarch  had  sailed  for  Cyprus  to  ob¬ 
tain  means  at  a  great  cost  for  the  relief  of  the  city  and  the  welfare  of 
its  citizens.  His  mission  was  to  beg  alms  from  the  faithful  in  that  land 
with  which  to  pay  the  tribute  and  extra  taxes  which  had  been  imposed 

Is.  55  :  II. 

This  story  of  the  tribute  paid  to  Peter  the  Hermit  by  the  grateful  Christians  of 
Jerusalem  does  greater  honor  to  William^s  literary  sense  than  to  his  historical  acumen. 
None  of  the  contemporary  or  eyewitness  accounts  mentions  it.  Not  even  Albert  of  Aix, 
the  first  to  promote  the  legend  of  Peter,  thought  to  include  it.  William’s  literary  sense, 
however,  evidently  impelled  him  to  round  out  his  account  of  the  First  Crusade,  which 
he  had  begun  originally  with  Peter’s  vision  in  Jerusalem,  by  this  conclusion.  With  the 
mention  of  Patriarch  Simeon,  who  likewise  figured  in  that  earlier  scene,  the  original 
dramatis  personae  are  dismissed,  and  with  the  description  of  the  cleansing  of  the  city 
the  first  part  of  the  history  is  brought  to  a  proper  literary  ending. 


END  OF  THE  PILGRIMAGE 


377 

upon  the  Christians  of  Jerusalem  far  beyond  their  ability  to  pay.  If 
these  obligations  were  not  met,  there  was  reason  to  dread  that  the 
extortioners  might  tear  down  the  churches  or  slay  the  people  as  they 
had  done  repeatedly  in  the  past.  The  venerable  man,  therefore,  was 
entirely  ignorant  of  all  that  had  occurred  in  the  city  and  was  dreading 
a  return  to  the  same  critical  conditions.^®  But,  in  the  meantime,  the 
Lord  had  brought  about  a  condition  of  peaceful  quiet  in  that  place,  far 
beyond  anything  which  could  have  been  anticipated. 

24 »  The  city  is  cleansed  of  the  corfses  of  the  slain.  The  fugitives 
in  the  citadel  surrender  to  the  count  of  Toulouse.  The  day 
is  set  aside  as  memorable  forever. 

When  their  prayers  had  been  completed  and  the  venerable  places 
visited  in  a  spirit  of  sincere  devotion,  the  chiefs  deemed  it  necessary, 
before  all  else,  to  cleanse  the  city  and  especially  the  temple  precincts, 
lest  pestilence  should  arise  from  the  air  tainted  by  the  stench  from  the 
corpses  of  the  slain.  This  task  was  imposed  upon  those  captured  citi¬ 
zens  who,  though  cast  into  prison,  had  by  chance  escaped  death.  But 
since  their  number  was  not  sufficient  to  accomplish  so  great  a  work 
without  ^id,  the  poor  of  the  army  were  offered  a  daily  wage  to  give 
assistance  in  cleaning  up  the  city  without  delay. 

When  this  matter  had  been  attended  to,  each  leader  repaired  to  the 
house  where  he  had  taken  up  his  abode.  These  had  been  made  ready 
for  them  during  the  interval  by  the  household  servants.  The  city  was 
found  to  be  full  to  overflowing  with  goods  of  all  kinds,  so  that  all,  from 
the  least  to  the  greatest,  had  an  abundance  of  everything.  In  the  houses 
which  had  been  seized  were  discovered  vast  treasures  of  gold  and  sil¬ 
ver,  besides  gems  and  valuable  raiment.  There  were  stores  of  grain, 
wine,  and  oil,  as  well  as  a  plentiful  supply  of  water,  the  lack  of  which 
had  caused  great  suffering  among  the  Christians  during  the  siege.  Con¬ 
sequently  those  who  had  appropriated  the  residences  were  able  to 
supply  their  needy  brethren  in  all  affection.  On  the  second  day  after 
the  occupation  of  Jerusalem  and  again  on  the  third,  a  public  market  of 
goods  for  sale  was  held  under  the  best  conditions.  Even  the  common 
people  had  all  that  they  needed  in  abundance.  The  days  passed  in  joy¬ 
ous  celebration,  as  the  pilgrims  refreshed  themselves  to  some  extent 
with  the  rest  and  food  which  all  so  greatly  needed.  The  lavish  abun¬ 
dance  of  the  gifts  granted  them  from  heaven  was  a  source  of  continual 

See  Book  I,  note  53. 


378  END  OF  THE  PILGRIMAGE 

amazement  and  served  as  a  constant  reminder  of  the  goodness  which 
the  Lord  had  deigned  to  shower  so  freely  upon  them. 

In  order  that  the  memory  of  this  great  event  might  be  better  pre¬ 
served,  a  general  decree  was  issued  which  met  with  universal  approval 
and  sanction.  It  was  ordained  that  this  day  be  held  sacred  and  set  apart 
from  all  others  as  the  time  when,  for  the  glory  and  praise  of  the  Chris¬ 
tian  name,  there  should  be  recounted  all  that  had  been  foretold  by 
the  prophets  concerning  this  event.  On  this  day  intercession  should 
always  be  made  to  the  Lord  for  the  souls  of  those  by  whose  laudable 
and  successful  labors  the  city  beloved  of  God  had  been  restored  to  the 
pristine  freedom  of  the  Christian  faith. 

Meanwhile,  the  infidels  who  had  fled  to  the  citadel  of  David  to 
escape  the  vengeance  of  the  sword  perceived  that  the  Christians  had 
now  gained  entire  possession  of  the  city.  They  realized  that  they  could 
no  longer  sustain  the  siege.  They  accordingly  sought  the  count  of  Tou¬ 
louse,  who  lodged  in  the  vicinity  of  the  tower,  and  from  him  obtained 
the  promise  that  they,  with  their  wives  and  children,  should  have  free 
exit  from  the  city  and  safe  conduct  to  Ascalon.  Furthermore,  they  were 
to  be  allowed  to  take  with  them  all  the  goods  which  they  had  carried 
away  with  them  into  the  tower.  On  these  terms  they  surrendered  the 
citadel  to  the  count. 

Those  who  had  undertaken  to  cleanse  the  city  showed  great  dili¬ 
gence  and  zeal  in  the  work.  Some  of  the  bodies  were  burned  and  others 
buried,  according  as  the  exigency  of  the  time  permitted.  Quickly, 
within  a  few  days,  all  was  finished  and  the  city  restored  to  its  usual 
state  of  cleanliness.  The  people  then  flocked  with  greater  confidence 
to  the  venerated  places  and  were  able  to  meet  more  fully  and  enjoy 
pleasant  converse  with  one  another  in  the  city  streets  and  squares. 

Jerusalem  was  taken  in  the  year  of  the  Incarnation  of  the  Lord  1099 
on  Friday,  July  15,  about  the  ninth  hour  of  the  day.  It  was  the  third 
year  from  the  one  in  which  the  faithful  people  had  assumed  the  burden 
of  this  great  pilgrimage.  Pope  Urban  II  was  presiding  over  the  Holy 
Roman  Church,  and  Henry  IV  was  administering  the  empire  of  the 
Romans.  King  Philip  was  reigning  in  France,  and  Alexius  was  wield¬ 
ing  the  scepter  over  the  Greeks.  Guiding  and  directing  all  was  the 
merciful  hand  of  the  Lord,  to  whom  be  honor  and  glory  for  ever  and 
ever. 

HERE  ENDS  THE  EIGHTH  BOOK 


THE  NINTH  BOOK  BEGINS 


GODFREY,  DEFENDER  OF  THE  HOLY  SEPUL¬ 
CHRE:  PRECARIOUS  TENURE  OF  JERUSALEM 

AND  ANTIOCH 

I .  On  the  eighth  day  ajter  the  cafture  of  J erusaleniy  the  chief 
Tnen  meet  for  the  purfose  of  electing  one  of  their  number  to 
preside  over  the  city  and  the  neighboring  districts »  The  clergy 
as  a  whole  endeai)or  to  prevent  this  action, 

i 

Thus  through  the  superabundant  grace  of  God  the  Holy  City  had 
been  restored  to  the  Christian  people  and  matters  had  been  reduced 
to  some  degree  of  order.  Seven  days  glided  by  in  much  rejoicing,  tem¬ 
pered,  Indeed,  by  the  fear  of  the  Lord  and  spiritual  gladness.  On  the 
eighth  day  the  leaders  assembled  for  consultation.  It  was  their  purpose, 
after  invoking  the  grace  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  to  choose  someone  from 
among  their  own  number  to  rule  over  the  region  and  to  bear  the  royal 
responsibility  for  that  province. 

But  while  they  were  deliberating  over  the  matter,  some  of  the 
clergy,  puffed  up  with  the  spirit  of  pride  and  intent  on  their  own 
interests  rather  than  on  those  of  Jesus  Christ,  also  gathered.  They  sent 
a  message  to  the  chiefs  saying  that  they  had  certain  private  matters 
which  they  wished  to  bring  before  those  who  were  now  sitting  in  coun¬ 
cil.  On  being  admitted,  they  said,  ^Tt  has  been  reported  to  the  clergy 
that  you  have  met  for  the  purpose  of  choosing  one  of  your  number  as 
king.  This  purpose  of  yours  seems  to  us  holy  and  well  advised  and,  if 
it  were  reached  in  its  proper  order,  worthy  of  being  carried  out  with 
all  care.  It  is  undoubtedly  true  that  spiritual  matters  are  of  higher  im¬ 
portance  than  temporal  and  ought  therefore  to  be  considered  first.  In 
our  opinion,  the  order  should  be  reversed,  and,  before  election  to  a 
secular  office  is  thought  of,  some  person  of  religious  life,  pleasing  to 
God,  ought  to  be  chosen  who  will  be  capable  of  presiding  over  the 
church  of  God  for  its  advancement  and  benefit.  If  it  pleases  you  to  pro¬ 
ceed  in  this  order,  it  will  be  most  agreeable  to  us,  and  we  are  with  you 
in  body  and  spirit.  But  if  not,  we  shall  pronounce  whatever  you  decree 
without  our  approval  invalid  and  without  force.” 


38o  GODFREY  IN  JERUSALEM 

Although  this  proposition  of  the  clergy  seemed  on  the  surface  to  be 
reasonable  and  honorable,  yet  in  reality  there  was  underlying  it  much 
malevolence,  as  results  will  show.^  The  prime  leader  of  this  faction 
was  a  certain  bishop  of  Calabria,  from  Martirano  [Matera],^  an  in¬ 
timate  friend  of  that  Arnulf  of  whom  quite  enough  has  already  been 
said  in  the  foregoing  pages.  The  bishop  was  scheming  to  place  in  the 
patriarchal  chair  this  very  Arnulf,  a  man  who,  though  in  holy  orders, 
was  notorious  for  his  loose  conduct  and  who  was,  moreover,  the  son  of 
a  priest,^  During  the  entire  expedition  his  reputation  had  been  the 
subject  of  common  talk  among  the  people,  and  the  wanton  singers  of 
the  chorus  had  made  him  the  butt  of  their  lascivious  songs.  Such  was 
the  man  whom  the  bishop,  contrary  to  the  sacred  canons  and  against 
the  will  of  all  honorable  men,  was  endeavoring  to  raise  to  the  olEce  of 
patriarch.  The  bishop  himself  was  a  man  of  perverse  mind,  who  had 
no  regard  for  honor.  Hence  he  could  easily  reach  an  agreement  with 
Arnulf,  for,  as  says  the  ancient  proverb :  “As  is  the  true  nature  of  a  man, 

^  Raymond  d^Aguilers,  from  whom  "William  draws  this  account  of  the  election,  is 
somewhat  vague  in  his  description  of  the  factions  among  the  clergy.  The  bishop  of 
Albara  is  mentioned  as  the  head  of  one,  the  bishop  of  Matera  of  the  other.  Which  of 
the  two  objected  to  the  election  of  a  secular  ruler  before  an  ecclesiastical  head  was 
chosen  is  especially  obscure.  Hagenmeyer  regards  William’s  statement  as  a  correct 
interpretation  of  Raymond’s  account  (H,  Hagenmeyer,  Anony^ni  gesta  Francorum  et 
aliorum  Hterosolymitanonim^  p.  4.79,  note  12).  On  the  other  hand,  Raymond  names 
the  bishop  of  Albara  immediately  after  the  protest  and  further  refers  to  him  as  “not 
conducting  himself  humbly”  at  this  time.  Furthermore,  the  protest  reflected  an  attitude 
of  independence,  even  of  superiority,  toward  the  secular  authorities  which  is  out  of 
accord  with  the  conduct  of  Arnulf  before  or  after  the  election.  William  might  have 
been  led  to  blame  Arnulf  because  the  act  itself  was  blamed  at  the  time.  It  seems  prob¬ 
able  that  both  William  and  Hagenmeyer  are  wrong  in  their  identification. 

^  The  status  of  this  bishop,  Arnulf  of  Matera,  is  somewhat  uncertain.  He  is  believed 
to  have  been  Tancred’s  chaplain.  It  would  be  natural,  in  view  of  the  consistent  prac¬ 
tice  of  the  crusaders  thus  far,  to  place  someone  from  the  army  which  captured  a  place 
in  charge  of  the  church  there.  No  collusion  would  have  been  necessary,  since  Tancred 
had  taken  Bethlehem.  The  more  remarkable  feature  of  this  incident  is  that  the  cru¬ 
saders  evidently  regarded  Bethlehem  as  a  proper  bishopric.  It  had  previously  been  a 
parish  in  the  diocese  of  Ascalon,  a  fact  of  which  they  were  apparently  unaware. 

^  Though  the  law  of  the  church  had  condemned  the  marriage  of  priests  ever  since 
the  time  of  Gregory  the  Great,  that  canon,  like  many  others,  had  suffered  neglect  in 
the  five  centuries  of  disorder  which  followed.  Even  up  to  the  end  of  the  eleventh 
century  there  were  many  communities,  especially  in  Western  and  Northern  Europe, 
where  the  marriage  of  priests  was  regarded  as  proper.  The  vigorous  campaign  of 
Gregory  VII  and  his  successors  against  the  practice,  however,  changed  the  public  atti¬ 
tude  of  Europe  on  the  matter.  Arnulf’s  life  fell  in  the  period  of  this  change.  The  cir¬ 
cumstance  of  his  birth,  which  had  placed  no  obstacle  to  his  earlier  career,  was  to  be 
held  against  him  in  his  later  years.  This  and  the  numerous  other  charges  against 
Arnulf  were  to  be  brought  before  the  pope  for  final  adjudication  (see  Book  XI, 
chap.  26). 


GODFREY  IN  JERUSALEM  381 

so  does  he  delight  in  the  companionship  of  those  of  the  same  mind, 
for  like  to  like  is  easily  joined.” 

This  same  man  had  seized  upon  the  church  at  Bethlehem,  for  he 
had  made  a  bargain  with  Arnulf  that,  if  the  latter  through  the  bishop’s 
exertions  should  be  raised  to  the  patriarchate,  the  said  church  without 
question  or  difficulty  should  belong  to  the  bishop  in  perpetuity.  Death, 
however,  soon  put  an  end  to  all  these  schemes  of  his,  as  will  be  related 
in  the  following  pages. 

Among  the  clergy  pure  religion  and  all  sense  of  honor  had  fallen 
from  its  high  estate.  Everywhere  decadent,  it  had  been  flowing  at 
hazard  through  forbidden  channels  from  the  time  when  Adhemar, 
bishop  of  Puy,  the  legate  of  the  apostolic  see,  of  pious  memory  in  the 
Lord,  had  succumbed  to  death.  After  the  passing  of  this  holy  man, 
William,  bishop  of  Orange,  a  religious  and  God-fearing  man,  assumed 
the  responsibility  of  that  charge  and,  as  long  as  he  lived,  faithfully 
administered  it.  Only  a  short  time  elapsed,  however,  before  he  too 
rested  in  the  Lord  at  Maara.  After  the  death  of  these  two  holy  men, 
it  happened  as  says  the  prophet:  “Like  people,  like  priest.”  ^  Only  the 
bishop  of  Albara  and  a  few  others  who  had  the  fear  of  the  Lord  be¬ 
fore  their  eyes  continued  in  the  strait  way.^ 

2.  The  leaders  disregard  the  offosition  of  the  clergy  and  make 
choice  of  the  lord  duke.  After  his  election^  he  is  escorted  to  the 
Sefulchre  of  the  Lord  amid  the  joyful  sound  of  hymns  and 
sfiritual  songs. 

The  princes  regarded  the  objections  of  the  clergy  stated  in  the  pre¬ 
ceding  chapter  as  frivolous  and  of  no  importance.  Though  intent  on 
carrying  out  their  plan,  yet  they  took  the  proposal  under  consideration. 
Some  accounts  say  that,  in  order  that  the  election  might  be  conducted 
in  accordance  with  the  will  of  God  and  that  the  merits  of  the  candi- 

^  Ho.  4:9. 

®  The  hardships  of  the  crusade  had  fallen  heavily  upon  the  older  clergy.  Almost 
all  of  the  higher  clergy  who  had  started  in  1096  were  already  dead.  Even  the  hisbop 
of  Albara  had  been  only  a  priest  when  he  started  and  was  elevated  after  the  capture 
of  Antioch.  Virtually  none  of  the  clergy  who  were  now  prominent  could  be  regarded 
as  having  been  directly  or  even  indirectly  acquainted  with  Pope  Urban^s  plans.  The 
small  group  of  clergy  in  Raymond’s  band  with  which  Bishop  Adhemar  had  been 
associated  doubtless  considered  themselves  somewhat  nearer  to  the  official  views  of  the 
church.  Their  influence,  however,  had  been  weakened  by  the  unpopularity  of  Count 
Raymond.  The  immediate  task  of  organizing  the  Latin  church  had  to  be  performed  by 
younger  men  but  little  acquainted  with  the  plans  and  policies  of  the  church  as  a  whole. 


382  GODFREY  IN  JERUSALEM 

dates  might  receive  due  consideration,  individuals  from  the  households 
of  those  proposed  for  the  honor  were  secretly  interviewed.  Each  man 
was  forced  to  take  an  oath  that,  when  questioned  concerning  the  life 
and  character  of  his  lord,  he  would  speak  the  truth  without  deviating 
from  the  facts.  This  course  was  adopted  so  that  the  electors  might  ob¬ 
tain  full  and  accurate  information  as  to  the  worth  of  the  several  candi¬ 
dates.  When  later  these  people  were  asked  searching  questions  by  the 
electors,  they  were  bound  by  the  oath  which  they  had  taken  to  acknowl¬ 
edge  under  seal  of  secrecy  many  faults  as  well  as  virtues  in  their  mas¬ 
ters.  By  this  means  it  was  hoped  that  an  unbiased  judgment  of  the 
character  and  personality  of  each  candidate  might  be  formed.  When, 
among  others,  members  of  Godfrey's  staff  were  examined  they  de¬ 
clared  that  of  all  the  doings  of  the  lord  duke,  the  following  seemed  to 
them  the  most  trying:  namely,  that  when  he  once  entered  a  church  he 
could  not  be  induced  to  leave,  even  after  the  celebration  of  the  divine 
office  was  concluded.  He  continued  to  question  the  priests  and  others 
cognizant  of  such  matters  as  to  the  meaning  of  each  image  and  picture 
until  his  companions,  whose  interests  were  different,  were  excessively 
bored.  Moreover,  because  of  this  habit  of  his,  the  viands  which  had 
been  prepared  for  a  fixed  and  suitable  hour  were,  when  finally  eaten, 
overdone  and  tasteless  as  the  result  of  the  long  delay.® 

On  hearing  this  complaint,  the  electors  exclaimed,  ^‘Happy  the  man 
who  possesses  these  characteristics,  to  whom  that  is  ascribed  as  a  fault 
which  others  would  boast  of  as  a  virtue!’’  After  carefully  considering 
all  aspects  of  the  matter,  the  electors  unanimously  agreed  upon  the 
duke  as  their  choice.  Godfrey  was  elected  and  escorted  with  great  de¬ 
votion  to  the  Sepulchre  of  the  Lord,  attended  by  the  singing  of  chants 
and  hymns. 

It  is  said,  however,  that  the  majority  of  the  electors  had  agreed  upon 
Raymond,  count  of  Toulouse,  as  their  choice.*^  They  knew,  however, 

®  By  William’s  time  Godfrey  had  become  established  not  only  as  a  national  hero,  but 
also  as  the  hero  of  Latin  Christendom  and,  as  such,  the  natural  object  of  legendary 
attributes.  When  William  was  writing,  the  stories  of  King  Arthur’s  knights  were 
receiving  their  final  form.  Knights  seeking  Jerusalem  and  knights  seeking  the  Holy 
Grail  were  readily  confused.  This  picturesque  legend  of  Godfrey’s  piety  is  not  fully 
supported  by  the  historical  records,  though  there  are  numerous  instances  of  pious 
acts  in  his  later  life. 

^  This  story  rests  upon  the  authority  of  Raymond  d’Aguilers.  Doubtless  each  of  the 
leaders  was  the  first  choice  of  his  own  more  pious  followers  for  that  honor,  and  his 
compatriots  later  ^vere  disposed  to  believe  that  he  could  have  had  it.  Similar  legends 
grew  up  about  Robert  of  Normandy  and  Robert  of  Flanders.  (See  C.  W.  David, 


GODFREY  IN  JERUSALEM  383 

that  if  he  did  not  obtain  the  kingdom  he  intended  to  return  home  at 
once.  Hence,  drawn  by  an  intense  longing  for  the  soil  of  their  beloved 
native  land,  they  had  invented  many  reasons,  even  against  the  dictates 
of  conscience,  why  the  count  should  be  considered  unfit  for  the  office. 
In  spite  of  all  this,  Raymond  spurned  the  call  of  his  fatherland  and, 
devotedly  following  Christ,  did  not  return  home.  On  the  contrary,  he 
continued  on  the  pilgrimage  which  he  had  once  and  for  all  undertaken 
and  voluntarily  followed  poverty  even  to  the  end.  For  he  knew  that 
“he  that  shall  endure  unto  the  end,  the  same  shall  be  saved”  j  ®  and 
also  that  “No  man  having  put  his  hand  to  the  plough,  and  looking 
back,  is  fit  for  the  kingdom  of  God.”  ^ 

3,  The  dukcy  on  hts  elevation  to  fowcTy  demands  from  the  count 
of  Toulouse  the  tower  of  David  which  Raymond  had  taken 
from  the  enemy,  A  disagreement  arises  between  the  leaders y 
but  finally  Godfrey  gams  'possession  of  the  tower  according  to 
his  demand. 

At  the  time  when,  by  unanimous  consent,  the  lord  duke  received  the 
supreme  power  of  the  realm,  the  count  of  St.  Gilles  was  still  in  posses¬ 
sion  of  the  city’s  citadel,  namely,  the  tower  of  David.  This,  as  we  have 
said,  the  enemy  had  surrendered  to  him  in  the  beginning.  The  struc¬ 
ture,  built  of  mighty  hewn  stone,  was  situated  in  the  highest  part  of 
the  city,  facing  the  west,  and  from  its  lofty  elevation  the  whole  city 
could  be  seen  below. 

When  the  duke  found  that  this  last  stronghold  of  the  entire  city  was 
still  outside  his  control,  he  felt  that  without  it  his  overlordship  was 
incomplete.  In  the  assembly  of  the  leaders,  therefore,  he  demanded 
that  the  count  surrender  it  to  him.  But  Raymond  replied  that,  since 
the  enemy  had  given  it  into  his  hands,  he  wished  to  retain  it  until  the 
Eastertide,  when  he  intended  to  make  the  crossing  and  return  home. 
Possession  of  the  citadel  would  give  his  position  more  importance 
while  he  was  tarrying  in  the  kingdom  with  his  men.  The  duke  re¬ 
sponded  that  unless  the  tower  were  resigned  to  him  he  would  surren¬ 
der  the  rule  entirely.  It  would  be  ignominious,  he  declared,  that,  after 

Robert  Curthose^  pp.  119-21J  198—200.)  The  political  divisions  which  had  formed 
in  the  army,  however,  afford  no  basis  for  assuming  that  Count  Raymond  could  have 
received  any  votes  outside  his  own  army.  In  fact,  his  chaplain  makes  it  quite  clear  that 
not  all  of  his  own  followers  would  support  him. 

®  Mat.  24:  13.  ^  Lu.  9  :  62. 


384  GODFREY  IN  JERUSALEM 

he  himself  had  been  named  overlordj  the  city’s  stronghold  should  be 
in  the  power  of  another  whom  he  must  regard  as  his  equal  or  superior. 

The  counts  of  Normandy  and  Flanders  took  the  side  of  the  duke, 
and  even  the  friends  of  the  count  of  St.  Gilles  aided  the  faction  op¬ 
posing  him,  for  they  hoped  that,  in  this  way  at  least,  they  might  afford 
their  lord  an  excuse  for  leaving.^ ^  The  result  was  that  until  it  could  be 
legally  decided  to  whom  the  tower  should  be  given,  it  was  placed  by 
general  consent  in  charge  of  the  bishop  of  Albara  as  trustee.  The  latter, 
however,  without  waiting  for  the  decision,  is  said  to  have  handed  over 
the  tower  to  the  duke  before  the  suit  came  on.  When  this  charge  was 
made  against  him  later  by  certain  individuals,  he  asserted  publicly  that 
he  had  been  compelled  to  do  so  by  force. 

The  count  was  full  of  wrath  and  greatly  exasperated,  because  he  felt 
that  he  had  been  deprived  of  the  tower  in  so  ignominious  a  manner. 
Moreover,  it  seemed  to  him  that  the  attitude  of  the  other  chiefs  toward 
him  was  not  so  friendly  as  it  should  have  been  and  that  they  had  too 
little  remembrance  of  the  many  favors  which  he  had  repeatedly  con¬ 
ferred  upon  them  during  the  pilgrimage.  Accordingly,  he  went  down 
to  the  Jordan  and,  after  bathing  in  its  waters,  made  preparations  to 
return  to  his  own  land  to  satisfy  the  wishes  of  his  friends. 

4.  The  bishof  of  Matera^  luicked  and  subtlcy  tries  to  rmse  to  the 
fatriarchate  Arnuljy  a  man  of  his  own  caliber y  but  fails.  The 
Cross  of  the  Lord  is  found. 

During  all  this  time,  the  wicked  and  crafty  bishop  of  Matera  con¬ 
tinued  to  incite  the  ignorant  people  against  the  pious  chiefs.  He  insinu¬ 
ated  that,  influenced  by  envy,  the  leaders  did  not  wish  to  provide  the 
church  with  a  shepherd,  for  while  it  lacked  a  head  they  could  dominate 
it  more  fully.  Supported  by  his  partisans  of  the  same  way  of  thinking, 
against  the  opposition  of  the  rest,  he  chose  the  aforesaid  Arnulf  and 
seated  him  in  the  patriarchal  chair.  In  this  procedure  he  relied  upon 
the  aid  of  the  count  of  Normandy,^  ^  whose  friend  and  companion  Ar- 

This  party  division  is  probably  a  reflection  of  the  fixed  lines  of  partisanship 
which  had  been  formed — Raymond,  not  fully  supported  by  his  own  men,  on  one  side, 
and  Godfrey,  Tancred,  Robert  of  Flanders,  and  Robert  of  Normandy  on  the  other. 
Raymond’s  willingness  to  retain  the  tower  of  David  is  perhaps  the  clearest  refutation 
of  the  claim  that  he  had  refused  election  as  ruler  of  Jerusalem  (see  note  7). 

It  is  altogether  probable  that  Robert  of  Normandy  supported  his  chaplain  for  the 
office.  It  is  not  altogether  inconceivable  that  he  may  have  cast  his  vote  for  Godfrey  on 
the  understanding  that  Arnulf  was  to  be  supported  for  the  patriarchate. 


GODFREY  IN  JERUSALEM  385 

nulf  was  and  had  been  during  the  whole  expedition,  and  upon  the  votes 
of  the  foolish  people  which  they  gave  with  ill-advised  readiness. But 
neither  of  the  two  enjoyed  the  result  of  this  scheming  very  long.  Ar- 
nulf  was  soon  forced  to  lay  aside  the  office  which  he  had  so  rashly  as¬ 
sumed,  and  the  shameless  patron  of  his  infamous  conduct  also  before 
long  reaped  the  fitting  harvest  of  his  ways. 

Just  at  this  time  there  was  discovered  in  a  secluded  corner  of  the 
church  of  the  Holy  Sepulchre  a  part  of  the  Cross  of  the  Lord.  For 
greater  security,  the  faithful  who  dwelt  in  fear  under  the  yoke  of  the 
Gentiles  had  long  ago  hidden  this,  admitting  only  a  few  to  the  secret. 
Through  the  zealous  efforts  of  a  certain  Syrian  who  had  witnessed  Its 
hiding,  the  precious  treasure  was  discovered  concealed  within  a  silver 
case.  Accompanied  by  the  singing  of  hymns  and  spiritual  songs,  it  was 
borne  away,  first  to  the  Sepulchre  of  the  Lord  and  then  to  the  Temple. 
The  clergy  and  people  followed  In  a  body.  Among  the  Christians  there 
was  a  general  feeling  that  this  gift  had  been  sent  them  from  heaven  as 
a  consolation  and  a  fitting  reward  for  all  their  hardships  and  suffer¬ 
ings.^^ 

5.  Who  Duke  Godfrey  was — whence  he  came  and  of  what  an¬ 
cestors  he  was  sfrung — is  herein  set  forth. 

This  Duke  Godfrey,  whose  name  occurs  so  often  in  this  chronicle,  was, 
by  the  grace  of  God,  confirmed  as  the  supreme  head  of  the  realm,  and 
all  quarrels,  if  perchance  any  had  arisen,  were  settled.  Then  the  king¬ 
dom  began  to  grow  strong,  and  during  the  days  of  his  reign  it  became 
well  established.  Nevertheless,  Godfrey  reigned  only  one  year.^^  For 

ArnulPs  popularity  must  have  rested  on  more  substantial  grounds.  It  seems 
scarcely  probable  that  a  group  of  men  so  deeply  moved  by  piety  as  were  the  crusaders 
at  this  time  should  have  consented  to  his  election  as  patriarch,  had  that  not  been  the 
case.  Both  Albert  and  Ralph  of  Caen  reveal  him  as  one  of  the  real  heroes  of  the 
expedition. 

According  to  the  more  contemporary  accounts  it  was  the  initiative  of  Arnulf 
which  led  to  the  recovery  of  this  sacred  relic.  William’s  animosity  towards  him,  how¬ 
ever,  would  not  permit  him  to  associate  this  most  important  symbol  of  the  Lord’s  favor 
with  Arnulf ’s  name. 

Godfrey’s  actual  title,  which  William  does  not  mention,  was  ‘‘Defender  of  the 
Holy  Sepulchre,”  and  he  was  usually  referred  to  as  “duke”  or  sometimes  “prince.” 
The  great  piety  which  the  crusaders  felt  in  taking  over  the  Holy  City  led  at  the  time 
to  the  opinion  that  it  was  wrong  to  wear  the  kingly  crown  where  the  Savior  had  worn 
the  crown  of  thorns.  Opinion  had  changed  greatly  by  William’s  time  so  that  he  felt 
it  a  slight  upon  Godfrey’s  name  not  to  call  him  king  (see  Prologue  j  also  J.  L.  La 
Monte,  Feudal  Monarchy  in  the  Latin  Kingdom  of  Jerusalenty  iioo—i2giy  p,  4,  and 
H.G.y  pp.  478-80). 


386  GODFREY  IN  JERUSALEM 

the  sins  of  men  forbade  that  through  the  longer  ministrations  of  this 
great  prince  the  tender  plant  of  Christian  dominion  should  be  re¬ 
freshed  and  comforted  in  the  face  of  the  tribulations  which  menaced 
it.  He  was  snatched  away  from  the  midst  of  men,  lest  his  heart  be 
changed  by  wickedness  for,  as  it  is  written,  ^‘The  righteous  perisheth 
and  no  man  layeth  it  to  heart.” 

Godfrey  derived  his  origin  from  the  kingdom  of  the  Franks.  He 
was  born  in  the  province  of  Rheims,  in  the  city  of  Boulogne,  on  the 
English  sea.  He  sprang  from  a  line  of  illustrious  and  God-fearing 
ancestors.  His  father.  Lord  Eustace  the  Elder,  was  a  distinguished 
and  magnificent  count  of  that  same  land.  Many  were  the  notable  deeds 
he  wrought,  and  his  memory  as  a  religious  and  God-fearing  man  is  still 
held  in  reverence  and  pious  recollection  by  the  great  men  of  the  neigh¬ 
boring  lands.  His  mother,  Ida,  was  of  high  lineage,  distinguished 
among  the  noble  matrons  of  the  West  alike  for  her  lofty  character  and 
exalted  rank.  She  was  a  sister  of  the  excellent  Godfrey,  duke  of  Lor¬ 
raine,  who  was  surnamed  Struma.  The  duke,  being  without  children, 
adopted  as  his  own  son  his  nephew  of  the  same  name  and  made  him 
heir  to  his  entire  patrimony.  On  the  death  of  his  uncle,  Godfrey  suc¬ 
ceeded  to  the  duchy. 

The  younger  Godfrey  had  three  brothers,  all  worthy,  by  dignity  of 
character  and  eminent  valor,  to  be  the  brothers  of  so  great  a  lord.  Of 
these,  Baldwin,  count  of  Edessa,  later  followed  Godfrey  as  ruler  of 
Jerusalem,  and  Eustace,  count  of  Boulogne,  who  was  named  for  his 
father,  succeeded  to  the  paternal  estates  and  ruled  the  county  after  his 
sire’s  death.  The  daughter  of  this  Eustace,  Matilda,  married  Stephen, 
the  illustrious  and  magnificent  king  of  the  Angles,^”^ 

When  Baldwin  died  without  children,  his  brother  Eustace  was  sum¬ 
moned  by  the  leading  men  of  the  East  to  succeed  to  the  kingdom.  He 
was  unwilling  to  go,  however,  for  he  feared  that  his  elevation  to  the 
throne  could  not  be  brought  about  without  strife.^® 

Is.  57 :  I. 

Nearly  six  years  passed  after  the  death  of  Godfrey  the  Hunchback  before  Henry  IV 
invested  Godfrey  with  the  duchy.  Godfrey  had  foug'ht  faithfully  in  Henryks  service 
during-  that  time,  even  assisting  Henry  in  the  Italian  campaign  against  Gregory  VII. 
He  became  duke  of  Lower  Lorraine  in  1082. 

Stephen,  king  of  England  ii 35-1 154,  was  the  third  son  of  Stephen  Henry  of 
Blois  and  grandson  of  Stephen,  the  crusader  of  blemished  record,  and  AdHe,  daughter 
of  William  the  Conqueror.  The  high  regard  here  accorded  him  by  William  is  in 
marked  contrast  to  the  low  opinion  of  him  held  by  later  ages — so  low,  in  fact,  that 
his  name,  like  that  of  John,  has  not  appeared  in  the  list  of  English  kings  since  that  time. 

See  Book  XII,  chaps,  i  and  2. 


GODFREY  IN  JERUSALEM  387 

Godfrey's  third  brother,  William,  was  an  illustrious  man  who  did 
not  fall  short  of  the  energetic  and  lofty  character  which  distinguished 
his  father  and  brothers.  The  two  brothers  first  mentioned  followed 
their  lord  and  brother  upon  the  expedition,  while  William,  the  third, 
remained  at  home.^® 

Godfrey,  the  oldest  according  to  the  flesh,  was  distinguished  by  no¬ 
bility  of  character  also,  as  far  as  the  qualities  of  the  inner  man  were 
concerned,  and  to  him  rightly  the  precedence  belonged.  He  was  a  man 
of  deep  religious  character,  devout  and  God-fearing,  merciful  and  just. 
Serious  and  steadfast  in  word,  he  shunned  all  evil  ways.  He  scorned 
the  vanity  of  the  world,  a  trait  rare  at  his  time  of  life,  and  especially  in 
one  belonging  to  the  military  profession.  He  was  constant  in  prayer, 
assiduous  in  good  works,  and  noted  for  his  liberality.  Gracious  and 
affable,  kind  and  forbearing,  he  showed  himself  in  all  his  ways  com¬ 
mendable  and  pleasing  to  God. 

He  was  tall  of  stature,  not  extremely  so,  but  still  taller  than  the 
average  man.  He  was  strong  beyond  compare,  with  solidly  built  limbs 
and  stalwart  chest.  His  features  were  pleasing,  his  beard  and  hair  of 
a  medium  blond.  In  the  use  of  arms  and  in  the  practice  of  military 
tactics  he  was,  in  the  judgment  of  all,  without  a  peer. 

6.  The  frediction  of  his  mother  about  the  future  status  of  her  sons* 

The  mother  of  these  great  princes  was  a  woman  of  devout  life,  re¬ 
ligious  and  pleasing  to  God.  While  they  were  still  of  tender  years,  she, 
filled  with  the  divine  spirit,  foresaw  future  events  and  the  state  which 
was  ordained  for  her  sons  when  grown,  as  if  it  had  been  predicted  by 
an  oracle.  On  one  occasion,  while  they  were  playing  together  around 
her,  as  is  the  custom  of  children,  striking  at  one  another,  and  often 
flying  for  refuge  to  their  mother^s  lap,  the  venerable  Count  Eustace, 
their  father,  happened  to  come  in.  Hidden  beneath  the  folds  of  her 
mantle,  the  children  were  challenging  each  other  with  lively  move¬ 
ments  of  hands  and  feet.  The  count  noticed  the  agitation  under  the 
cloak  and  asked  what  was  stirring  so  actively  there.  She  is  said  to 
have  replied  as  follows:  ^^Three  great  princes,  the  first  of  whom  will 
be  a  duke,  the  second  a  king,  and  the  third  a  count.”  This  prophecy, 

This  brother,  William,  is  not  mentioned  by  other  writers  and  does  not  appear  in 
the  genealogical  tables  of  the  family  (see  La  Monte,  Feudal  Monarchy,  App.).  It  has 
been  commonly  assumed  that  Eustace  was  the  oldest  and  Baldwin  the  youngest  of  the 
three  brothers. 


388  GODFREY  IN  JERUSALEM 

by  the  kind  dispensation  of  divine  mercy,  was  later  fulfilled,  and  the 
subsequent  events  verified  the  mother^s  predictions.  For  on  his  uncle’s 
death,  the  first  son,  Godfrey,  as  has  been  said,  succeeded  to  the  duchy. 
Later,  by  the  unanimous  choice  of  the  chiefs,  he  became  the  ruler  of 
the  kingdom  of  Jerusalem.  Baldwin,  the  next  in  age,  followed  him  on 
this  throne  3  while  Eustace,  the  third  brother,  after  his  father’s  death, 
succeeded  as  sole  heir  to  the  whole  of  the  ancestral  patrimony,  as  has 
already  been  related. 

I  purposely  omit  the  story  of  the  swan  whence,  legend  declares, 
these  brothers  derived  their  origin,  because,  although  many  writers 
give  that  as  true,  yet  it  seems  to  be  without  foundation.^^ 

Passing  over  these  stories,  therefore,  let  us  return  to  the  history  of 
the  duke,  which  we  began  to  relate.  Among  other  marvellous  feats 
which  he  wrought,  according  to  his  custom,  legend  records  one  so  well 
worth  remembering  that  we  feel  it  should  be  inserted  in  the  present 
narrative. 

7.  The  memorable  achievement  0]  Godjrey  in  a  certain  single 
combat  is  recounted. 

One  memorable  feat  of  this  distinguished  man  stands  forth  promi¬ 
nently  as  worthy  to  be  related  here.  Much  against  his  wish,  he  was 
obliged  to  engage  in  a  single  combat,  which,  according  to  the  custom 
of  the  land,  could  not  be  declined  without  loss  of  reputation.  At  the 
court  of  the  emperor  he  suffered  a  wrong  from  one  of  the  noblemen 
attached  thereto,  who  is  said  to  have  been  his  own  kinsman.  The  matter 
in  question  involved  certain  great  estates  and  a  patrimony  of  vast  ex¬ 
tent.  A  day  was  set  for  the  trial,  and  at  the  appointed  time  both  the 
plaintiff  and  the  defendant  appeared  in  the  court  of  the  emperor.  The 
matter  in  dispute  was  introduced  and  the  aforesaid  nobleman  presented 
his  claim.  The  duke  defended  himself  as  well  as  he  could,  but,  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  laws  of  the  land,  trial  by  single  combat  between  the  litigants 
was  adjudged.  The  great  lords  of  the  empire  tried  in  vain  to  prevent 
these  distinguished  men  from  offering  a  spectacle  so  unworthy  of  them¬ 
selves  to  the  people,  for  in  such  a  combat  the  honor  and  reputation  of 
one  or  the  other  must  necessarily  suffer,  and  to  no  purpose.  The  im- 

The  legend  of  the  swan  ancestor  is  told  by  Albert.  William,  whose  willingness 
to  accept  legends  about  Godfrey  is  very  generous,  could  not  stretch  his  credulity  quite 
so  far. 


GODFREY  IN  JERUSALEM  389 

perial  sentence  was,  however,  ordered  carried  into  execution.  The 
nobles  took  their  places  around,  according  to  custom,  and  the  common 
people  crowded  about  as  the  contestants  entered  the  field  appointed 
for  the  trial  to  test  the  doubtful  outcome  of  ordeal  by  single  combat. 

Now  while  these  illustrious  and  magnificent  men  were  fighting  gal¬ 
lantly  with  all  their  force,  the  duke’s  sword  struck  against  the  shield 
of  his  adversary  and  broke.  Barely  half  a  foot  beyond  the  hilt  remained 
in  his  hand.  The  attendant  nobles,  perceiving  that  the  duke’s  situation 
thereby  had  become  very  critical,  had  a  truce  declared  and  went  to  the 
emperor,  humbly  begging  that  they  might  be  permitted  to  bring  about 
a  compromise  between  the  two  great  nobles.  They  were  discussing  the 
matter  carefully  when  the  duke  declared  positively  that  he  declined  to 
take  advantage  of  the  efforts  of  the  would-be  peacemakers,  and  with 
determined  obstinacy  returned  to  the  field  to  renew  the  combat. 

The  adversary’s  sword  was  still  intact,  and  he  now  seemed  to  have 
gained  the  upper  hand.  He  pressed  the  duke  hard  and  refused  him  any 
respite.  Finally,  however,  Godfrey  regained  his  usual  skill,  for  which 
he  was  so  famous.  Urged  on  by  anger,  he  rushed  forward  with  the  hilt 
of  his  broken  sword  in  his  hand  and  dealt  his  adversary  such  a  mighty 
blow  on  the  left  temple  that  he  was  thrown  half  dead  to  the  ground] 
indeed,  to  all  appearance  he  seemed  to  be  wholly  lifeless. 

Godfrey  threw  the  fragments  of  his  own  sword  from  him  and,  hold¬ 
ing  in  his  hand  the  sword  of  his  prostrate  enemy,  summoned  the  lords 
who  shortly  before  had  talked  to  him  about  a  compromise.  He  begged 
them  to  arrange  conditions  of  peace,  and  to  rescue  from  such  an  igno¬ 
minious  death  the  distinguished  man  who  had  been  vanquished. 

Amazed  at  the  extraordinary  valor  of  the  duke  and  his  incomparable 
mercy,  they  arranged  a  peace.  Thus  the  controversy  was  brought  to  an 
honorable  end,  yet  in  such  a  way  that  the  duke  remained  the  victor  and 
was  universally  deemed  worthy  of  immortal  glory.^^ 

8.  The  matchless  deed  of  this  same  Godfrey  in  the  matter  of  the 
victory  of  the  Emferor  Henry  against  Rudolfh^  the  'pseudo- 
king  of  Saxony, 

9 

Another  deed  of  no  less  glory  which  abides  ever  in  the  memory  of 
men  we  deem  worthy  of  inserting  in  this  present  writing.  The  Saxons, 
the  fiercest  of  all  the  German  peoples,  had  refused  to  endure  the  yoke 

There  is  no  known  basis  for  this  story  in  German  history. 


390  GODFREY  IN  JERUSALEM 

o£  the  Roman  Empire.  Desiring  to  roam  about  freely  without  re¬ 
straint,  they  had  shaken  off  the  rules  of  discipline  which  bound  them 
and  revolted  from  Emperor  Henry.  To  such  an  extent  was  this  de¬ 
termined  audacity  carried  that  they  established  as  king  over  them¬ 
selves,  in  opposition  to  the  emperor,  a  certain  count  named  Rudolph, 
a  nobleman  of  their  own  people.^^ 

Roused  by  this  injury,  the  emperor  caused  all  the  princes  of  the  em¬ 
pire  to  be  summoned.  When  they  were  gathered  in  his  presence,  he  set 
before  them  the  wrongs  so  well  known  to  all  and  called  on  them  for 
revenge.  Zealous  for  the  glory  of  the  empire  and  angry  at  the  mon¬ 
strous  conduct  of  the  Saxons,  all  offered  their  services  and  promised 
troops.  Such  a  wrong  against  the  Roman  Empire  must  not  be  left  un¬ 
noticed,  they  declared,  but  must  be  expiated  by  death,  and  the  crime 
of  lese  majestS  wiped  out  by  the  avenging  sword. 

At  the  command  of  the  emperor,  therefore,  they  assembled,  as 
arranged,  at  the  appointed  place  on  the  day  set,  leading  with  them 
countless  thousands.  From  all  the  lands  of  the  empire  they  came,  both 
ecclesiastical  and  secular  princes,  determined  to  invade  the  land  of  the 
Saxons  by  force  and  take  vengeance  for  so  monstrous  a  crime. 

The  day  set  for  the  engagement  approached.  The  legions  of  both 
armies  were  drawn  up  in  battle  array  ready  for  action.  Then  the  em¬ 
peror  summoned  his  principal  men  and  inquired  to  whom  of  their 
number  he  might  with  safety  commit  the  imperial  standard  and  make 
commander  in  chief  of  the  vast  host.  The  response  was  immediate  and 
unanimous  that  Godfrey,  duke  of  Lorraine,  was  by  far  the  most  capa¬ 
ble  and  best  fitted  for  that  responsibility.  To  him,  therefore,  as  the  one 
chosen  by  so  many  thousands  and,  in  the  opinion  of  all,  a  man  of  un¬ 
surpassed  excellence,  the  emperor  confided  the  eagle,  albeit  Godfrey 
himself  very  reluctantly  and  unwillingly  accepted  the  honor. 

On  that  day,  while  the  armies  on  both  sides  were  fighting  gallantly 
and  pressing  each  other  hard  with  their  swords,  it  happened  that  the 
duke,  who  was  leading  the  emperor’s  forces  with  the  eagle,  moved 
against  the  lines  led  by  the  pseudo-king  Rudolph,  and  thus  directed 

Rudolph  was  the  duke  of  Swabia  who  was  chosen  antiking  at  Forchheim  in  1077. 
This  action  was  an  incident  in  the  Investiture  Struggle  following  the  penance  of 
Henry  IV  at  Canossa.  The  disaffected  German  nobles  who  had  hoped  for  papal  sup¬ 
port  proceeded  to  elect  an  antiking  despite  Henry’s  reconciliation  with  the  church. 
Rudolph’s  support,  therefore,  was  greatly  weakened,  though  the  Saxons  continued  the 
fight  even  after  Rudolph’s  defeat  and  death  in  1080. 


GODFREY  IN  JERUSALEM  391 

the  forces  under  the  emperor’s  command  thither.  When  Godfrey 
reached  the  king’s  lines,  they  broke  up  in  utter  confusion,  and,  before 
the  very  eyes  of  the  emperor  and  some  of  his  nobles,  the  duke  plunged 
the  standard  which  he  was  bearing  into  the  heart  of  the  king.  Then 
throwing  the  lifeless  body  on  the  ground,  Godfrey  again  raised  aloft 
the  imperial  standard,  all  stained  with  the  blood  of  the  king. 

When  the  Saxons  saw  that  their  king  had  fallen,  they  also  gave  way 
and  surrendered  to  the  emperor.  Reparation  was  imposed  upon  them 
in  proportion  to  the  nature  of  their  offense,  and,  after  giving  up  hos¬ 
tages  and  their  arms  as  a  pledge  that  they  would  never  again  make  a 
similar  attempt,  they  were  restored  to  favor. 

We  have  recorded  these  deeds,  that  it  may  be  known  how  great 
among  the  mightiest  princes  of  the  world  was  the  prestige  of  this  dis¬ 
tinguished  man  whom  we  are  now  discussing.  For  no  one  can  doubt 
that  one  who  was  unanimously  singled  out  as  the  best  by  famous  princes 
who  are  said  to  be  unequalled  in  the  world  was  a  very  great  man.  Es¬ 
pecially  is  this  the  case  because  he  himself  confirmed  their  judgment 
by  such  a  remarkable  deed  and  showed  them  by  actual  proof  that  their 
estimation  of  him  was  correct. 

Many  other  splendid  deeds,  well  worthy  of  admiration,  were  done 
by  this  distinguished  man — works  which  even  today  are  still  told  as 
familiar  stories.  Among  others  is  the  following.  When  Godfrey  re¬ 
solved  to  go  upon  the  pilgrimage,  he  gave  to  the  church  of  Liege, 
with  pious  generosity,  the  well-known  castle  of  Bouillon,  from  which 
he  took  his  name.  This  castle  was  renowned  for  its  lands,  for  its  site 
and  fortifications,  and  for  all  the  advantages  arising  from  vast  terri¬ 
tories  extending  over  a  wide  area.^^ 

But  since  we  have  undertaken  to  describe  only  those  deeds  which 
he  did  among  us,  let  us  return  to  the  story. 

9.  The  'pious  liberality  of  the  duke  toward  the  churches  of  Jeru- 
sale'm,  A'ud  howy  because  of  his  humility y  he  refused  to  be 
crowned  with  the  royal  diadem, 

Godfrey  was  a  devout  man,  whose  heart  was  filled  with  pious  care  for 
all  that  pertained  to  the  honor  of  the  house  of  God.  A  few  days  after 

Godfrey  and  Baldwin  both  disposed  of  much  of  their  property  to  neighboring 
bishops  and  abbots  before  setting  out  on  the  crusade.  Some  of  these  transfers  were 
doubtless  in  the  nature  of  mortgages  to  obtain  money  for  the  journey  j  others,  however, 


392  GODFREY  IN  JERUSALEM 

he  was  elected  head  of  the  klngdortij  he  began  to  offer  the  first  fruits 
of  his  responsibility  to  the  Lord.  He  established  canons  in  the  church 
of  the  Lord’s  Sepulchre  and  in  the  Temple  of  the  Lord  3  and  upon  them 
he  bestowed  ample  benefices  known  as  prebends.  At  the  same  time  also 
he  gave  them  noble  houses  in  the  vicinity  of  these  same  churches  be¬ 
loved  of  God.  He  preserved  the  rule  and  regulations  observed  by  the 
great  and  wealthy  churches  founded  by  pious  princes  beyond  the  moun¬ 
tains,  and  he  would  have  conferred  still  greater  gifts,  had  not  death 
prevented. 

When  about  to  start  out  on  his  pilgrimage,  this  man  beloved  of  God 
led  with  him  in  his  train  monks  from  well-regulated  cloisters,  religious 
men  notable  for  their  holy  lives.  During  the  entire  pilgrimage,  at  the 
regular  hours,  night  and  day,  these  monks  celebrated  the  divine  offices 
for  him  after  the  custom  of  the  church.  After  he  acquired  the  royal 
power,  he  located  them  at  their  own  request  in  the  valley  of  Jehosha- 
phat  and  conferred  upon  them  there,  as  a  reward  for  their  services, 
lands  of  wide  extent.^^ 

It  would  take  far  too  long  to  recount  what  and  how  great  gifts  he 
bestowed  with  pious  generosity  on  the  churches  of  God.  Yet,  from  the 
contents  of  privileges  granted  to  the  churches  it  may  be  seen  how  many 
and  how  valuable  are  the  donations  which  this  man,  filled  with  the 
spirit  of  God,  gave  to  the  venerable  places  for  the  healing  of  his  soul. 
Nevertheless,  after  his  elevation  to  power,  because  of  his  humility  of 
spirit,  he  refused  to  be  invested  with  a  crown  of  gold  in  the  Holy  City, 
as  is  the  fashion  of  kings.  For  he  was  content  with,  and  showed  rever- 
ence  toward,  that  crown  of  thorns  which,  in  that  same  city,  the  Saviour 
of  the  human  race,  for  our  salvation,  wore  even  to  the  passion  of  the 
cross.  Hence,  some  people,  not  appreciating  Godfrey’s  services,  hesi- 

such  regard  those 
outward  acts  which  are  done  in  the  body  as  of  greater  value  than  those 
of  a  faithful  spirit  pleasing  to  God.  To  us  he  seems  not  merely  a  king, 
but  the  best  of  kings,  a  light  and  a  mirror  to  others.  Truly,  it  ought 

were  gifts  reflecting  genuine  piety  (see  R.  Rohricht,  Geschichte  des  ersten  KreuzzugSy 
p.  60,  note  4) . 

^^This  monastery  of  St.  Mary  of  the  Valley  of  Jehoshaphat  soon  became  one  of  the 
most  popular  and  wealthy  of  the  Latin  monasteries  in  the  Holy  Land.  The  abbot  of 
this  original  group  of  monks,  Baldwin,  was  made  first  Latin  archbishop  of  Caesarea. 
Gifts  of  land  in  various  parts  of  Europe  were  made  to  support  it  (C.  Kohler,  “Chartes 
de  PAbbaye  de  Notre  Dame  de  la  Vallee  de  Josaphat  en  Terre  Sainte,  1108-1291,^^ 
Revue  de  V Orient  latiny  VII  [1900]  108—222). 


tate  to  place  his  name  in  the  catalogue  of  the  kings  3 


GODFREY  IN  JERUSALEM  393 

not  to  be  thought  that  this  faithful  prince  disdained  the  gift  of  conse¬ 
cration  and  the  sacraments  of  the  church  but,  rather,  that  he  scorned 
the  pomp  and  vanity  of  the  world  to  which  every  creature  is  prone.  It 
was  in  a  spirit  of  humility  that  he  declined  the  crown  which  would 
perish,  in  the  hope  of  attaining  hereafter  one  that  would  never  fade.^® 

10.  The  frtnce  of  Egypt  summons  his  military  forces  of  every 
descriftio7t  and  marches  into  Syria  against  the  Christians. 

The  city  had  but  recently  been  taken,  and  the  leaders  who  had  won  it 
for  the  service  of  God  had  not  yet  separated,  when  a  rumor  began  to 
circulate  which  proved  to  be  true.  It  was  reported  that  the  prince  of 
Egypt,  a  most  powerful  lord  among  the  oriental  peoples,  had  sum¬ 
moned  military  forces  from  all  the  lands  under  his  sway  and  had  as¬ 
sembled  an  immense  host.  For  he  was  angry  that  a  barbarous  people 
from  the  remotest  regions  of  the  world  had  invaded  his  kingdom  and 
taken  by  force  a  province  that  had  been  subject  to  him.  He  called  be¬ 
fore  him  Al-Afdal,  the  commander  in  chief  of  his  armies,  also  known 
as  Emireius,  and  ordered  him  to  muster  the  entire  flower  of  Egypt  and 
the  whole  strength  of  the  empire  as  well.  With  this  host  he  was  to 
march  to  Syria,  there  to  wipe  from  the  face  of  the  earth  that  presump¬ 
tuous  people,  so  that  their  very  name  should  perish. 

Al-Afdal  was  an  Armenian,  born  of  Christian  parents.  But,  led 
astray  by  immense  riches,  he  had  renounced  his  Maker  and  despised 
the  faith  by  which  alone  the  righteous  live.^®  This  man  had  rewon 
Jerusalem  for  his  master  from  the  power  of  the  Turks3  but  in  the  same 
year  the  Christians  besieged  that  city  under  the  protecting  power  of 
the  Lord  and  restored  it  to  the  faith.  Scarcely  eleven  months  had  he 
held  peaceful  possession  of  it  when  the  Christian  army,  by  the  grace  of 
God,  delivered  it  from  the  bondage  of  undeserved  slavery.  He  had 
enjoyed  the  fruits  of  his  victory  for  so  brief  a  time  that  it  seemed  but 

William  here  expresses  his  own  personal  conviction.  It  is  not  certain  whether 
these  last  two  paragraphs  are  part  of  his  first  writing  or  were  added  during  a  later 
revision.  But  the  conviction  grew  upon  him  during  the  years,  for  he  asserts  it  more 
positively  at  the  very  end  of  his  writing  (see  Prologue,  p.  57). 

William  may  here  be  confusing  father  and  son.  Al-AfdaPs  father,  Badr  al-Jamali, 
was  born  of  Armenian  parents.  He  grew  up  as  a  slave  in  the  household  of  the  caliph. 
He  rose  to  power  through  sheer  ability  and  at  the  end  was  the  real  ruler,  the  caliph 
being  a  puppet  in  his  hands.  On  the  way  he  had,  of  course,  become  a  Muslim.  His  son 
grew  up  in  the  faith  and  like  his  father  became  vizier  of  the  caliph.  Like  his  father, 
too,  he  managed  to  obtain  the  real  rule.  Egypt  was  exceptionally  well  governed  under 

their  rule. 


394 


GODFREY  IN  JERUSALEM 

a  moment.  Moreover,  it  was  through  his  efforts  that  his  master  had 
gained  possession  of  the  city.  Consequently  Al-Afdal  gladly  undertook 
the  task  assigned  to  him.^*^ 

He  hoped  that  it  would  be  an  easy  matter  to  triumph  over  those  who 
had  dimmed  the  glory  of  his  prowess.  Accordingly,  in  a  spirit  of  vio¬ 
lent  and  haughty  arrogance  he  went  up  into  Syria  at  the  head  of  the 
entire  army  and  all  the  forces  that  the  land  of  Egypt,  then  at  its  best, 
could  furnish.  He  intended  to  destroy  the  Christians  utterly  so  that 
not  even  the  remembrance  of  them  should  remain.  But  the  Lord,  who 

terrible  in  his  doing  toward  the  children  of  men,”  ruled  other¬ 
wise. 

With  this  mighty  host  and  a  magnificent  army  of  cavalry,  therefore, 
he  advanced  into  Syria  and  encamped  before  Ascalon.  Immense  forces 
from  all  over  Arabia  and  the  land  of  Damascus  also  joined  his  expedi¬ 
tion.  Heretofore,  the  Turks  and  Egyptians  had  not  been  on  very 
friendly  terms,  since  each  power  distrusted  the  military  strength  of 
the  other  and  each  in  turn  strove  to  extend  its  own  kingdom  at  the 
expense  of  its  rival.  Now,  however,  fear  of  the  Christians,  not  regard 
for  each  other,  drew  them  together,  and  they  joined  forces  to  under¬ 
take  some  plan  for  overthrowing  the  Christians,  who  had  so  recently 
come.  Far  better  would  it  be,  they  thought,  to  endure  the  arrogance  of 
their  rivals,  even  to  the  extent  of  bearing  their  yoke,  than  to  experience 
the  harsh  and  cruel  swords  of  the  barbarians. 

It  was  with  this  purpose  in  view,  therefore,  that  innumerable  forces 
of  Egyptians,  Arabs,  and  Turks  had  been  assembled  and  were  now 
encamped  on  the  plains  before  Ascalon.  From  there  they  were  to  march 
on  Jerusalem,  for  it  seemed  incredible  that  our  army  would  venture  to 
risk  an  encounter  with  such  a  vast  host. 

II.  The  duke^  having  comfleted  his  frayers  and  devotions  at 
J er us aleniy  musters  his  forces  at  Ramlahy  where  the  leaders 
had  already  gathered. 

On  the  arrival  of  these  tidings,  the  entire  body  of  Christians — ^leaders, 
bishops,  clergy,  and  common  people — assembled,  armed  with  the 

Al-Afdal  was  responsible  for  Egyptian  policy  at  this  time.  His  troops  had  recap¬ 
tured  Jerusalem  from  the  Turks  after  a  siege  of  forty  days,  July  and  August,  1098. 
He  miscalculated  the  strength  of  the  crusaders  and  arrived  too  late  to  save  Jerusalem 
from  their  hands  in  1099. 

Ps.  66 :  5. 


GODFREY  IN  JERUSALEM  395 

weapons  of  the  spirit.  Prostrate  before  the  Sepulchre  of  the  Lord, 
they  poured  forth  their  petitions  amid  groans  and  tears.  With  humble 
and  contrite  hearts,  they  besought  the  Lord  that  He  would  mercifully 
free  His  people  from  the  impending  danger,  that  He,  who  had  pre¬ 
served  them  even  unto  the  present  day  triumphant  for  Himself  and 
had  willed  that  the  place  of  His  sanctification  should  be  purified,  would 
not,  for  the  sake  of  His  own  glory,  suffer  it  to  be  further  contaminated. 

Then,  in  the  same  fervor  of  rapt  devotion,  to  the  sound  of  hymns 
and  spiritual  songs,  they  hastened  with  bare  feet  to  the  Temple  of  the 
Lord.  There  once  more  they  poured  out  their  hearts  in  prayer  to  God, 
saying,  ^^Spare  thy  people,  O  Lord,  and  give  not  thine  heritage  to 
reproach.” 

When  their  prayers  had  been  made  according  to  custom,  the  bishop 
gave  them  his  benediction.  The  duke  then  appointed  wise  and  experi¬ 
enced  men  to  guard  and  govern  the  city.  He  himself,  accompanied  by 
the  count  of  Flanders,  went  down  into  the  plains  of  Ramlah.  The 
other  chiefs  remained  at  Jerusalem. 

The  illustrious  Eustace,  the  duke’s  brother,  and  Tancred  were  at 
Nablus.  They  had  gone  there  at  the  duke’s  command,  in  response  to 
the  call  of  the  citizens,  who  had  sent  word  that  they  would  surrender 
the  city  without  making  any  trouble.  They  were  still  lingering  there, 
not  only  on  account  of  the  great  riches  of  the  place,  but  also  for  the 
purpose  of  appointing  a  suitable  garrison  to  guard  it.  Consequently 
they  were  ignorant  of  what  had  happened  at  Jerusalem.  They  returned 
immediately,  however,  at  the  summons  of  the  duke  and  joined  the 
other  chiefs. 

At  Ramlah,  the  duke  and  the  count  of  Flanders  received  positive 
and  reliable  Information  that  Al-Afdal  had  encamped  with  his  forces 
before  Ascalon.  A  messenger  was  therefore  sent  in  haste  to  summon 
the  other  leaders,  who  had  remained  at  Jerusalem  to  await  confirma¬ 
tion  of  the  rumor. 

12.  A  battle  Is  j ought.  Victory  is  granted  us  from  on  highy  to¬ 
gether  with  countless  wealth, 

■ 

The  message  of  the  duke  brought  the  information  that  the  enemy  had 
arrived  in  vast  numbers  and  were  encamped  near  at  hand.  Without 
delay,  the  count  of  Toulouse  and  the  other  chiefs  devoted  to  God,  after 


Joel  2:17. 


396  GODFREY  IN  JERUSALEM 

invoking  aid  from  on  high,  mustered  all  the  forces  available  at  the 
time  and  place  and  marched  down  into  the  land  of  the  Philistines  to 
the  place  which  is  now  called  Ibelin,  where  they  knew  the  duke  to  be. 
They  led  with  them  a  force  of  twelve  hundred  cavalry  and  about  nine 
thousand  foot  soldiers.  Our  army  had  been  at  Ibelin  a  day  when,  about 
the  eleventh  hour,  a  large  force  appeared  in  the  plain  afar  off.  Sup¬ 
posing  that  it  was  the  enemy’s  host,  they  sent  on  ahead  two  hundred 
light-armed  cavaliers  to  ascertain  the  number  and  condition  of  these 
troops.  Meanwhile,  they  themselves  prepared  for  battle. 

When  the  reconnoitering  force  drew  nearer,  however,  they  discov¬ 
ered  that  the  host  consisted  of  great  troops  of  cattle,  horses,  and  camels. 
Some  mounted  knights  kept  watch  over  the  animals  and  were  respon¬ 
sible  for  them  like  shepherds.  As  our  detachment  approached,  how¬ 
ever,  both  the  herdsmen  and  the  cavaliers  on  guard  fled.  Thus,  with¬ 
out  waiting  to  encounter  the  Christians  they  deserted  their  flocks  and 
herds  and  left  them  without  protection. 

Some  prisoners  were  captured,  however,  from  whom  full  informa¬ 
tion  about  the  situation  and  plans  of  the  enemy  was  obtained.  It  was 
learned  that  the  infidel  prince  had  located  his  camp  quite  near  them, 
about  seven  miles  away.  After  two  days,  he  intended  to  advance  and 
annihilate  the  Christian  army. 

The  leaders,  now  certain  that  battle  was  inevitable,  drew  up  their 
forces  in  nine  divisions.  Of  these,  three  formed  the  vanguard,  three 
occupied  the  center,  and  the  remaining  three  were  ordered  to  bring  up 
the  rear.  Thus,  at  whatever  point  the  enemy  might  attack,  a  triple  array 
of  troops  to  oppose  them  would  be  found.  In  regard  to  the  numbers  of 
the  enemy,  no  definite  information  could  be  obtained,  for  their  host 
was  beyond  counting  and  additional  reinforcements  were  received 
daily. 

The  booty  which  the  Christians  had  won  without  opposition,  as  just 
described,  was  inestimable.  They  passed  the  night  in  that  place  with 
great  rejoicing.  Yet,  like  wise  men  experienced  in  warfare,  they  placed 
the  necessary  guards  around  the  camp  and  kept  vigilant  watch. 

On  the  following  day,  the  herald’s  voice  gave  the  call  to  battle.  With 
ranks  drawn  up  in  regular  formation,  the  Christians  advanced  as  with 
one  accord  against  the  foe,  commending  the  result  to  God.  For  in  Him, 
who  can  easily  vanquish  many  with  a  few,  all  hope  of  victory  lay. 

The  determined  and  vigorous  attitude  of  their  enemies  caused  the 


GODFREY  IN  JERUSALEM  397 

Egyptians  and  those  who  had  joined  them  from  the  land  of  Syria  to 
distrust  their  own  strength.  Far  wiser  than  formerly,  they  now  felt 
less  and  less  confident  hope  in  their  vast  numbers,  for  they  supposed 
that  the  entire  host  advancing  against  them  consisted  of  soldiers. 

Our  numbers  were,  in  fact,  small.  But  it  happened  that  the  flocks 
and  herds  which  had  been  seized  as  booty  followed  along  with  our 
army  of  their  own  accord.  When  the  troops  halted,  the  animals  halted 
also  3  and  when  the  host  moved  on  again,  straightway  the  herds  fol¬ 
lowed,  although  without  a  leader.  Consequently,  the  enemy,  convinced 
that  our  number  was  infinite  and  our  strength  incomparable,  took  to 
flight,  though  no  man  pursued.  Even  in  flight,  however,  they  felt  but 
little  hope  of  safety. 

Through  some  unknown  mishap,  the  bishop  of  Matera,  instigator 
of  quarrels  and  author  of  sedition,  disappeared  that  day.  No  one  knew 
what  his  fate  was.  Nevertheless,  in  some  way  he  was  removed  from 
human  affairs  and  was  never  seen  again.  He  had  been  sent  by  the  duke 
to  summon  the  chiefs  who  had  remained  at  Jerusalem,  and  it  is  said 
that,  on  his  return,  he  was  taken  by  the  enemy  and  either  killed  or  con¬ 
demned  to  perpetual  imprisonment. 

Then  after  victory  had  been  granted  them  from  on  high,  the  army 
repaired  to  the  enemy ^s  camp.  There  such  a  vast  supply  of  goods  of  all 
kinds  was  found  that  the  pilgrims  became  satiated  to  the  point  of  loath¬ 
ing,  so  that  they  disdained  even  cakes  and  honey.  In  fact,  the  most 
lowly  and  insignificant  among  them  was  able  to  say,  “Abundance  has 
made  me  helpless.” 

The  flight  of  the  enemy  gave  the  victory  to  the  Christians  without 
effort  on  their  part.  With  heartfelt  thanks  to  the  Lord,  leaders  and 
people  went  back  to  Jerusalem,  laden  with  spoils  and  bringing  along 
with  them  immense  booty.  Exulting  and  rejoicing  they  returned,  like 
victors  who  are  dividing  the  treasures  which  they  have  taken. 

13.  The  leaders  se  far  ate;  the  counts  oj  Normandy  and  Flanders 
go  back  to  their  own  lands ;  the  count  of  Toulouse  returns  to 
C onstantinofle ,  Tancred  is  given  command  of  Tiberias, 

When  this  campaign  was  ended,  the  counts  of  Normandy  and  Flan¬ 
ders,  leaders  beloved  of  God  and  devoted  to  His  service,  decided  to 
return  home,^  since  the  pilgrimage  which  they  had  undertaken  had 
been  brought  to  a  successful  end.  Accordingly,  they  set  forth  upon 


398  GODFREY  IN  JERUSALEM 

their  journey  and  went  by  ship  to  Constantinople.  Here  they  were 
graciously  received  by  the  emperor  and  dismissed  with  honorable  gifts. 
Finally,  by  the  will  of  God,  each  arrived  safe  and  sound  in  his  own 
land. 

The  count  of  Normandy,  on  his  return,  found  affairs  in  a  very  dif¬ 
ferent  condition  from  that  in  which  he  had  left  them  when  he  set  out 
on  the  pilgrimage.  It  was,  in  fact,  far  from  his  liking.  For  while  he  was 
fighting  for  the  Lord  on  the  expedition,  his  elder  brother  William, 
surnamed  Rufus,  the  king  of  the  Angles,  had  died  childless.  By  right 
of  primogeniture,  succession  to  the  kingdom  belonged  to  the  count, 
but  his  younger  brother  Henry  had  persuaded  the  princes  of  the  realm 
that  Robert  had  been  made  king  of  Jerusalem  and  had  no  intention  of 
returning.  By  this  fraud  he  had  obtained  the  throne.^*^ 

As  soon  as  the  count  returned,  he  at  once  demanded  the  kingdom  as 
belonging  to  him  by  right.  Since  Henry  absolutely  refused  to  resign 
it,  the  count  raised  troops,  made  ready  a  fleet,  and  invaded  England 
with  an  armed  force.  His  brother  advanced  against  him  with  the  full 
strength  of  the  kingdom.  They  were  about  to  engage  in  battle,  when 
mediators  intervened  and  a  compromise  was  effected  between  them  on 
condition  that  the  king  should  pay  a  fixed  sum  yearly  to  his  elder 
brother  under  the  name  of  taxes.  Pacified  by  this  arrangement,  the 
duke  returned  to  his  own  country.  Afterwards,  however,  the  duke 
demanded  from  his  brother  certain  castles  in  Normandy  which  Henry 
had  owned  even  before  his  elevation  to  the  throne.  On  the  king’s  re¬ 
fusal  to  give  them  up,  Robert  besieged  them  and  took  them  by  force. 

As  soon  as  the  king  heard  of  this,  he  sailed  across  to  Normandy  with 
large  forces.  He  fought  with  his  brother,  took  him  prisoner,  and  had 
him  cast  into  prison  for  life.  There  he  died,  and  the  king,  his  brother, 
succeeded  to  his  entire  possessions.^^ 

Here,  too,  William  reveals  an  attitude  not  shared  in  later  English  history.  His 
partiality  toward  Robert  Curthose  and  his  dislike  for  Henry  I  are  pardonable  in  a 
native  of  Latin  Jerusalem,  which  Robert  had  helped  to  found.  He  is,  of  course,  wrong 
in  his  inference  that  William  Rufus  was  the  older  brother  because  he  had  been  made 
king.  There  were  Englishmen  who  were  ready  to  support  Robert  for  the  crown  when 
William  Rufus  was  killed  in  the  New  Forest  in  iioo,  but  Robert  was  lingering  in 
southern  Italy  on  his  way  home  from  Jerusalem  at  the  time.  Henry,  his  younger 
brother,  who  was  as  enterprising  as  Robert  was  lackadaisical,  was  close  at  hand  and 
seized  the  opportunity  to  make  himself  king.  (David,  Robert  Curthose^  pp.  119-21J 
198—200.) 

Robert  died  in  ii34>  a  prisoner  in  Cardiff  Castle  in  Wales.  The  account  of  his 
later  career  is  here  greatly  abbreviated  (David,  Robert  Curthose^  pp.  120-89). 


GODFREY  IN  JERUSALEM  399 

The  count  of  St.  Gilles  returned  to  Laodicea  In  Syria.  There  he  left 
his  wife,  intending  to  join  her  soon,  and  again  set  out  for  Constan¬ 
tinople  to  the  lord  emperor  with  an  honorable  retinue.  The  emperor 
gave  him  a  magnificent  welcome,  treated  him  very  kindly,  and  sent 
him  away  with  many  splendid  gifts.  After  an  absence  of  two  years,  he 
returned  in  safety  to  Syria,  to  his  wife  and  household,  as  will  be  re¬ 
counted  later. 

The  duke  retained  with  him  the  noble  and  distinguished  Tancred, 
together  with  the  Count  Gamier  de  Grey  and  certain  other  nobles.  He 
continued  to  administer  with  wisdom  and  vigor  the  kingdom  com¬ 
mitted  to  him  by  God.  With  his  usual  generosity,  he  bestowed  upon 
Tancred  as  a  hereditary  right  forever  the  city  of  Tiberias  on  Lake  Gen- 
nesaret,  together  with  the  entire  principality  of  Galilee.  At  the  same 
time  he  also  granted  to  him  Cayphas  [Haifa],  which  is  called  Por- 
fhyriony  a  coast  city,  with  all  its  appurtenances.^^ 

In  the  management  of  this  principality  Tancred  conducted  himself 
so  quietly  and  acceptably  to  God  that  even  to  this  day  hi^  memory  is 
held  in  benediction  by  the  people  of  that  land.*"^^  He  also  devoted  much 
attention  to  establishing  churches  in  that  diocese,  namely,  at  Nazareth, 
Tiberias,  and  on  Mt.  Tabor.  These  he  endowed  with  ample  patri¬ 
monies  and  to  them  also  he  gave  ecclesiastical  furnishings  and  decora¬ 
tions.  A  large  part  of  these  gifts  was  unfortunately  lost  to  the  venerable 
places  later  through  the  frauds  and  intrigues  of  the  princes  who  suc¬ 
ceeded  Tancred.  Yet  from  what  was  left  to  them,  the  churches  are  still 
able  to  supply  themselves  with  what  is  needful.  Never  do  they  forget 
to  offer  prayers  for  the  soul  of  him  who  displayed  tpward  the  churches 
of  God  such  pious  liberality  and  deep  affection. 

And  because  he  was  faithful  in  small  things,  God  set  him  over  much  3 
he  entered  into  the  joy  of  the  father  of  a  family  and  received  for  all  he 
had  given  an  hundredfold.  For,  two  years  later,  as  a  reward  for  his 
services,  he  was  called  to  the  principality  of  Antioch.  That  church  also, 
which  has  ever  increased  in  glory  and  fame  since  the  time  of  the  apos- 

See  Book  X,  chap.  12. 

Tiberias  was  the  first  great  fief  of  Jerusalem.  The  grant  of  Haifa  is  doubtful. 
Tancred  aided  in  its  capture  after  Godfrey’s  death,  which  may  be  the  basis  of  William’s 
statement,  but  Geldemar  Carpinel  claimed  it  as  having  been  promised  to  him  by  God¬ 
frey  (see  Book  X,  chap.  10). 

Doubtless  William  is  here  speaking  from  personal  knowledge.  He  had  visited  this 
region  frequently  and  for  a  few  months  held  the  office  of  archdeacon  of  Nazareth 
(see  R.  Rohricht,  Regesta  regni  Hierosolymttanij  no.  518). 


400  GODFREY  IN  JERUSALEM 

ties,  he  honored  with  munificent  gifts.  Moreover,  he  extended  the 
limits  of  the  principality  greatly  by  subjugating  cities  and  taking  for¬ 
tresses  far  and  wide,  as  will  be  related  in  the  following  pages. 

14.  Bohemondy  frlnce  of  A ntiochy  and  Baldwlny  count  of  Edessay 
go  to  J erusalem  to  celebrate  there  the  Lord^s  Nativity. 

While  matters  were  progressing  thus  in  the  kingdom,  Bohemond, 
prince  of  Antioch,  and  Baldwin,  count  of  Edessa,  the  duke’s  brother, 
determined  to  go  to  Jerusalem.  From  many  reports  which  reached 
them,  they  had  learned  that  the  rest  of  their  brethren  and  comrades 
on  this  great  pilgrimage,  attended  by  divine  favor,  had  succeeded  in 
taking  the  Holy  City,  thus  happily  accomplishing  the  object  of  their 
journey.  Stirred  by  this  news,  they  set  a  day  when,  after  all  necessary 
preparations  for  the  journey  had  been  made,  they  should  set  out  for 
the  Holy  City,  under  the  guidance  of  God.  Their  purpose  was  to  com¬ 
plete  the  object  of  their  labors  by  paying  their  vows  to  the  Lord  and 
furthermore  to  lend  the  comfort  of  their  brotherly  presence  to  the 
duke  as  well  as  to  Tancred  and  the  other  chiefs.  For  these  two  illus¬ 
trious  noblemen  had  remained  behind,  Bohemond  at  Antioch  to  care 
for  the  principality  and  Baldwin  at  Edessa  to  protect  that  country  from 
the  attacks  of  the  enemy. 

From  the  very  beginning,  as  soon  as  Antioch  was  taken,  it  had  been 
determined  that,  for  the  general  welfare,  these  leaders  should  not 
abandon  the  cities,  worshippers  of  God,  which  had  been  entrusted  to 
them  from  on  high,  but  should  devote  vigilant  care  to  their  defense. 
For  it  might  well  happen  that  the  enemy  would  return  with  fresh 
strength  to  begin  war  anew,  and  so  all  that  the  Christians  had  accom¬ 
plished  would  be  of  no  avail. 

Although  each  ruler  was  fully  occupied  with  the  affairs  of  his  own 
kingdom,  yet  both  were  determined  to  finish  the  pilgrimage.  So  on  the 
day  appointed  they  started  on  the  way. 

Bohemond  took  with  him  a  large  force  of  both  foot  and  horse. 
He  was  also  accompanied  by  many  who  were  animated  by  a  strong 
desire  to  accomplish  the  same  pilgrimage.  He  arrived  at  the  maritime 
city  Valenia,  which  lies  at  the  foot  of  the  castle  Margat,  where  he  es¬ 
tablished  his  camp,  much  against  the  wishes  of  the  citizens.  There  he 
was  joined  by  Baldwin,  who  was  following  him  closely.  The  two  lead- 


GODFREY  IN  JERUSALEM  401 

ers  united  their  forces  and  proceeded  together  on  the  journey  which 
they  had  undertaken. 

Just  about  this  time  a  band  of  pilgrims  from  Italy  had  landed  at 
Laodicea  of  Syria.  Among  their  number  was  Daimbert,  archbishop  of 
the  Pisans,  a  wise  and  learned  man  of  great  piety,  and  a  friend  to  all 
that  was  noble.^®  The  bishop  of  Ariano  in  Apulia  was  also  in  that  com¬ 
pany.^®  These  people  attached  themselves  to  the  camp  of  the  leaders 
spoken  of  above,  whereby  the  forces  of  the  latter  were  greatly  in¬ 
creased.  The  throng  of  men  and  women,  on  horesback  and  on  foot, 
is  said  to  have  been  about  twenty-five  thousand. 

On  resuming  their  march,  the  pilgrims  followed  along  the  coast, 
but  found  only  cities  belonging  to  the  enemy.  It  was  with  the  greatest 
difficulty,  therefore,  and  at  the  cost  of  much  suffering  from  lack  of 
food,  that  they  finally  succeeded  in  reaching  their  goal.  For  since  they 
had  had  no  opportunity  to  trade  and  found  nothing  to  buy,  the  pro¬ 
visions  which  they  carried  in  their  packs  had  given  out.  Moreover,  the 
extreme  cold  and  violent  rain  had  reduced  many  to  the  last  extremity 
of  suffering,  for  it  was  winter,  in  the  month  of  December.  During  the 
entire  course  of  this  long  journey  the  people  of  Tripoli  and  Caesarea 
were  the  only  ones  who  offered  the  wayfarers  the  opportunity  to  buy 
provisions  as  they  passed  through  the  country.  Yet,  notwithstanding 
the  scarcity  of  food  and  the  straits  of  hunger  resulting  therefrom,  the 
pilgrims  pressed  on  their  way,  regardless  of  the  fact  that  they  had  not 
even  pack  animals  to  carry  the  baggage. 

Under  the  protection  of  divine  mercy,  however,  they  finally  arrived 
at  Jerusalem,  where  they  were  most  cordially  received  by  the  duke, 
the  clergy,  and  the  people.  Then  with  contrite  hearts,  in  a  deep  spirit 
of  humility,  they  visited  the  holy  places  and  learned,  by  the  evidence 
of  their  own  eyes,  the  actuality  of  that  which  hitherto  they  had  known 
by  report  and  teaching  only.  At  the  holy  city  of  Bethlehem  they  cele¬ 
brated  the  day  of  the  Lord’s  nativity.  There  they  gazed  upon  the  man- 

Daimbert  or  Dagfobert  had  become  the  first  archbishop  of  Pisa  when  that  city 
was  elevated  from  a  bishopric  by  the  addition  of  Corsica,  which  the  Pisans  had  cap¬ 
tured  from  the  Muslims.  He  was  instrumental  in  raising  a  fleet  to  take  part  in  the 
crusade  and  was  virtually  its  commander.  Pope  Urban  may  have  designated  him  as 
papal  legate  and  vicar  to  succeed  Adhemar,  who  had  died  at  Antioch  August  i,  1098. 

Apparently  William  thought  that  the  bishop  of  Ariano  had  come  with  the  Pisan 
fleet,  but  there  is  some  reason  for  believing  that  he  had  been  with  Bohemond  ever  since 
1096  (see  R.  B.  Yewdale,  Bohemond  7,  Prince  of  Antioch^  P-  38  5  also  H.  Hagenmeyer, 
ed.,  Fulcheri  Camotensis  historia  HierosolymitanUy  p.  327,  note  24). 


402  GODFREY  IN  JERUSALEM 

ger  and  the  wondrous  cave  wherein  the  tender  Mother  of  God,  the 
doorway  of  salvation,  once  wrapped  the  Saviour  of  the  world  in  swad¬ 
dling  clothes  and  stilled  His  wailing  at  her  breast. 

15.  Daimberty  archbtshof  of  the  church  at  Pisay  becomes  fatrl-' 
arch  of  J erusalem. 

For  about  five  months  prior  to  this  time  the  church  at  Jerusalem  had 
been  without  a  head,  lacking  its  own  high  priest.  In  view  of  this  situa¬ 
tion,  the  princes  who  were  then  in  the  city  assembled  to  provide  for 
the  church  of  God  in  that  place.  After  much  mature  deliberation,  the 
venerable  Daimbert  was,  by  general  consent,  placed  in  the  patriarchal 
chair.  For  the  former  election  of  Arnulf,  which  we  recorded,  had  been 
as  quickly  and  easily  made  null  and  void  as  it  had  been  rashly  and  in¬ 
advisedly  brought  about.^"^ 

William’s  intense  animosity  toward  Arnulf  led  him  to  give  a  very  distorted  ac¬ 
count  of  this  change.  The  account  which  is  contained  in  the  supposed  letter  of  Daimbert 
to  Bohemond  (Book  X,  chap.  4)  is  much  nearer  the  truth. 

Bohemond’s  hold  on  Antioch  was  precarious,  for  the  emperor  claimed  it  under  the 
agreement  which  the  crusading  leaders  had  made  with  him  at  Constantinople.  He  was 
very  much  in  need  of  moral  sanction  for  his  continued  hold  upon  it,  and  the  arrival 
of  Daimbert  as  papal  -legate  offered  him  an  opportunity.  He  lost  no  time  in  cultivating 
the  legate’s  friendship  and  even  persuaded  him  to  lend  the  aid  of  the  Pisan  fleet  to 
capture  Laodicea,  which  was  still  held  by  the  Greeks.  This  capture  was  prevented  by 
the  arrival  of  the  crusading  leaders  who  were  returning  from  Jerusalem.  Robert  of 
Normandy,  Raymond  of  Toulouse,  and  others  threatened  to  take  up  arms  against 
Bohemond  if  he  did  not  raise  the  siege,  which  was  in  violation  of  their  agreement 
with  the  Greeks.  The  siege  was  abandoned,  but  the  friendship  between  Daimbert  and 
Bohemond  continued  nevertheless.  Bohemond  was  in  a  commanding  position  when  he  ar¬ 
rived  at  Jerusalem,  for  Godfrey’s  garrison  was  pitifully  small,  and  even  with  the  addition 
of  Baldwin’s  force  was  no  match  for  Bohemond,  Tancred,  and  Daimbert.  Furthermore, 
Godfrey  was  very  much  in  need  of  a  fleet  to  obtain  a  seaport.  Bohemond  was  therefore 
in  a  position  to  dictate  his  wishes.  These  included  the  election  of  Daimbert  as  patriarch 
and  the  submission  of  their  respective  principalities  to  Daimbert  as  papal  vicar  and 
patriarch,  to  be  received  back  from  him  as  fiefs. 

The  matter  was  arranged  through  negotiation.  Arnulf,  who  lacked  independent 
strength  and  papal  approval  for  his  ofiice,  was  in  no  position  to  insist  upon  his  rights. 
He  was  granted  the  second  place  in  the  church  as  archdeacon  of  the  Holy  Sepulchre, 
together  with  a  generous  allotment  of  income.  Had  the  charges  of  Arnulf’s  enemies 
been  taken  seriously,  they  would  have  disqualified  him  as  much  for  the  one  position 
as  for  the  other.  The  next  step  was  the  submission  of  their  principalities  to  the  new 
patriarch  by  Bohemond  and  Godfrey,  to  be  received  back  as  fiefs  from  him.  How 
willingly  Godfrey  submitted  to  this  step  may  be  questioned,  for  he  was  almost  as 
helpless  as  Arnulf.  The  arrangement  was  bound  to  be  embarrassing  to  him  in  the 
future.  There  was  no  question  of  Bohemond’s  willingness,  even  eagerness.  He  had 
everything  to  gain  and  nothing  to  lose.  His  father  had  obtained  sanction  for  his  seizure 
of  land  in  southern  Italy  by  a  similar  arrangement  with  Pope  Leo  IX,  whose  nominal 
vassal  he  became.  Bohemond  hoped  likewise  to  commit  the  church  to  his  hold  upon 


GODFREY  IN  JERUSALEM  403 

As  soon  as  Daimbert,  the  man  of  God,  had  been  installed  in  the  pa¬ 
triarchal  chair,  both  Duke  Godfrey  and  Prince  Bohemond  humbly  re¬ 
ceived  from  his  hand,  the  former  the  investiture  of  the  kingdom,  and 
the  latter  that  of  the  principality,  thus  showing  honor  to  Him  whose 
vicegerent  on  earth  they  believed  the  patriarch  to  be.^® 

This  ceremony  over,  revenues  were  assigned  to  the  lord  patriarch, 
from  which  his  establishment  might  be  honorably  supported,  as  was 
due  to  his  office.  Into  his  hands  were  given  not  only  those  possessions 
which  had  belonged  to  the  Greek  patriarch  from  the  days  of  the  Greeks 
in  the  time  of  the  Gentiles,  but  new  ones  as  well. 

When  all  these  matters  had  been  duly  attended  to,  Bohemond  and 
Baldwin  took  leave  of  the  duke  to  return  to  their  own  lands  and  de¬ 
scended  to  the  river  Jordan.  Thence  following  along  the  bank  of  that 
river,  through  the  famous  valley,  they  crossed  to  Scythopolis,  and 
finally  arrived  at  Tiberias.  Here  they  provided  themselves  with  the 
necessary  food  for  the  journey  and  again  resumed  their  way  along  the 
sea  of  Galilee  to  Phoenicia  Libani,  passing  Paneas  [Banyas],  which  is 
Caesarea  Philippi,  on  the  right.  Then  they  entered  Ituria  and  came  to 
the  place  called  Heliopolis  and  also  known  as  Malbec  [Baalbec] ,  Here 
they  again  returned  to  the  seashore  and  finally,  led  by  the  mercy  of 
God,  arrived  at  Antioch  safe  and  sound. 

1 6.  Through  the  intrigues  of  evil  meny  a  serious  disfute  amount-' 
ing  to  strife  arises  between  the  duke  and  the  fatriarch  over  the 
fossession  of  the  tower  of  David  and  a  fourth  fart  of  the  city. 

In  the  meantime,  a  question  had  arisen  at  Jerusalem  between  the  pa¬ 
triarch  and  the  duke.  The  trouble  was  increased  by  the  busy  meddling 
of  certain  trouble  makers  who  begrudge  the  tranquillity  of  others  and 
ever  delight  to  sow  the  seeds  of  dissension.  The  patriarch  demanded 
that  the  duke  give  over  to  him  the  Holy  City  of  God  with  its  citadel 
and  likewise  the  city  of  Jaffa  with  its  appurtenances.  For  some  time 
the  question  was  under  vigorous  discussion.  Finally,  on  the  day  of  the 
purification  of  the  blessed  Mary,  in  the  presence  of  the  clergy  and  all 


Antioch  by  this  step.  Godfrey  and  Arnulf  had  to  pay  a  heavy  price  for  this  improve¬ 
ment  in  Bohemond’s  status. 

This  statement  may  well  represent  William’s  conception  of  the  ideal  relationship 
between  patriarch  and  king",  church  and  state,  in  Jerusalem.  It  is  not  derived  from  any 
of  the  earlier  chronicles. 


k 


I 


404  GODFREY  IN  JERUSALEM 

the  people,  the  duke,  a  man  of  humble  and  gentle  nature,  who  stood 
in  fear  of  the  rebuke  of  the  Lord,  resigned  the  fourth  part  of  the  city 
of  Jaffa  to  the  church  of  the  Holy  Resurrection.^^ 

Later,  on  the  holy  day  of  the  following  Easter,  again  in  the  presence 
of  the  clergy  and  people  who  had  assembled  for  the  feast  day,  he  gave 
into  the  hand  of  the  patriarch  the  city  of  Jerusalem  with  the  tower  of 
David  and  all  that  pertained  to  it.  The  following  condition  was  at¬ 
tached  to  the  gift,  however — ^that  he  himself  should  enjoy  and  have 
the  use  of  the  aforesaid  city,  with  its  territories,  until  the  Lord  should 
permit  him  to  take  one  or  two  other  cities  and  thus  enlarge  the  king¬ 
dom.  But  if,  in  the  meantime,  he  should  die  without  legitimate  heir, 
all  the  aforesaid  possessions  should  pass  without  difficulty  or  contra¬ 
diction  into  the  jurisdiction  of  the  lord  patriarch.^® 

We  have  inserted  all  these  details  in  the  present  narrative,  although 
they  are  well  known  from  the  accounts  of  others  and  have,  in  fact, 
been  committed  to  writing  by  the  efforts  of  various  individuals.^^  Yet 
we  wonder  what  the  influences  were  that  led  the  patriarch  to  raise  this 
question  against  the  duke.  For  nowhere  have  we  read  or  even  heard 
from  trustworthy  sources  that  the  kingdom  was  committed  to  the  duke 
by  the  victorious  leaders  on  such  terms  that  he  should  have  to  feel  him¬ 
self  bound  to  give  pledges,  either  annual  or  perpetual,  to  any  person 
whatsoever. 

Nor  should  this  be  thought  stupidity  or  gross  ignorance  on  our  part, 
for  we  have  diligently  investigated  the  truth  of  these  matters,  more 
fully  than  any  other  mortal,  for  the  express  purpose  of  recording  the 
facts  in  this  narrative,  an  intention  which  we  have  long  had  in  mind.**^ 

February  2,  iioo. 

Easter,  April  i,  1100.  It  is  difficult  to  believe  that  Godfrey,  despite  his  genuine 
piety,  would  have  made  this  grant  at  this  time  except  under  pressure,  such  as  the  need 
of  the  fleet  which  Daimbert  controlled. 

This  is  a  clear  allusion  to  the  use  of  written  sources,  in  contrast  to  the  statement 
in  the  Prologue.  Albert  of  Aix  dealt  most  fully  with  these  affairs.  William’s  statements 
here  indicate  a  later  revision.  He  decided  not  to  change  what  he  had  written  but  to 
add  to  it  the  two  following  chapters.  His  interest  in  the  problem  grew  as  the  possibility 
that  he  himself  might  become  patriarch  increased.  The  investigation  to  which  he 
refers  was  probably  made  during  the  years  1175—1178,  when  he  was  constantly  at 
court.  Doubtless  he  also  inserted  the  next  two  chapters  during  those  years,  for  his  out¬ 
look  upon  the  patriarchate  was  very  different  after  ii8o. 

This  somewhat  immodest  statement  is  probably  correct.  He  had  to  investigate 
Greek  and  Arabic  as  well  as  Latin  sources  to  arrive  at  these  conclusions.  It  reveals  his 
training  in  law  as  well  as  his  professional  interest  in  the  church  hierarchy. 


GODFREY  IN  JERUSALEM 


405 


1 7  •  Exflains  why  a  quarter  of  the  city  was  given  into  the  fower 
and  jurisdiction  of  the  lord  fatriarch. 

It  is  a  fact,  however,  that  from  the  time  the  Latins  entered  Jerusalem, 
and,  indeed,  for  many  years  before,  the  patriarch  had  held  as  his  own 
a  fourth  part  of  the  city.  How  this  came  about,  together  with  the  origin 
and  reason  for  his  so  holding  it,  may  be  briefly  stated.  After  carefully 
investigating  this  matter  and  making  repeated  inquiries,  we  have  at 
last  arrived  at  the  facts  underlying  the  affair. 

Ancient  traditions  say  that  during  the  time  this  city  was  held  by  the 
infidels  it  never  enjoyed  continuous  peace,  even  for  a  short  time.  On 
the  contrary,  it  was  harried  by  repeated  wars  and  endured  many  sieges 
because  the  neighboring  princes  desired  to  win  it  for  themselves.  As 
a  consequence,  through  age  and  the  havoc  wrought  by  siege,  its  walls 
and  towers  had  fallen  into  ruins,  and  the  place  lay  exposed  to  the  ma¬ 
chinations  of  enemies  from  every  direction. 

At  this  period,  the  kingdom  of  the  Egyptians  surpassed  all  other 
kingdoms  of  the  East  and  South,  not  alone  in  strength  and  riches,  but 
also  in  worldly  wisdom.  Desiring  to  enlarge  the  limits  of  his  empire 
and  expand  his  sovereignty  far  and  wide,  the  caliph  of  Egypt  sent  out 
his  armies  and  seized  by  force  the  whole  of  Syria  even  to  Laodicea,  a 
city  which  lies  next  to  Antioch  and  is  the  boundary  of  Coelesyria.  He 
appointed  governors  over  all  the  cities,  both  maritime  and  inland;  he 
established  taxes  and  made  the  whole  region  tributary  to  him.  More¬ 
over,  he  ordered  each  city  to  rebuild  its  walls  and  raise  strong  towers 
round  about.  In  accordance  with  this  general  edict,  the  procurator  in 
charge  of  Jerusalem  compelled  the  inhabitants  of  that  place  to  obey 
the  common  orders  and  to  restore  the  wall  and  towers  to  their  former 
condition. 

In  the  distribution  of  this  work  it  happened,  rather  by  malice  afore¬ 
thought  than  by  a  just  parcelling  out,  that  a  fourth  part  of  this  recon¬ 
struction  work  was  assigned  to  the  wretched  Christians  who  were  living 
at  Jerusalem.  These  faithful  people,  however,  were  already  so  ground 
down  by  corvees  and  extra  corvees,  by  tributes  and  taxes,  and  by  the 
rendering  of  various  ignominious  services  that  the  wealth  of  their 
entire  community  was  scarcely  sufficient  to  enable  them  to  restore  even 
one  or  two  of  these  towers.  Perceiving,  therefore,  that  their  enemies 


4o6 


GODFREY  IN  JERUSALEM 

were  seeking  occasion  against  them  and  having  no  other  resort,  they 
betook  themselves  to  the  governor.  Humbly  they  prayed  him  with 
tears  that  he  would  impose  upon  them  a  task  in  proportion  to  their 
strength,  for  they  were  utterly  unable  to  accomplish  that  which  had 
been  assigned  to  them.  But  the  governor  ordered  them  to  be  sent  forth 
from  his  presence  under  heavy  threats,  saying,  ^^To  violate  the  edict 
of  the  supreme  prince  is  sacrilege.  Therefore,  you  must  either  finish 
the  work  assigned  to  you  or  succumb  to  the  avenging  sword  as  guilty 
of  lese-majeste 

Through  the  intervention  of  many  mediators  and  the  free  use  of 
gifts,  they  finally  succeeded  in  obtaining  a  stay  of  sentence  from  the 
governor  until  envoys  could  be  sent  to  the  emperor  at  Constantinople 
to  implore  alms  from  him  for  the  accomplishment  of  their  task. 

1 8.  The  same  subject  is  continued.  Herein  is  also  exflained  what 
revered  f laces  are  contained  within  the  fart  of  the  city  so 
often  mentioned. 

Envoys  were  at  once  sent  to  the  emperor.  On  arriving  they  explained 
to  the  best  of  their  ability  the  appalling  condition  of  the  Christians, 
their  groans  and  their  tears.  The  recital  evoked  the  compassion  of  all 
who  listened.  The  envoys  described  in  detail  the  sufferings  of  the 
Christians,  the  insulting  blows  and  spitting,  the  shackles  and  incar¬ 
cerations  to  which  they  were  exposed  for  the  name  of  Christ.  They  told 
how  the  wretched  people  constantly  suffered  the  loss  of  their  goods  by 
confiscation — nay  more,  how  they  were  subject  to  crucifixion  and  all 
kinds  of  torture.  They  went  on  to  explain  the  pretexts  by  which  their 
enemies  were  seeking  to  destroy  that  pitiful  people. 

At  that  time,  Constantine,  surnamed  Monomachus,^^  a  wise  and 
splendid  man,  was  wielding  the  scepter  and  administering  with  vig¬ 
orous  energy  the  empire  of  Constantinople.  He  gave  a  ready  assent  to 
the  pitiful  petitions  of  Christas  faithful  ones  and  promised  them  money 
with  which  to  accomplish  the  task  laid  upon  them,  for  he  felt  full  and 
loving  sympathy  with  their  continued  troubles  and  aifflictions.  He 
added  this  condition,  however:  the  money  should  be  given  if  they 
could  obtain  a  promise  from  the  lord  of  the  land  that  none  but  Chris¬ 
tians  should  be  permitted  to  dwell  within  the  circuit  of  the  wall  which 

The  lang-uage  here  reflects  acquaintance  with  Roman  law. 

Constantine  X,  who  reigned  from  1059  to  1067. 


GODFREY  IN  JERUSALEM  407 

they  proposed  to  erect  by  means  of  the  imperial  donation.  Forthwith, 
the  emperor  wrote  to  Cyprus,  directing  the  people  of  that  island,  in 
the  event  of  the  Christians  obtaining  the  necessary  concession  at  Jerusa¬ 
lem,  to  supply  them,  from  taxes  and  money  due  to  the  treasury,  with 
a  sum  sufficient  to  pay  for  the  said  work. 

On  receiving  this  promise,  the  envoys  returned  home  and  told  the 
lord  patriarch  and  the  people  of  God  in  detail  all  that  they  had  done. 
The  proposition  was  embraced  with  joy,  and  faithful  and  zealous  ef¬ 
forts  were  made  to  bring  about  the  concession  required  by  the  emperor. 
Messengers  were  immediately  dispatched  to  their  great  and  supreme 
lord,  the  caliph  of  Egypt.  Divine  favor  attended  these  envoys,  for  they 
succeeded  in  their  mission  and  obtained  a  document  confirmed  by  the 
caliph’s  signature  and  his  seal. 

Having  at  last  brought  the  matter  to  a  successful  end,  the  deputies 
returned  home,  and  the  Christians,  by  the  help  of  God,  completed  the 
portion  of  wall  allotted  to  them.  This  was  in  the  year  of  the  Incarna¬ 
tion  of  the  Lord  1063,  in  the  thirty-sixth  year  before  the  liberation  of 
the  city,  under  the  reign  of  the  Egyptian  Caliph  Mustansir  (Bomensor 
Elmostensab).^® 

Up  to  that  time  the  Saracens  and  Christians  had  dwelt  together  in¬ 
differently.  Thenceforward,  by  the  order  of  the  prince,  the  Saracens 
were  forced  to  remove  to  other  parts  of  Jerusalem,  leaving  the  quarter 
named  to  the  faithful  without  dispute.  By  this  change,  the  condition 
of  the  servants  of  Christ  was  materially  improved.  Because  of  their 
enforced  association  with  the  men  of  Belial,  quarrels  had  often  arisen, 
which  greatly  increased  their  troubles.  When  at  last  they  were  able  to 
dwell  by  themselves,  without  the  disturbance  of  discord,  their  lives 
flowed  more  tranquilly.  Any  disagreements  which  arose  were  referred 
to  the  church,  and  the  controversy  was  settled  by  the  decision  of  the 
patriarch  then  ruling  as  sole  mediator. 

From  that  day,  then,  and  in  the  manner  just  described,  this  quarter 
of  the  city  had  had  no  other  judge  or  lord  than  the  patriarch,  and  the 
church  therefore  laid  claim  to  that  section  as  its  own  in  perpetuity. 

This  quarter  is  described  as  follows:  the  outer  boundary  is  formed 
by  the  wall  which  extends  from  the  west  gate,  or  the  gate  of  David, 
past  the  corner  tower  which  is  known  as  the  tower  of  Tancred  as  far  as 
the  north  gate  which  is  called  by  the  name  of  the  first  martyr  Stephen, 


Mustansir  was  caliph  1035—1094. 


4o8  GODFREY  IN  JERUSALEM 

The  inner  boundary  is  formed  by  the  public  street  which  runs  from 
the  gate  of  Stephen  straight  to  the  tables  of  the  money-changers,  and 
thence  again  back  to  the  west  gate.  Within  these  boundaries  are  con¬ 
tained  the  sacred  places  of  the  Lord’s  passion  and  resurrection,  the 
house  of  the  Hospital,  and  two  monasteries,  one  of  monks  and  the 
other  of  holy  women.  Both  these  cloisters  are  known  as  the  monasteries 
of  the  Latins.  The  house  of  the  patriarch  and  the  cloister  of  the  canons 
of  the  Holy  Sepuchre  with  their  appurtenances  also  lie  within  its 
limits."*® 

19.  The  condttto7i  of  the  kingdom  at  this  time.  Also  how  the  duke 
besieged  A rsufy  a  city  on  the  seacoasty  and  why  he  raised  that 
siege. 

By  this  time  nearly  all  the  leaders  who  had  taken  part  in  the  expe¬ 
dition  had  returned  to  their  own  lands.  There  remained  only  the  duke, 
to  whom  the  care  of  the  kingdom  had  been  committed,  and  Tancred, 
whom  Godfrey  had  kept  with  him  as  a  wise  man,  energetic  and  suc¬ 
cessful,  to  share  in  the  responsibility.  The  resources  and  military 
strength  of  the  Christians  were  very  small  at  that  time.  When  all 
had  been  called  together  with  the  utmost  diligence,  barely  three  hun¬ 
dred  knights  and  two  thousand  foot  soldiers  could  be  found. 

The  cities  which  had  come  under  our  power  were  but  few,  and  these 
were  so  situated  in  the  midst  of  the  enemy  that  the  Christians  could  not 
pass  from  one  to  another,  when  necessity  required,  without  great  dan¬ 
ger.  The  entire  country  surrounding  their  possessions  was  inhabited 
by  infidel  Saracens,  who  were  most  cruel  enemies  of  our  people.  These 
were  all  the  more  dangerous  because  they  were  close  at  hand,  for  no 
pest  can  more  effectively  do  harm  than  an  enemy  at  one’s  very  doors. 
Any  Christian  who  walked  along  the  highway  without  taking  due  pre¬ 
caution  was  liable  to  be  killed  by  the  Saracens,  or  seized  and  handed 
over  as  a  slave  to  the  enemy.  Moreover,  they  refused  to  cultivate  the 

The  intimate  knowledge  of  Jerusalem  may  reflect  his  boyhood  wanderings 
through  its  streets.  Such  extraterritorial  jurisdiction  was  not  unknown  to  the  Muslims, 
who,  like  the  Greeks  at  Constantinople,  granted  quarters  to  foreign  merchants,  notably 
at  Alexandria.  It  is  another  matter,  however,  to  transform  such  a  grant  made  to  pro¬ 
tect  a  minority  into  a  claim  for  special  privilege  when  that  minority  becomes  a  ma¬ 
jority.  Elsewhere  (Book  XVIII,  chap.  4),  William  has  indicated  that  this  grant  like¬ 
wise  was  made  at  the  request  of  merchants  in  behalf  of  pilgrims  from  the  West  as 
well  as  for  themselves. 


GODFREY  IN  JERUSALEM  409 

fields,  in  order  that  our  people  might  suffer  from  hunger.  In  fact,  they 
preferred  to  endure  famine  themselves  rather  than  furnish  anything 
to  the  Christians,  whom  they  looked  upon  as  enemies. 

Nor  was  it  on  the  highways  alone  that  danger  was  feared.  Even 
within  the  city  walls,  in  the  very  houses,  there  was  scarcely  a  place 
where  one  could  rest  in  security.  For  the  inhabitants  were  few  and 
scattered,  and  the  ruinous  state  of  the  walls  left  every  place  exposed 
to  the  enemy.  Thieves  made  stealthy  inroads  by  night.  They  broke 
into  the  deserted  cities,  whose  few  inhabitants  were  scattered  far  apart, 
and  overpowered  many  in  their  own  houses.  The  result  was  that  some 
stealthily,  and  many  quite  openly,  abandoned  the  holdings  which  they 
had  won  and  began  to  return  to  their  own  land.  For  they  feared  that 
those  who  were  making  great  efforts  to  protect  their  country  would 
one  day  be  overpowered  by  the  enemy  and  there  would  be  no  one  to 
rescue  them  from  the  impending  massacre.  This  condition  gave  rise 
to  an  edict  providing  that  an  annual  accounting  should  be  held,  favor¬ 
ing  the  interests  of  those  who  had  persevered  in  the  midst  of  tribula¬ 
tion  and  had  held  their  tenure  peacefully  and  without  question  for  a 
year  and  a  day.  This  law  was  introduced,  as  we  have  said,  through 
resentment  toward  those  who,  because  of  cowardice,  had  left  their  pos¬ 
sessions,  that  they  might  not  be  able  to  return  after  the  lapse  of  a  year 
and  renew  their  claim.^^ 

Although  the  kingdom  was  struggling  with  such  poverty,  yet  God¬ 
frey,  fearing  God  and  beloved  of  God,  endeavored  under  divine  guid¬ 
ance  to  extend  the  domains  of  the  realm.  He  assembled  military  auxil¬ 
iaries,  together  with  the  people  of  the  land,  and  laid  siege  to  a  maritime 
city  near  Jaffa,  which  was  formerly  called  Antipatris  but  is  now  gener¬ 
ally  known  as  Arsuf.  That  city,  however,  was  well  defended  by  brave 
men,  valiant  in  the  use  of  arms,  and  was  abundantly  supplied  with 
food  and  other  things  necessary  for  their  support.  Meanwhile,  the 
duke  outside  was  suffering  serious  need,  especially  because  he  had  no 
ships  with  which  he  might  prevent  the  besieged  from  going  in  and 
out.  Forced  by  necessity,  therefore,  he  raised  the  siege  in  the  hope  that 
in  the  future  a  more  favorable  opportunity  for  accomplishing  his  end 

This  law  implies  the  presence  of  a  number  of  accountants  in  Jerusalem  and  sug- 
gests  that  almost  from  the  outset  Jerusalem  and  other  Latin  states  in  the  East  were 
conducted  on  a  much  more  businesslike  basis  than  was  true  of  feudal  principalities  in 

the  West. 


410 


GODFREY  IN  JERUSALEM 

would  be  afforded  him  from  on  high.  But  his  premature  death  pre¬ 
vented  him  from  carrying  out  this  intention,  and  his  desire  was  never 
realized. 

20.  A  circumstance  worthy  of  remembrance  which  haffened  to 

'  this  illustrious  man  during  that  siege. 

We  have  thought  it  well  to  insert  in  this  narrative  an  incident  worthy 
of  remembrance  which  happened  during  the  course  of  this  same  siege. 
From  the  mountains  of  Samaria  where  the  city  of  Nablus  is  situated, 
certain  petty  chiefs  from  the  surrounding  country  came  down  to  the 
siege,  bringing  with  them  gifts  of  bread  and  wine,  figs  and  raisins.  The 
purpose  of  their  coming  was,  I  suppose,  rather  to  investigate  our 
strength  and  numbers  and  to  obtain  more  accurate  information  about 
our  condition  than  to  bring  presents  to  the  duke.  When  these  men  ar¬ 
rived  at  the  Christian  camp,  they  at  once  demanded  to  be  led  before 
the  duke.  Being  introduced  into  his  presence,  they  presented  the  gifts 
which  they  had  brought  with  them.  Now  the  duke  was  a  humble- 
minded  man,  who  utterly  declined  the  pomp  of  this  world.  He  was 
sitting  on  a  straw-filled  sack  which  had  been  placed  on  the  ground, 
awaiting  the  return  of  his  men  whom  he  had  sent  on  a  foraging  quest. 
At  sight  of  him  sitting  thus,  the  chiefs  were  struck  dumb  with  amaze¬ 
ment.  “Why,”  they  inquired,  “did  so  great  a  prince  and  so  admirable 
a  lord,  who,  coming  out  of  the  West,  had  shaken  the  entire  Orient  and 
seized  a  mighty  kingdom  with  a  strong  hand,  sit  thus  ingloriously? 
Why  was  he  not  surrounded  by  tapestries  and  silken  stuffs  and  at¬ 
tended  by  a  throng  of  armed  satellites,  so  as  to  present  a  formidable 
appearance  to  those  who  approached  him?” 

As  they  were  inquiring  thus,  the  duke  asked  what  they  were  saying. 
When  the  reply  was  given,  he  answered  that  the  ground  might  well 
suffice  for  a  temporary  seat  to  mortal  man,  since  after  death  it  was 
destined  to  be  his  abode  forever.  Filled  with  admiration  at  the  man’s 
answer,  as  well  as  at  his  humility  and  wisdom,  those  who  had  come  to 
test  him  departed,  saying,  “Verily  this  Is  a  man  who  ought  to  take  all 
lands  by  storm,  to  whom,  because  of  the  merit  of  his  life,  rightly  it 
has  been  given  to  rule  over  peoples  and  nations.” 

The  inhabitants  of  the  neighboring  lands  marvelled  and  at  the  same 
time  were  terrified  at  the  courage  and  success  of  the  pilgrim  people. 
And  this  fear  and  wonder  became  all  the  greater  because  they  learned 


GODFREY  IN  JERUSALEM  411 

these  facts  from  the  lips  of  their  own  friends,  in  whose  story  they  must 
needs  place  confidence.  Consequently  this  marvellous  report  was  cir¬ 
culated  widely  even  to  the  remotest  parts  of  the  Orient.^® 

2 1 .  Bohemondy  frlnce  of  Antiochy  is  taken  'prisoner  at  the  city  of 

Malatia, 

While  these  events  were  transpiring  in  the  kingdom  of  Jerusalem, 
it  happened  that  a  certain  Armenian,  Gabriel  by  name,  was  ruling  over 
the  city  of  Malatia  which  lies  in  Mesopotamia,  beyond  the  Euphrates. 
This  man,  fearing  an  incursion  of  the  Persians,^ ^  whose  violence  he 
knew  he  could  not  resist,  sent  envoys  to  Bohemond,  prince  of  Antioch, 
begging  him  to  come  at  once  to  take  immediate  possession  of  the  city 
under  certain  definite  conditions.  On  receiving  the  message,  the  valiant 
Bohemond  hastened  to  respond  to  the  call.  Attended  by  his  usual  fol¬ 
lowing,  he  crossed  the  Euphrates  and  entered  Mesopotamia.  He  had 
almost  reached  his  destination  when  his  company  was  suddenly  at¬ 
tacked  by  a  powerful  Turkish  satrap  named  Danish mand.  This  leader 
had  received  advance  information  of  their  march  and,  swooping  down 
upon  them  with  a  sudden  onslaught,  caught  them  unawares.  Some  fell 
by  the  sword,  and  the  rest,  unable  to  make  a  stand  against  such  a  host, 
took  flight.  Lord  Bohemond  himself,  because  of  his  sins,  was  captured 
by  the  enemy  and  thrown  into  chains. Elated  by  this  success  and  pre¬ 
suming  on  the  great  numbers  of  the  army  which  he  was  leading,  the 
satrap  laid  siege  to  Malatia.  He  hoped  to  take  it  immediately,  but  the 
fugitives  who  had  escaped  succeeded  in  reaching  Edessa,  where  they 
gave  the  count  a  full  recital  of  the  mishap  that  had  befallen  the  prince 
and  themselves. 

When  the  valiant  ruler  heard  their  story,  he  sympathized  with  the 
prince  as  with  an  own  brother.  Deeply  moved  by  the  untoward  disaster 
so  fraught  with  perilous  consequences,  he  hastily  summoned  his  mili- 

By  the  time  of  William  such  legends  about  Godfrey  and  other  early  Christian 
heroes  were  circulating  among  the  Muslims.  This  one  is  so  distinctly  oriental  in 
flavor  that  it  may  well  have  originated  among  the  Arabs.  The  very  first  chronicle  of 
the  crusade  recounted  several  legends  about  Bohemond  and  Tancred  said  to  have 
originated  in  the  East. 

These  “Persians^*  were  the  people  under  the  rule  of  Gumushtigin  ibn  Danishmand, 
of  Turkish  origin,  who  ruled  a  semi-independent  state  from  his  capital  at  Siwas.  The 
dynasty  of  Danishmand  remained  important  through  most  of  the  twelfth  century. 

This  occurred  about  August  15,  iioo.  Bohemond  was  carried  off  to  Niksar,  the 
Neocaesarea  of  the  Romans. 


412  GODFREY  IN  JERUSALEM 

tary  reserves,  took  the  necessary  supplies  for  the  march,  and  set  forth 
with  all  speed. 

Malatia  is  said  to  be  distant  a  journey  of  three  days  from  Edessa. 
This  ground  the  count  covered  with  great  rapidity.  He  was  already 
very  near  the  city  when  Danishmand  heard  of  his  approach  and  raised 
the  siege.  With  his  prisoner  Bohemond,  whom  he  was  holding  in 
chains,  he  withdrew  to  the  remotest  part  of  the  kingdom  to  avoid  a 
battle. 

On  learning  that  Danishmand,  alarmed  at  his  coming,  had  aban¬ 
doned  the  siege,  the  count  pursued  him  for  three  days.  Finally,  how¬ 
ever,  he  perceived  that  nothing  could  be  gained  in  this  fashion  and 
returned  to  Malatia.  Gabriel  gave  him  a  royal  welcome  and  treated 
him  with  great  honor.  He  then  handed  over  the  city  to  Baldwin  on 
the  same  terms  which  he  had  offered  to  Bohemond,^ ^  After  this  had 
been  accomplished,  the  count  returned  to  his  own  land. 

22.  A  jeat  worthy  of  remembrance  which  the  duke  wrought  in 
the  land  of  Arabia, 

Meanwhile  the  illustrious  duke  and  those  who  had  remained  with 
him  at  Jerusalem  to  protect  the  realm  after  the  departure  of  the  other 
leaders  were  laboring  under  conditions  of  extreme  need.  So  dire  was 
their  poverty  that  it  can  hardly  be  expressed  in  words. 

It  so  happened  that  at  this  time  a  report  was  brought  by  scouts 
worthy  of  confidence  that  in  the  parts  of  Arabia  across  the  Jordan  in 
the  land  of  the  Ammonites  there  were  certain  Arab  tribes  who  were 
living  without  adequate  defenses.  If  a  sudden  attack  were  made  upon 
them,  immense  spoils  would  undoubtedly  be  captured.  The  valiant 
Godfrey  was  easily  persuaded  to  undertake  this  project.  He  quietly 
summoned  such  forces  as  the  young  kingdom  afforded,  both  cavalry 
and  infantry,  crossed  the  Jordan,  and  entered  the  land  of  the  enemy. 

The  raid  was  successfully  accomplished.  Godfrey  was  returning  with 
immense  spoils  of  flocks  and  herds  as  well  as  many  prisoners,  when 
he  was  met  by  a  certain  Arab  nobleman,  a  famous  and  valiant  prince 
among  his  own  people  and  an  ardent  lover  of  the  art  of  war.  Through 
messengers  he  had  obtained  peace,  and  now,  attended  by  an  honorable 
retinue  of  Arab  nobles,  he  had  come  himself  to  visit  the  duke.  Nu- 


Gabriel  continued  to  rule,  presumably  as  the  vassal  of  Edessa. 


GODFREY  IN  JERUSALEM  413 

merous  reports  had  reached  him  of  the  strength  and  fame  of  this  peo¬ 
ple,  who,  coming  from  out  of  the  West,  had  traversed  such  vast  dis¬ 
tances  and  finally,  after  enduring  numerous  hardships,  had  at  length 
subdued  the  entire  Orient.  Above  all,  he  had  heard  of  the  matchless 
valor  of  the  duke  and  his  indefatigable  prowess,  and  with  all  his  heart 
he  longed  to  see  him. 

When  he  stood  in  the  presence  of  the  duke  and  had  greeted  him 
with  all  due  reverence,  the  Arab  chief  earnestly  begged  Godfrey  that 
he  would  deign  to  smite  with  his  own  sword  an  immense  camel  which 
had  been  brought  for  this  purpose.  He  wished  to  be  able  to  testify  to 
others  of  the  duke’s  strength  as  seen  with  his  own  eyes.  Since  the  chief 
had*come  from  a  long  distance  to  see  him,  Godfrey  consented.  Un¬ 
sheathing  his  sword,  he  cut  off  the  animal’s  head  as  easily  as  if  it  had 
been  some  fragile  object.  The  Arab  was  amazed  at  the  evidence  of 
such  great  strength,  but,  in  his  own  heart,  he  attributed  the  feat  largely 
to  the  sharpness  of  the  sword.  Accordingly,  begging  leave  to  speak 
freely,  he  asked  Godfrey  whether  he  could  accomplish  a  similar  feat 
with  the  sword  of  another.  The  duke,  smiling  a  little,  requested  that 
the  Arab’s  own  sword  be  brought  him.  Taking  it,  he  commanded  an¬ 
other  animal  of  the  same  kind  to  be  brought  before  him.  This  done,  he 
raised  the  sword  and  without  difficulty  struck  off  its  head  also  at  one 
blow. 

The  Arab  chief  now  for  the  first  time  began  to  marvel  and  was  al¬ 
most  dumb  with  amazement.  He  recognized  that  the  force  of  the  blow 
proceeded,  not  from  the  keenness  of  the  weapon,  but  from  the  strength 
of  the  man  himself  and  was  convinced  that  the  stories  he  had  heard 
about  Godfrey’s  valor  were  true.  He  immediately  offered  gifts  of  gold, 
silver,  and  horses  and  thereby  won  the  favor  of  the  duke.  On  his  return 
to  his  own  land,  he  acted  as  a  herald  and  proclaimed  to  all  whom  he 
met  the  prowess  of  the  duke,  which  he  himself  had  witnessed.^^ 

The  duke  himself  returned  to  Jerusalem  with  his  prisoners  and 

spoils. 


23,  The  death  and  burial  of  the  duke. 

In  that  same  month  of  July,  Godfrey,  the  illustrious  ruler  of  the  king¬ 
dom  of  Jerusalem,  was  stricken  by  a  violent  and  incurable  disease  and 

Another  legend  of  Godfrey’s  swordsmanship  and  strength.  It  is  difficult  to  find 
time  in  Godfrey’s  activities  of  this  year  for  the  occurrence  here  described. 


414  GODFREY  IN  JERUSALEM 

began  to  be  sick  unto  death.  The  virulence  of  the  disease  continued  to 
increase,  and  no  remedy  could  be  found,  though  sought  far  and  wide. 
At  length,  after  receiving  the  Eucharist,  this  true  confessor  of  Christ, 
devoutly  penitent,  went  the  way  of  all  flesh  to  receive  an  hundredfold 
reward  and  possess  eternal  life  with  the  spirits  of  the  blest.  He  died 
on  the  eighteenth  of  July,  in  the  year  of  the  Incarnation  of  the  Lord 
1 100.  He  was  buried  in  the  church  of  the  Sepulchre  of  the  Lord  in 
the  place  Calvary,  where  the  Lord  suffered.  There  a  place  has  been 
set  aside  also  for  his  successors  even  unto  this  day.®^ 

This  burial  place  in  the  chapel  of  Golg'otha  in  the  church  of  the  Holy  Sepulchre 
was  used  for  the  rulers  of  Jerusalem  up  to  its  capture  by  Saladin  in  1187.  It  appears 
to  have  been  respected  by  him  and  his  successors  but  was  ravished  by  the  wilder 
Mongols  in  1244. 


HERE  ENDS  THE  NINTH  BOOK 


THE  TENTH  BOOK  BEGINS 


KING  BALDWIN  I:  EXPANSION  OF  THE 

KINGDOM 

I.  On  the  death  of  his  brother  Godfrey^  Baldwiny  count  of 
Edessay  succeeds  to  the  kingdom^ 

The  illustrious  Duke  Godfrey,  of  pious  memory  in  the  Lord,  was 
the  first  Latin  ruler  of  the  kingdom  of  Jerusalem.  When  he  departed 
from  this  world  to  attain  a  better  life  beyond,  the  throne  remained 
vacant  three  months.  Finally,  either  out  of  deference  to  the  last  wishes 
of  the  duke  or  by  the  common  consent  of  the  leaders,  whose  numbers 
were  now  reduced  to  a  few.  Lord  Baldwin,  count  of  Edessa,  own 
brother  of  the  duke  by  both  parents,  was  summoned  to  succeed  his 
brother  in  the  care  of  the  kingdom  due  him  by  hereditary  right. ^ 

In  his  youth,  Baldwin  was  well  nurtured  in  the  liberal  studies.  He 
became  a  cleric,  it  is  said,  and,  because  of  his  illustrious  lineage,  held 
benefices  commonly  called  prebends  in  the  churches  of  Rheims,  Cam- 
brai,  and  Liege.  Later,  however,  for  reasons  unknown  to  us,  he  laid 
aside  the  clerical  habit,  assumed  military  arms,  and  became  a  soldier. 
In  the  course  of  time  he  married  an  illustrious  lady  of  high  rank  from 
England  named  Godehilde.^  Accompanied  by  his  wife,  he  followed 
his  brothers,  Godfrey  and  Eustace,  those  men  of  lofty  virtues  and  im¬ 
mortal  memory,  upon  the  first  expedition,  a  pilgrimage  which  was 
successful  and  prosperous  in  all  respects.^ 

Before  the  army  of  the  faithful  arrived  at  Antioch,  however,  Gode- 
hilde,  worn  out  by  long  suffering,  died  peacefully  at  Marash  and  was 
there  buried,  as  we  have  already  related.  Baldwin  was  later  summoned 
by  the  duke  of  Edessa  and  by  him  adopted  as  his  son.  After  the  duke’s 
death,  Baldwin  succeeded  to  that  county  with  all  that  pertained  to  it, 
as  has  also  been  related  in  detail.^  He  then  married  the  daughter  of 

^  The  story  of  the  succession  as  it  occurred  at  the  time  is  told  in  Chapter  3  and 
following  chapters.  These  first  two  chapters  were  probably  inserted  by  William  when 
he  made  his  final  revision  of  the  work. 

"  See  Book  II,  note  6  5  Book  III,  note  20. 

®  William  has  forgotten  his  earlier  statement  about  Eustace  as  the  companion  of 
Robert  of  Normandy  (see  Book  II,  note  30). 

^  See  Book  IV,  notes  6  and  7. 


4i6  king  BALDWIN  I 

a  noble  and  distinguished  Armenian  prince,  Tafroc  [Thoros]  by 
name,^  who,  with  his  brother  Constantine,  had  impregnable  fortresses 
in  the  vicinity  of  Mt.  Taurus  and  large  forces  of  brave  men.  Because 
of  their  wealth  and  immense  power,  these  lords  were  regarded  as  the 
kings  of  this  people. 

It  is  not  necessary,  at  this  time,  to  state  again  at  length  Baldwin’s 
-  origin  according  to  the  flesh,  his  splendid  ancestry,  and  the  place  of 
his  birth,  for  while  we  were  writing  of  the  deeds  of  the  lord  duke, 
enough  was  said  about  the  exalted  lineage  which  was  common  to  both. 

2.  C oncermng  the  'physical  characteristics  and  moral  qualities  of 
Lord  Baldwin, 

He  is  said  to  have  been  very  tall  and  much  larger  than  his  brother,  so 
that,  as  it  is  written  concerning  Saul,  ^‘he  was  higher  than  any  of  the 
people  from  his  shoulders  and  upward.”  ®  He  was  of  rather  light  com¬ 
plexion,  with  dark-brown  hair  and  beard.  His  nose  was  aquiline  and 
his  upper  lip  somewhat  prominent.  The  lower  jaw  slightly  receded, 
although  not  so  much  that  it  could  be  considered  a  defect.  He  was 
dignified  in  carriage  and  serious  in  dress  and  speech.  He  always  wore 
a  mantle  hanging  from  his  shoulders.  Because  of  his  gravity  both  in 
word  and  habit,  he  appeared  to  those  who  did  not  know  him  more  like 
a  bishop  than  a  layman.  Nevertheless,  there  is  no  doubt  that  he  was 
a  descendant  of  Adam  and  an  heir  of  the  original  curse,  for  he  is  said 
to  have  struggled  in  vain  against  the  lustful  sins  of  the  flesh.  Yet  so 
circumspectly  did  he  conduct  himself  in  the  indulgence  of  these  vices 
that  he  was  a  stumbling  block  to  no  one.  Neither  did  he  inflict  violence 
or  great  injury  on  anyone  j  in  fact,  a  thing  rare  in  such  cases,  only  a 
few  of  his  personal  attendants  were  aware  of  his  licentious  habits.  If, 
like  all  sinners,  his  partisans  try  to  find  excuses  for  him,  it  seems  pos¬ 
sible  that  some  may  be  found  acceptable,  if  not  with  the  strict  Judge,  at 
least  among  men,  as  will  be  related  in  the  following  pages. 

Baldwin  was  neither  stout  nor  unduly  thin,  but  rather  of  a  medium 

®  This  was  Arda,  daughter  of  Thoros  I  (not  Tafroc)  of  the  Rupenian  dynasty  of 
Armenia,  whom  Baldwin  married,  probably  in  1098.  Thoros  was  the  son  of  Con¬ 
stantine,  the  former  ruler  of  that  Armenian  state.  He  had  a  brother,  Leo,  who  did 
rule  after  him  ii 23-1 135  (see  Galust  T.  Iskenderian,  Die  Kreuzfahrer  und  thre 
Beziehungen  zu  den  armenischen  N  achharfiirsten  bis  zum  Unter gauge  der  Graf  sc/m  ft 
Edessa^  p.  59,  n.  215). 

I  Sa.  10:23. 


KING  BALDWIN  I 


417 

habit  of  body.  Expert  in  the  use  of  arms,  agile  on  horseback,  he  was 
active  and  diligent  whenever  the  affairs  of  the  realm  called  him. 

It  seems  unnecessary  to  speak  in  commendatory  terms  of  his  mag¬ 
nanimity  and  courage,  his  experience  in  the  art  of  war,  and  of  all  the 
other  excellent  characteristics  of  a  well-balanced  mind.  These  traits 
had  been  transmitted  to  himself  and  his  brothers  as  a  perpetual  in¬ 
heritance  from  their  forefathers.  Above  all,  Baldwin  avowedly  emu¬ 
lated  the  duke  so  closely  that  he  considered  it  a  sin  in  himself  to  depart 
in  the  least  detail  from  the  example  set  by  his  brother.  He  was,  how¬ 
ever,  on  rather  too  intimate  terms  with  one  Arnulf,  a  wicked  and 
malicious  man,  who  was  archdeacon  at  Jerusalem.  He  was  ruled  far 
too  much  by  the  advice  of  this  man,  and  for  this  he  was  criticized.  This 
is  the  Arnulf  whom  I  have  already  mentioned  as  having  usurped  the 
patriarchal  chair.  His  reputation  was  that  of  a  man  who,  both  in 
thought  and  deed,  inclined  toward  evil.*^ 

3.  On  the  death  of  the  dukey  Count  Gamier  seizes  the  tower. 

He  sends  secret  messengers  to  summon  Baldwin, 

But  when  the  duke  was  dead  and  consigned  to  the  tomb,  as  we  have 
related,  those  to  whom  he  had  committed  the  execution  of  the  wishes 
expressed  in  his  last  testament  abandoned  the  will  of  the  dead  man, 
preferring  their  own  wishes  to  the  judgment  of  their  lord.®  They  did 
not  surrender  the  tower  of  David  to  the  Patriarch  Daimbert,  neither 
did  they  resign  the  city  into  his  power,  as  was  contained  in  the  provi¬ 
sions  of  the  testament,  which  agreement  on  the  holy  day  of  the  previ¬ 
ous  Easter  the  duke  of  pious  remembrance  in  the  Lord  had  entered 
into  with  the  patriarch  in  the  church  of  the  Lord^s  Resurrection  in 
presence  of  the  clergy  and  people. 

^  Perhaps  William  seeks  to  spare  Baldwin  by  ascribing'  his  activities  in  dealing* 
with  the  patriarchate  to  the  undue  influence  of  Arnulf.  Baldwin’s  record,  however, 
affords  little  basis  for  the  charge  that  he  was  under  any  man’s  influence.  These  acts, 
which  seemed  so  wicked  to  William,  doubtless  arose  from  the  fact  that  Baldwin,  like 
Arnulf,  believed  that  in  its  existing  condition  Jerusalem  must  be  governed  by  a  warrior 
and  that  all  its  resources  must  be  under  his  control.  This  view  was,  of  course,  the 
opposite  of  that  held  by  Daimbert  and  shared  by  William.  From  the  point  of  view  of 
Baldwin  and  Arnulf,  the  conduct  of  Daimbert  seemed  as  wicked  as  their  conduct  does 
to  William.  Their  views  are  more  accurately  revealed  by  Albert  of  Aix  (‘‘Historia 
Hierosolymitana,”  Recuell  des  historiens  des  croisadesy  Historiens  occidentauxy  Vol.  IV, 
chap,  vii,  fassim)  and  Ralph  of  Caen. 

®  They  may  have  been  acting  more  nearly  in  accord  with  the  real  views  of  Godfrey 
than  William  is  able  to  recognize,  if  Albert  is  to  be  credited. 


4i8  king  BALDWIN  I 

The  leader  of  this  troublesome  faction  was  a  certain  Count  Gamier, 
surnamed  de  Grey,  a  valiant  and  intrepid  warrior  and  a  kinsman  of 
the  duke  and  the  count.  As  soon  as  the  duke  died,  the  count  seized 
the  tower  and  fortified  it  strongly.^  Then,  without  the  knowledge  of 
the  others,  he  secretly  dispatched  messengers  to  Count  Baldwin,  bid¬ 
ding  him  come  as  speedily  as  possible  and  that  without  delay.  The 
patriarch  repeatedly  called  upon  him  to  carry  out  the  last  wishes  of 
the  duke  by  giving  way  to  the  rights  of  the  church,  but  Gamier  kept 
inventing  excuses  and  making  delay  and  in  every  way  sought  to  gain 
time  so  that  the  count,  whom  he  had  summoned,  might  find  his  rights 
still  unimpaired  when  he  arrived.  This  he  did  in  the  hope  of  acquir¬ 
ing  great  favor  with  Baldwin  for  the  loyalty  thus  shown  him.  Gamier 
was  deceived  in  this  hope,  however,  far  beyond  the  expectation  of  all. 
For  within  five  days  he  died.  This  was  regarded  by  all  as  a  miracle, 
and  it  was  ascribed  to  the  merits  of  the  patriarch  that  the  enemy  and 
persecutor  of  the  church  had  met  such  a  sudden  death. 

The  condition  of  the  church  was  not  improved  by  Garnier’s  death, 
however,  for  those  who  were  in  possession  of  the  citadel  paid  but  lit¬ 
tle  attention  to  what  had  happened  and  continued  to  remain  there  un¬ 
til  the  count  of  Edessa  arrived. 

» 

The  patriarch  was  well  aware  that  the  count  had  been  summoned 
and  dreaded  his  arrival.  Wishing  to  hinder  his  advancement  in  every 
way  possible,  he  sent  a  letter  containing  full  details  of  the  affair  to 
Bohemond,  prince  of  Antioch.  In  order  that  there  may  be  conclusive 
evidence  on  this  matter  we  have  deemed  it  wise  to  insert  a  copy  of 
that  document  in  the  present  history.^® 

®  These  precautions  were  necessary  in  view  of  Daimbert’s  attitude.  Daimbert  was 
with  Tancred  at  this  time  at  the  siege  of  Haifa.  According  to  Albert,  Daimbert  and 
Tancred  actually  appeared  in  force  and  demanded  Jerusalem  (see  Albertus  Aquensis, 
R.H.C,  Oc.y  Vol.  IV,  chap,  vii,  35). 

This  is  not  regarded  as  genuine  by  many  scholars,  including  Prutz,  because  the 
language  is  obviously  that  of  William.  Hagenmeyer,  however,  feels  that,  despite  this, 
its  contents  so  fully  fit  the  facts  and  contain  so  much  that  is  at  variance  with  William’s 
previous  statements  as  to  suggest  that  it  rests  upon  a  substantial  basis.  According  to 
Albert  of  Aix  {R.H.C.  Oc.y  Vol.  IV,  chap,  vii,  27)  the  bearer  of  this  letter,  a  certain 
Morellus,  Daimbert’s  secretary,  fell  into  the  hands  of  Raymond  of  Toulouse  (or  of 
his  men)  at  Laodicea.  They  prevented  him  from  delivering  the  message.  It  is  possible 
that  the  letter  or  the  tradition  of  its  contents  remained  in  the  possession  of  Raymond’s 
people.  If  so,  William  might  have  learned  about  it  from  followers  of  Raymond  III 
of  Tripoli  with  whom  he  became  intimately  acquainted  during  Raymond’s  regency 
(1174-1176).  Certain  expressions  in  this  letter,  however,  suggest  that  if  there  was 
such  substantial  basis,  William  was  elaborating  it  with  ideas  of  his  own  (see  H.  Hagen¬ 
meyer,  ChronologUy  no.  447). 


KING  BALDWIN  I 


419 


4.  The  letter  of  Daimbert  to  the  'prince  of  Antioch. 

“You  will  know,  my  dearest  son,  that  you  chose  me  as  rector  and 
patriarch,  reluctant  and  ignorant  as  I  was,  yet  filled  with  good  and 
holy  aspirations  toward  her  who  is  the  one  and  only  mother  of  all 
churches  and  the  queen  of  nations.  With  the  assent  of  the  clergy,  the 
leaders,  and  the  people  alike,  you  brought  about  my  election  and, 
under  the  direction  of  God,  placed  me,  albeit  unworthy,  in  the  seat 
of  highest  dignity.  On  this  exalted  pinnacle  I  have  been  harassed  by 
a  thousand  injuries.  How  many  hardships  and  persecutions,  what 
great  dangers  I  have  suffered  are  known  only  to  my  own  soul  and 
Christ,  who  sees  all  things.  For  it  was  with  the  greatest  difficulty  that 
Duke  Godfrey,  while  he  was  still  living,  led  astray  not  so  much  by 
his  own  wishes  as  by  the  persuasion  of  wicked  men,  was  induced  to 
relinquish  to  the  church  the  things  which  ought  to  be  held  by  her, 
possessions  which,  during  the  time  of  the  Turks,  the  patriarch  then 
ruling  had  held.  Holy  church,  also,  at  the  very  time  when  she  should 
have  been  more  highly  honored  and  exalted,  experienced  untold 
tribulation  and  reproach.  At  length,  through  the  mercy  of  God,  the 
duke  came  to  his  senses,  abandoned  his  sacrilegious  intention,  and  on 
the  day  of  the  Purification  of  the  blessed  Virgin  Mary  gave  to  the 
church  of  the  Holy  Sepulchre  a  fourth  part  of  the  city  of  Jaffa.  Still 
later,  on  the  day  of  the  celebration  of  Easter,  touched  with  com¬ 
punction  through  the  workings  of  the  divine  will,  he  nobly  scorned 
to  enjoy  longer  or  trust  worldly  pomp,  but  restored  freely  every¬ 
thing  which  by  right  belonged  to  the  church.  He  became  the  man 
of  the  Holy  Sepulchre  and  of  us  and  promised  thenceforward  to  fight 
loyally  for  God  and  for  us.  He  restored  to  our  power  the  tower  of 
David  with  the  entire  city  of  Jerusalem  and  its  appurtenances,  as 
well  as  his  own  possessions  in  Jaffa.  Since  his  temporal  means  were 
insufficient,  however,  with  our  consent  he  inserted  the  condition  that 
he  should  retain  all  these  possessions  until  such  time  as  God  might 
increase  his  resources  by  permitting  him  to  take  Babylon  and  other 
cities.  Should  he  die  without  male  issue,  all  these  properties  were  to 

Here  means  Cairo  as  the  capital  of  Egypt.  It  is  a  question  whether  the  prospective 
conquest  could  have  been  contemplated  at  this  time  when  there  were  so  many  more 
immediate  territories  to  be  conquered.  That  conquest  did  not  really  become  imminent 
until  William’s  own  time,  when  Amaury  was  conducting  his  campaigns  into  the  region. 
Perhaps  this  suggestion  is  an  elaboration  by  William. 


KING  BALDWIN  I 


420 

be  restored  to  the  church  without  contest.  Although  he  had  promised 
all  these  things  on  the  solemn  day  of  Easter  before  the  Most  Holy 
Sepulchre,  in  the  presence  of  all  the  clergy  and  people,  yet,  while  he 
lay  upon  the  bed  of  his  last  illness,  he  confirmed  them  in  the  pres¬ 
ence  of  many  well-approved  witnesses. 

^^After  Godfrey’s  death,  Count  Gamier  arose  as  an  enemy  against 
the  church  of  God.  He  fortified  the  tower  of  David  in  our  despite, 
esteeming  as  nothing  the  faithful  promise  and  righteous  agreement 
which  had  been  made.  He  dispatched  his  own  messengers  to  summon 
Baldwin,  telling  him  that  he  would  despoil  the  church  of  God  by 
seizing  her  property  and  holding  it  by  force  until  the  count  himself 
should  arrive.  But  Gamier  was  overtaken  by  the  judgment  of  God 
and  died  on  the  fourth  day  after  the  duke’s  death.  Even  after  this 
happened,  however,  some  baseborn  men  of  the  common  people 
took  over  the  tower  and  the  entire  city.  They  are  still  holding  it, 
awaiting  the  coming  of  Baldwin  to  bring  about  the  downfall  of  the 
church  and  the  destruction  of  Christianity  itself. 

^^But  I,  dearest  son,  am  left  entirely  to  the  mercy  of  God  and  to 
your  affection.  Beset  as  I  am  by  the  numerous  trials  and  calumnies 
arising  from  the  intrigues  of  wicked  men,  in  you  alone,  after  God, 
do  I  trust  j  in  the  steadfastness  of  your  affection  I  place  the  sole 
anchor  of  my  hope.  To  you  alone,  with  tearful  words  and  anxious 
heart,  I  confide  the  miseries  which  I  am  suffering — nay,  rather,  which 
the  church  is  suffering. 

^^Therefore,  if  you  have  any  loyal  compassion  for  me  and  if  you 
would  not  fall  below  the  glorious  reputation  of  your  father  (who 
rescued  the  apostle  Gregory  from  the  city  of  Rome  when  the  holy 
man  was  imprisoned  by  the  tyrannical  cruelty  of  wicked  men  and  who 
should  be  remembered  for  that  deed  forever),  lay  aside  all  excuses 
and  come  to  me  at  once.  Wisely  commit  the  care  of  your  kingdom  and 
lands  to  some  of  your  reliable  warriors  and  mercifully  come  to  the 
help  of  holy  church  in  her  pitiful  struggles.  For  you  know  well  that 
you  promised  me  your  aid  and  counsel  and  voluntarily  made  yourself 
subject  to  holy  church  and  to  me. 

“Write  a  letter,  then,  to  Baldwin,  forbidding  him  against  our  will 

Such  social  distinctions  were  not,  as  a  rule,  made  during  the  period  of  the  First 
Crusade.  Bohemond’s  lineage  was  none  too  noble  itself.  This  attitude  was  more  char¬ 
acteristic  of  William’s  own  time. 


KING  BALDWIN  I 


421 

and  express  injunction  to  come  to  Jerusalem  to  devastate  holy  church 
and  in  any  way  to  lay  hand  on  her  possessions.  For  he  too  joined 
with  you  in  choosing  me  as  patriarch  and  rector  of  the  church  at 
Jerusalem.  Point  out  to  him  that  it  is  contrary  to  reason  to  have  under¬ 
gone  so  many  hardships  and  perils  for  the  sake  of  freeing  the  church 
if  now  that  same  church,  reduced  to  a  mean  and  abject  condition,  is 
compelled  to  serve  those  over  whom  she  should  dominate  and  rule 
with  the  right  of  a  mother.  But  if  he  resists  justice  and  refuses  to 
listen  to  reason,  I  call  upon  you  by  that  obedience  which  you  owe  to 
St.  Peter  to  hinder  Baldwin’s  coming  by  whatsoever  means  you  can, 
if  necessary,  even  by  violence. 

^^Let  me  know,  dearest  son,  through  this  same  messenger  whom  I 
am  sending  to  you,  what  you  intend  to  do  in  regard  to  those  things 
which  I  have  enjoined  upon  you  and  send  me  assistance  in  all  haste.” 

5.  Baldwifiy  hastening  on  his  way  to  Jerusaleniy  finds  that  the 
enemy  have  set  an  ambush  near  Dog  river. 

We  are  confident  that  this  letter  never  reached  Bohemond,  for  in  the 
same  month,  either  slightly  before  or  just  after  the  duke  of  happy  mem¬ 
ory  was  released  from  the  flesh  and  passed  over  to  the  Lord,  the  prince 
was  taken  by  the  enemy,  as  has  been  fully  described. 

At  this  time,  Baldwin,  count  of  Edessa,  was  enjoying  prosperity  and 
good  fortune.  Malatia,  that  splendid  metropolis  of  the  Medes,^^  had 
been  surrendered  to  him,  and  he  had  subdued  the  enemies  round 
about  him.  Thus,  through  the  favor  of  God,  he  had  succeeded  in  ob¬ 
taining  some  degree  of  peace  for  himself  and  his  people.  Suddenly  a 
messenger  arrived  posthaste  from  Jerusalem  to  announce  that  the  lord 
duke  had  died.  He  was  also  informed  that  the  friends  and  loyal  ad¬ 
herents  of  his  dead  brother  were  urgently  inviting  him  to  come  with 
all  speed  to  succeed  to  the  throne.  Accordingly,  he  at  once  gathered 
an  escort  of  two  hundred  knights  and  eight  hundred  foot  soldiers  and 
on  the  second  of  October  started  on  the  journey  to  Jerusalem.  It  was 
a  matter  of  surprise  to  many  that  he  proposed  to  make  so  long  a 
journey  through  enemy  country  with  so  small  a  following.  He  left  his 

See  Book  IX,  chap,  2 1 . 

The  use  of  the  ancient  terminology  must  be  regarded  as  a  literary  device.  Malatia 
was  one  of  the  chief  cities  of  the  Armenians  at  this  time. 


KING  BALDWIN  I 


422 

land  in  the  care  of  one  of  his  own  kinsmen,  Baldwin  du  Bourg,  a  wise 
and  excellent  man,  who  later  succeeded  him,  not  only  in  the  county, 
but  also  in  the  kingdom. 

On  arriving  at  Antioch,  he  sent  his  wife  and  the  maids  of  the  house¬ 
hold  staff,  with  all  the  heavy  furniture  and  the  greater  part  of  the 
baggage,  down  to  the  sea,  where  he  had  ordered  a  ship  to  be  pro¬ 
vided  on  which  the  countess  might  sail  in  fitting  state  to  Jaffa.  This 
was  the  only  coastal  city  which  as  yet  had  come  into  our  power,  all 
the  others  being  still  held  under  the  control  of  the  infidels.  His  mo¬ 
tive  in  making  this  arrangement  seems  to  have  been  that,  as  he  was 
about  to  cross  the  enemy^s  country,  he  might  be  less  encumbered 
and  hence  better  prepared  to  cope  with  any  difficulties  or  unexpected 
attacks  that  he  might  meet. 

From  Antioch  he  went  on  to  Laodicea  of  Syria,  and  from  there 
proceeded  along  the  coast  through  Jabala,  Valenia,  Maraclea,  Tortosa, 
and  Arka  to  Tripoli.  At  this  place  the  ruler  of  the  city  greeted  him 
in  his  camp  outside  the  city  and  showered  him  with  honor  and  gifts. 
From  this  same  ruler  he  received  the  information  that  Duqaq,  king  of 
Damascus,  had  laid  ambushes  for  him  further  on  along  his  line  of 
march. 

From  Tripoli  he  marched  on  past  Jubail  and  came  to  Dog  river. 
Here  there  is  a  very  dangerous  passage  between  a  tempestuous  sea 
and  high  mountains,  where  the  steep  ascent  and  rugged  cliffs  render 
the  road  almost  impassable.  The  pass  itself  is  four  stadia  long  but  only 
two  cubits  wide.  The  perilous  way  through  this  narrow  defile  had 
been  blocked  so  as  to  prevent  its  being  crossed.  For  the  natives  of 
the  locality,  with  the  help  of  certain  Turks  from  more  distant  parts, 
had  combined  at  that  point  to  hinder  the  march  of  Count  Baldwin. 

When  the  count  reached  this  place  he  sent  some  of  his  people  on 
ahead  to  reconnoiter.  These  scouts  found  that  some  of  the  defenders 
had  crossed  the  river  and  gone  down  into  the  plain.  On  discovering 
this  situation,  they  began  to  fear  that  the  enemy  had  left  even  greater 
numbers  in  ambush  behind  them.  They  therefore  sent  one  of  their 
number  to  inform  the  count  of  the  state  of  affairs.  Baldwin  imme¬ 
diately  drew  up  his  forces  in  battle  formation  and  marched  upon  the 

Duqaq,  a  nephew  of  Malik  Shah,  ruled  Damascus  1095—1 104. 

This  narrow  pass  at  Dog  river  is  famous  throughout  history.  Successive  con¬ 
querors  who  passed  through  it,  from  Alexander  to  Napoleon,  left  inscriptions  there. 


KING  BALDWIN  I 


423 

enemy.  He  found  them  prepared  to  fight.  Dashing  against  them  in  a 
bold  charge,  he  broke  up  their  lines  in  the  first  onset,  killed  many  of 
their  number,  and  put  the  rest  to  flight.  He  then  ordered  his  forces 
to  lay  aside  their  baggage  and  make  camp  in  that  place.  They  passed 
a  wakeful  night  there  under  circumstances  of  much  peril,  for  they 
were  encamped  in  a  narrow  defile  closely  shut  in  between  the  moun¬ 
tains  and  the  sea.  Throughout  the  entire  night  they  were  harassed 
by  the  enemy,  both  by  those  who  were  holding  the  mountain  pass 
and  by  others  who  had  come  by  sea  from  Beirut  and  Jubail.  The 
infidels  kept  up  a  constant  shower  of  arrows,  which  wrought  great 
havoc  among  those  Christians  whose  place  of  bivouac  lay  on  the 
outskirts  of  the  camp.  To  add  to  their  dire  distress,  although  they 
were  near  a  river,  they  were  unable  to  water  their  horses  that  night, 
and  the  poor  animals,  exhausted  from  the  long  march,  suffered  greatly 
from  thirst  induced  by  the  excessive  heat. 

6.  The  enemy  is  routed,  Ajter  an  undisfuted  marchy  Baldwin 
ari'ives  at  J erusalem. 

The  next  day,  as  soon  as  it  began  to  grow  light,  the  count,  after  tak¬ 
ing  counsel  with  his  people,  ordered  the  baggage  to  be  arranged  for 
the  march  and  all  to  be  ready  to  retreat.  He  sent  all  the  weaker 
pilgrims  and  those  useless  as  fighters  on  ahead,  and  himself  fol¬ 
lowed  with  the  abler  warriors  to  bear  the  brunt  of  any  attack  that 
might  be  made  on  the  rear  or  on  either  flank.  With  his  customary 
shrewd  foresight  he  had  devised  this  plan  for  the  purpose  of  mis¬ 
leading  the  enemy,  not  that  he  lacked  confidence  in  his  own  com¬ 
pany,  but  that  he  might  induce  the  enemy  to  pursue  him  as  he  re¬ 
treated.  This  would  enable  him  to  meet  them  in  the  plain,  where 
he  could  engage  them  with  more  freedom,  for  he  greatly  dreaded 
the  narrow  and  confined  defiles. 

While  his  army  was  struggling  thus  in  retreat,  the  enemy,  in  the 
belief  that  fear  was  the  cause  of  their  withdrawal,  continued  the  pur¬ 
suit  even  more  boldly.  They  rushed  down  eagerly  from  the  defiles  and 
began  to  follow  the  Christians  vigorously  in  the  open  country.  Mean¬ 
while  those  on  the  ships,  scenting  booty,  leaped  upon  the  shore,  hop¬ 
ing  to  win  the  victory  without  difficulty,  as  if  the  enemy  were  al¬ 
ready  defeated. 


424 


KING  BALDWIN  I 


When  the  count  saw  that  they  had  abandoned  the  heights  and 
were  already  on  the  plain  in  hot  pursuit^  he  ordered  his  forces  to  turn 
upon  them.  Then,  with  standards  raised,  he  fell  upon  those  who 
were  still  fiercely  pursuing  him.  His  battalions,  in  a  spirited  onset, 
followed  the  example  set  by  their  lord.  Thus  before  the  foe  could 
retreat  to  the  mountains,  as  was  their  custom,  the  Christians  were 
upon  them,  their  glittering  swords  dealing  death  even  to  utter  an¬ 
nihilation.  Unable  to  stand  against  this  attack,  amazed  at  the  strength 
and  intrepidity  of  their  pursuers,  the  infidels  made  no  attempt  to  de¬ 
fend  themselves;  convinced  that  their  only  hope  lay  in  flight,  they 
took  that  way  of  safety.  Those  who  had  landed  from  the  ships  dared 
not  return  to  the  sea,  while  those  who  fled  to  the  mountains  en¬ 
countered  dangerous  precipices  in  their  reckless  haste  and  met  with 
sudden  death  in  many  a  form. 

After  routing  the  enemy  in  this  fashion,  the  victorious  Christians 
returned  in  high  spirits  to  the  place  where  they  had  left  their  packs 
and  impedimenta.  There  they  rested  for  the  night,  blessing  the  Lord 
who  lays  low  the  powerful  and  exalts  the  humble.  On  the  following 
day  they  retraced  their  steps  to  a  place  called  Junia.  Here,  according 
to  military  usage,  they  divided  the  spoils  and  the  slaves  that  had  been 
taken  and  devoted  themselves  to  the  care  needful  for  themselves  and 
their  horses. 

The  following  morning  Baldwin,  desiring  to  safeguard  his  com¬ 
pany,  took  with  him  some  of  the  lighter-armed  cavalry  and  boldly 
proceeded  to  the  spot  where  the  conflict  of  the  preceding  day  had 
taken  place.  He  wished  to  determine  by  personal  investigation 
whether  his  adversaries  were  still  holding  the  defiles  or  whether  the 
pass  was  open  without  dispute  for  all  who  wished  to  traverse  it.  Find¬ 
ing  that  the  way  was  undefended  and  easily  passable,  he  caused  his 
following  to  be  summoned.  The  welcome  news  brought  them  quickly 
thither.  Under  the  leadership  of  their  lord  they  crossed  the  place 
which  had  rightly  caused  them  so  much  apprehension  and  dread. 
They  then  continued  on  the  march  to  Beirut,  where  they  encamped 
before  the  city.  From  Beirut  they  followed  the  coast,  passed  through 
Sidon,  Tyre,  and  Ptolemais  [Acre],  and  at  last  arrived  at  the  city 
of  Haifa. 

The  count,  however,  distrusted  Tancred  because  of  the  great  and 
undeserved  injury  which  he  had  himself  done  to  that  lord  at  Tarsus 


KING  BALDWIN  I 


425 

of  Cilicia.  Consequently,  he  forbade  any  of  his  men  to  enter  that  city, 
for  he  feared  lest  the  great-souled  Tancred,  remembering  the  wrong 
which  he  had  suffered,  might  wish  to  requite  the  injury.  Tancred  him¬ 
self  was  away,  but  the  citizens  came  out  to  meet  the  count  and  greeted 
him  with  much  kindness  and  fraternal  affection.  They  offered  to  pro¬ 
vide  a  market  for  the  sale  of  wares,  especially  of  the  necessary  food 
supplies,  under  favorable  conditions.  From  Haifa  the  army  marched 
on  to  Caesarea  and  then  to  Arsuf,  choosing  the  route  along  the  shore, 
and  came  to  Jaffa.  Here  Baldwin  was  welcomed  with  much  ceremony 
by  all  the  clergy  and  people,  and  here,  to  the  satisfaction  of  all,  he 
bore  himself  as  lord.  From  Jaffa  they  set  forth  for  Jerusalem.  All  the 
clergy  and  people  came  out  from  the  city  to  meet  them,  Latins  as 
well  as  other  nations,  and,  to  the  accompaniment  of  hymns  and  spirit¬ 
ual  songs,  with  rejoicing  they  led  the  count  into  the  city  as  their  lord 
and  king. 

7.  The  Patriarch  Dalmherty  j earing  Baldwin^ s  arnvaly  leaves 
the  'palace  of  the  patriarch  and  retires  to  the  church  of  Mt, 

Sion, 

During  this  time,  Arnulf,  mentioned  above,  the  first  born  of  Satan 
and  the  son  of  perdition,  realized  that  because  of  his  just  deserts  he 
had  fallen  from  the  chair  of  Jacob  which,  with  brazen  effrontery,  he 
had  usurped.  He  began,  therefore,  to  make  trouble  and  disturb  the 
peace  of  Daimbert,  who,  with  the  common  assent  of  all,  had  been 
chosen  to  rule  over  that  church.  Immediately  after  the  duke^s  death, 
Arnulf  had  made  many  accusations  against  the  lord  patriarch  to 
Baldwin.  He  had  also  roused  some  of  the  clergy  against  Daimbert, 
for  he  was  full  of  malice  and  loved  to  sow  the  seeds  of  discord.  For 
the  former  patriarch  was  exceedingly  rich  and  possessed  great  power. 
He  was  archdeacon  of  Jerusalem  and  also  received  revenues  from 
the  Temple  of  the  Lord  and  the  place  of  Calvary.  Therefore,  since 
he  was  both  wealthy  and  shrewd,  he  worked  much  evil  among  the 
clergy  and  yet  more  among  those  of  secular  rank. 

The  lord  patriarch,  keenly  aware  of  the  malice  of  this  man 
Arnulf,  who  was  as  a  thorn  in  the  flesh  to  him,  and  likewise  of  the 
credulity  of  the  count,  looked  with  apprehension  on  the  latter’s  com¬ 
ing.  He  therefore  left  the  palace  of  the  patriarch  and  retired  to  the 
church  of  Mt.  Sion.  In  that  retreat  far  from  all  dissensions,  he  de- 


426  KING  BALDWIN  I 

voted  himself j  as  a  private  citizen,  to  reading  and  prayer.  Thus  it 
happened  that  he  was  not  present  at  the  reception  of  the  lord  count 
to  participate  in  the  honors  paid  Baldwin  by  the  citizensd"^ 


The  count  leads  an  exf edition  against  Ascalon.  He  crosses 
the  Jordan  and  invades  the  enemy^s  land  by  force.  At  length 
he  returns  to  J erusalem. 


The  count  remained  several  days  in  Jerusalem  to  give  himself  and 
his  horses  the  opportunity  to  rest.  But  he  was  a  man  who  loved  work 
and  disdained  idleness.  Consequently,  as  soon  as  the  affairs  of  the 
realm  had  been  set  in  order  satisfactory  for  the  time  being,  he  got 
together  an  expeditionary  force  from  the  people  who  had  followed 
him  thither  and  from  troops  which  he  found  in  the  kingdom.  With 
this  company,  he  appeared  suddenly  and  unexpectedly  before  As¬ 
calon.  But  as  the  citizens  feared  to  issue  forth  against  him,  he  found 
that  he  could  accomplish  little  there.  He  marched  on  through  the 
country  which  lay  between  the  mountains  and  the  sea,  therefore,  and 
came  upon  many  places  whose  inhabitants  had  left  their  homes  and 
fled  into  subterranean  caverns  with  their  wives  and  children,  flocks 
and  herds. 

This  country  was  infested  by  bandits  and  robbers.  These  scourges 
of  the  highways  by  repeated  attacks  had  made  the  road  between  Ram- 
lah  and  Jerusalem  very  dangerous,  for  too  often  they  fell  with  hostile 
sword  upon  incautious  travellers.  When  the  count  heard  of  this,  he 
gave  orders  that  they  be  vigorously  pursued.  He  had  all  sorts  of  com¬ 
bustible  material  heaped  up  before  the  entrances  to  the  caves  and  set 
on  fire.  By  this  means  he  hoped  to  force  the  fugitives  hiding  within 
the  caves  to  surrender,  for  otherwise  the  dense  smoke  would  soon 
suffocate  them.  And  this  was  the  result,  for  those  imprisoned  within, 
unable  to  endure  the  heat  of  the  fire,  the  glowing  cinders,  and  the 
all-pervading  smoke,  soon  surrendered  unconditionally  to  the  count.^® 
Without  mercy,  he  at  once  ordered  the  decapitation  of  a  hundred  of 
their  number,  a  summary  punishment  which  their  guilt  seemed  to 

Daimbert’s  known  opposition  to  Baldwin’s  succession  was  probably  reason  enough 
for  his  absence  at  this  time.  However,  the  occasion  afforded  William  another  oppor¬ 
tunity  to  malign  Arnulf. 

This  more  primitive  form  of  “gas”  attack  was  not  an  uncommon  device  in 
Eastern  warfare.  It  was  more  frequently  employed  in  summer  battles,  when,  with  a 
favorable  wind,  the  dry  grass  was  lighted  to  blind  and  otherwise  inconvenience  the 
enemy.  Saladin  used  it  against  the  Christians  in  the  memorable  battle  of  Hattin  in  1187. 


KING  BALDWIN  I 


427 

deserve.  From  the  stores  found,  he  took  the  necessary  food  for  the 
men  and  beasts  in  his  train.  Then  proceeding  on  through  the  land  of 
the  tribe  of  Simeon,  he  ascended  to  the  hill  country.  He  went  through 
Hebron,  also  known  as  Cariatharbe,  famed  as  the  burial  place  of  the 
patriarchs  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob,  and  then  descended  through 
the  vineyards  of  EngaddI  to  the  famous  valley  where  lies  the  sea  of 
Salt.’^®  Passing  by  Segor,  small  indeed,  yet  able  to  save  Lot  when 
he  was  fleeing  from  Sodom,  the  company  entered  the  land  of  Moab  and 
traversed  the  whole  of  Syria  Sobal.  They  were  ever  on  the  watch 
for  an  opportunity  to  injure  that  perfidious  race  of  Turks  and  to  bet¬ 
ter  their  own  condition.  Yet  during  that  entire  march  they  accom¬ 
plished  nothing  except  that  they  maintained  themselves,  their  horses, 
and  beasts  of  burden  from  the  enemy’s  goods.  For  the  inhabitants 
of  the  locality  had  learned  beforehand  of  their  coming  and  had  fled 
to  their  usual  fastnesses  in  the  impenetrable  wilds  of  the  mountains. 
Consequently,  as  the  Christians  traversed  this  region,  they  found  it 
utterly  abandoned  and  without  cultivation. 

Finally  the  count  realized  that  he  could  accomplish  nothings  so 
as  the  feast  of  the  Lord’s  Nativity  was  at  hand,  he  retraced  the  route 
by  which  he  had  come,  and,  on  the  twenty-first  of  December,  the 
feast  day  of  St.  Thomas  the  Apostle,  he  reentered  Jerusalem. 

9.  A  reconciliation  takes  flace  between  the  patriarch  and  the 
count,  The  count  succeeds  to  the  throne. 

In  the  year  of  the  Incarnation  of  the  Lord  iioi.  Lord  Daimbert, 
the  patriarch,  and  Count  Baldwin  became  reconciled  through  the  laud¬ 
able  efforts  of  certain  discreet  mediators.  On  the  holy  day  of  the 
Lord’s  Nativity,  in  the  presence  of  clergy  and  people,  prelates  of 
the  church,  and  princes  of  the  realm,  Baldwin  was  consecrated  and 

anointed  king  in  the  church  at  Bethlehem  by  the  hand  of  Daim- 

% 

Fulcher  of  Chartres,  who  accompanied  Baldwin  on  this  journey,  verified  the 
presence  of  the  salt  by  actually  tasting  it  and  reported  his  experiment  with  considerable 
personal  pride  (H.  Hagenmeyer,  ed.,  Fulcheri  Carnotensis  historia  Hierosolymltanay 
P-  377)-  William,  who  lacked  Fulcher’s  interest  in  nature,  usually  omits  such  passages 
from  his  own  account. 

The  coronation  of  Baldwin  at  Bethlehem  must  be  regarded  as  a  compromise  of 
conflicting  views.  His  title  was  by  common  consent  king  of  Jerusalem.  Whether  the 
pious  views  of  the  crusading  leaders  in  the  election  of  Godfrey  or  Daimbert’s  apparent 
claims  upon  Jerusalem  itself  weighed  most  heavily  is  not  clear.  Bethlehem,  however, 
was  to  remain  peculiarly  dear  to  Baldwin  ever  after  this. 


428  KING  BALDWIN  I 

bertj  the  above-named  patriarch,  and  was  solemnly  crowned  with  the 
royal  diadem. 

10.  Tancred  Is  called  by  the  feofle  of  Antioch.  Ever  mindful  of 
the  ancient  wrong  done  him^  he  de farts  from  Baldwin. 

Thus  Baldwin,  as  has  been  related,  was  elevated  to  the  throne  and 
established  in  the  realm.  But  Tancred,  that  man  of  distinguished 
memory  and  pious  recollection  in  Christ,  still  cherished  in  his  heart 
the  memory  of  the  undeserved  wrong  which  he  had  suffered  at  the 
hand  of  this  same  Lord  Baldwin  at  Tarsus  of  Cilicia.  Tancred  was  a 
man  of  deep  religious  character  with  a  scrupulous  regard  for  the  dic¬ 
tates  of  his  own  conscience.  Unwilling,  therefore,  to  be  bound  by  the 
oath  of  fidelity  to  a  lord  whom  he  could  not  love  with  a  pure  af¬ 
fection,  he  resigned  into  the  hand  of  the  king  the  city  of  Tiberias.  At 
the  same  time  he  gave  up  also  the  city  of  Haifa,  which  Lord  God¬ 
frey  of  illustrious  memory  had,  in  the  generosity  of  his  heart,  granted 
him  in  return  for  distinguished  services.^ ^  Then,  taking  leave,  to  the 
great  regret  of  all,  he  retired  to  the  land  of  Antioch.  For  he  had 
been  summoned  repeatedly  by  the  leading  men  of  that  land  to  take 
over  the  responsibility  and  care  of  the  principality  until  the  return  of 
Bohemond,  if,  indeed,  the  Lord  should  ever  deign  to  deliver  the 
prince  from  prison.  In  the  event  that  Bohemond  should  not  be  per¬ 
mitted  to  return,  the  succession  in  its  entirety  would  descend  to  Tan¬ 
cred  by  hereditary  right.  On  his  arrival  at  Antioch,  the  people  and 
elders  at  once  surrendered  to  him  the  entire  administration  of  the 
city,  granting  him  a  free  hand. 

The  king  bestowed  Tiberias,  when  it  was  returned  into  his  hand, 
upon  a  certain  Hugh  de  St.  Omer  [de  Falkenberg],  a  man  of  high 
degree,  valiant  in  arms,  to  be  held  by  him  in  hereditary  rights  and 
the  kingdom  was  at  peace  for  four  months. 

According-  to  Albert  there  was  an  extended  dispute  about  Haifa  between  Baldwin 
and  Tancred,  which  was  settled  only  by  Tancred’s  summons  to  Antioch.  Geldemar 
Carpinel  claimed  it  as  having-  been  promised  to  him  by  Godfrey.  Baldwin  upheld  this 
claim  and  actually  awarded  it  to  him.  Hugh  de  Falkenberg  (St.  Omer)  received  only 
Tiberias,  the  fief  which  Tancred  had  held. 

The  grant  to  Hugh  de  Falkenberg  (St.  Omer)  was  at  first  conditional.  Tancred 
could  reclaim  it  within  a  year  and  three  months.  It  became  permanent  when  Tancred 
failed  to  return,  and  Hugh  is  thereafter  usually  mentioned  as  Hugh  of  Tiberias. 


KING  BALDWIN  I 


429 


II.  The  king  crosses  the  Jordan  and  takes  immense  s foils  jrom 
the  enemy^s  land,  A  most  laudable  feat  of  his  is  likewise  de~ 
scribed. 

During  those  same  days^  at  the  suggestion  of  certain  men  whose 
duty  it  was  to  investigate  the  condition  of  the  neighboring  districts 
and  spy  out  the  enemy’s  weak  points,  the  king  secretly  gathered  a 
large  company  of  soldiers,  crossed  the  Jordan,  and  entered  the  land 
of  the  Arabs.  He  penetrated  far  into  the  desert  where  these  people 
usually  live  and  came  at  last  to  the  place  which  had  been  indicated. 
Here  he  made  a  sudden  attack  at  night  and  surprised  the  infidels  off 
guard  in  their  tents.  He  took  some  men  and  all  the  women  and  chil¬ 
dren  prisoners  and  seized  all  their  possessions.  A  vast  amount  of 
booty,  including  a  large  number  of  camels  and  asses,  was  carried  off. 
Our  approach  had  been  noticed  from  a  distance,  however,  and  most 
of  the  men,  mounting  their  swift  horses,  had  fled  to  remote  parts  of 
the  desert  for  safety.  Their  wives  and  children,  their  tents,  and  all 
their  possessions  were  abandoned  to  the  mercy  of  the  enemy. 

The  Christians  now  started  on  the  return  march,  driving  before 
them  the  herds  and  slaves  taken  as  booty.  Among  the  prisoners 
there  happened  to  be  a  woman  of  high  rank,  the  wife  of  a  great  and 
powerful  chief,  who  had  been  overtaken  in  the  common  catastrophe. 
Now  upon  the  march  the  time  of  her  travail  came  upon  her,  and  with 
the  usual  pains  attending  childbirth,  she  brought  forth  her  offspring. 

This  was  reported  to  the  king.  He  at  once  gave  orders  that  she 
be  taken  down  from  the  camel  on  which  she  was  riding  and  that  from 
the  spoils  a  bed  for  the  emergency  be  hastily  prepared  on  the  ground. 
Food  was  provided  for  her  and  two  skins  of  water.  A  maid  was  also 
supplied  at  her  request,  and  two  camels  were  left  by  whose  milk  she 
might  be  nourished.  Wrapping  her  in  the  mantle  which  he  was  wear¬ 
ing  himself,  Baldwin  left  her  and  resumed  the  march  with  his  army.^^ 
On  that  same  day  or  possibly  the  following,  that  great  Arab  chief, 
followed  by  a  large  company  of  his  tribesmen,  appeared.  He  was 
following  closely  in  the  tracks  of  the  Christian  army,  according  to  the 
custom  of  his  people.  He  was  very  sorrowful,  grieving  for  the  loss 

This  seems  legendary,  for  Baldwin’s  itinerary  during  these  months  offered  little 
opportunity  for  its  occurrence.  Such  acts  of  courtesy  toward  leaders  of  the  enemy  were 
not  uncommon  in  William’s  time  and  were  performed  by  both  sides.  Saladin’s  treatment 
of  the  captives  at  Hattin  is  a  famous  instance. 


KING  BALDWIN  I 


430 

of  his  wife,  a  noble  matron  who  was  on  the  eve  of  childbirth,  in  com¬ 
parison  with  whose  loss  he  counted  all  the  rest  as  nothing.  Suddenly 
he  came  upon  her  lying  thus  on  the  ground.  At  sight  of  her,  he  was 
amazed  at  the  humanity  which  the  king  had  shown  so  abundantly  and 
began  to  extol  to  the  skies  the  name  of  the  Latins.  Above  all,  he 
praised  the  merciful  kindness  of  the  king  and  vowed  that  ever  after 
he  would  be  faithful  to  him  as  far  as  lay  in  his  power,  a  promise 
which  later  he  made  good  in  a  critical  emergency. 


12.  The  frmces  of  the  W est  again  undertake  a  'pilgrimage,  T hey 
arrive  at  Constantinople  with  large  forces. 

At  the  time  when  these  events  were  transpiring  in  the  -Orient, 
princes  of  the  West  heard  of  the  great  and  marvellous  things  which 
the  Lord  had  wrought  through  His  servants  who  had  gone  upon  the 
pilgrimage:  how  through  a  vast  expanse  of  countries,  through  many 
varied  and  manifold  misfortunes  He  had  led  His  army  into  the  Land 
of  Promise  5  how  before  the  very  eyes  of  these  pilgrims  He  had  sub¬ 
dued  nations  and  brought  kingdoms  low.  Those  who  had  remained 
at  home  rejoiced  over  the  triumphs  of  their  brethren,  but  they  were 
vexed  in  spirit  because  they,  too,  had  not  been  worthy  to  participate 
in  the  exploits  thus  successfully  accomplished.  Accordingly,  they 
came  together  and,  by  mutual  agreement,  conceived  the  idea  of  start¬ 
ing  a  new  expedition.^^ 

The  most  important  of  these  pilgrims  was  the  illustrious  and 
splendid  Count  William  of  Poitou,^^  duke  of  Aquitaine.  Another 
famous  man  was  Hugh  the  Great,  count  of  Vermandois,  brother  of 
Philip,  king  of  the  Franks.  Hugh  had  accompanied  the  first  expedi¬ 
tion,  but  after  Antioch  was  taken  he  was  forced  by  lack  of  means  to 
return  to  his  fatherland. Stephen,  count  of  Chartres  and  Blois,  a 
man  prudent  and  wise  in  counsel,  was  also  of  this  number.  To  his 

This  expedition  of  iioi  is  sometimes  called  the  Crusade  of  the  Faint-hearted 
because  it  included  so  many  who  had  started  on  the  first  expedition  and  then  turned 
back. 

William  IX,  duke  of  Aquitaine  1086—1127,  the  most  prominent  French  leader 
on  the  expedition,  did  not  take  the  cross,  however,  until  the  synod  of  Poitiers,  Novem¬ 
ber,  1 1 00.  William  IX,  who  is  usually  called  William  of  Poitou,  gained  some  reputa¬ 
tion  as  a  poet  and  even  more  as  a  bon  ^ivant. 

This  explanation  of  Hugh’s  failure  to  return  to  the  army  after  the  mission  to 
Constantinople  is  more  charitable  (if  not  as  convincing)  than  the  earlier  one  held 
by  the  crusaders  (see  Book  VII,  chap.  i). 


KING  BALDWIN  I 


431 

everlasting  shame  and  disgrace,  Stephen  had  deserted  his  comrades 
when  the  fall  of  Antioch  was  imminent,  through  terror  of  the  com¬ 
ing  battle,  and  thus  brought  never-dying  infamy  upon  his  name  by 
an  ignominious  flight.  Now,  eager  to  redeem  his  former  fault  and  to 
wipe  out  the  memory  of  his  disgrace,  he  assembled  an  honorable 
following  and  prepared  to  make  the  pilgrimage. The  distinguished 
Stephen  of  Burgundy,  of  noble  and  lofty  lineage,  likewise  made 
ready  to  undertake  the  same  journey. Many  other  nobles,  also  illus¬ 
trious  because  of  their  lands,  life,  lineage,  and  prowess  in  arms,  were 
kindled  by  the  same  desire  and  made  their  arrangements  to  go.^^  On 
the  day  appointed,  when  the  more  important  leaders  started  on  the 
journey,  these  nobles  too  intended  to  join  them  with  their  legions. 

So  they  arranged  all  things  needful  for  the  march,  summoned 
their  comrades,  and  at  the  right  time  on  the  appointed  day  set  out  on 
the  pilgrimage.  They  followed  in  the  footsteps  of  the  first  expedi¬ 
tion,  but  without  the  same  spirit  of  devotion.  At  Constantinople  they 
were  fairly  well  received  by  the  Emperor  Alexius.  They  found  at  the 
court  the  count  of  Toulouse, who  on  the  first  expedition  had  proved 
himself  to  be  a  great  and  notable  leader.  As  we  have  said,  the  count 
had  left  his  wife  and  most  of  his  household  at  Laodicea,  while  he 
himself  went  to  implore  the  aid  of  the  emperor  so  that  he  might  be 
able  to  return  to  Syria  and  conquer  one  or  more  cities  there.  For, 
since  he  had  once  for  all  undertaken  the  pilgrimage,  he  was  deter¬ 
mined  to  persevere  to  the  end  and  never  return  to  his  own  land. 

Full  of  joy,  therefore,  that  they  had  met  a  man  so  wise  and  en- 

The  embarrassing  directness  of  the  pressure  upon  Stephen  to  atone  for  his  previous 
conduct  is  vividly  described  by  the  Norman  historian  {Ordericus  Vitalisy  x,  119,  trans. 
by  Thomas  Forester  in  the  Bohn  Antiquarian  Library).  ^‘Being  frequently  reproved  by 
a  variety  of  persons  for  this  conduct,  Stephen  was  compelled  both  by  fear  and  shame 
to  undertake  a  fresh  crusade.  Among  others,  his  wife,  Adele,  often  urged  him  to  it, 
reminding  him  of  it  even  amidst  the  endearments  of  conjugal  caresses,  Tar  be  it  from 
me,  my  lord,*  she  said,  ‘to  submit  any  longer  to  the  jibes  you  receive  from  all  quarters. 
Pluck  up  the  courage  for  which  you  were  renowned  in  your  youth  and  take  arms  in 
a  noble  cause  for  the  salvation  of  thousands,  so  that  Christians  may  have  good  reason 
to  exult  in  all  parts  of  the  world  to  the  terror  of  the  pagans  and  the  public  humiliation 
of  their  detestable  religion.’  ” 

This  Stephen  of  Burgundy  was  the  son  of  Renaud  I,  count  of  Burgundy. 

The  omission  of  the  names  of  leaders  from  Germany  and  northern  Italy  who  took 
a  prominent  part  in  this  expedition  is  significant  of  William’s  lack  of  connection  with 
those  regions.  Ekkehard  of  Aura,  who  accompanied  the  German  contingent,  wrote  an 
account  of  the  expedition  (H.  Hagenmeyer,  ed.,  Ekkehardi  Uratigiensis  abbatts  Hiero- 
solymitay  'passim). 

Book  II,  note  245  Book  IX,  chap.  13. 


KING  BALDWIN  I 


432 

ergetic,  they  took  leave  of  the  lord  emperor,  who  showered  them 
liberally  with  rich  gifts.  Then,  with  the  count  as  their  guide,  they 
crossed  the  Hellespont  and  arrived  with  their  legions  at  Nicaea  of 
Bithynia,  following  the  tracks  of  the  earlier  army. 

13.  Emferor  Alexius y  according  to  his  usual  custoniy  causes  the 
Turks  to  set  ambushes  for  them.  The  greater  fart  of  the  'pil¬ 
grims  perish.  The  survivors  arrive  at  J er us alem  in  the  train 
of  the  count  of  T oulouse. 

The  emperor,  as  we  have  said,  had  treated  the  pilgrims  kindly  enough 
while  they  were  with  him.  But,  following  the  time-honored  custom 
of  the  Greek  race,  he  envied  the  success  of  the  Christians  and  meant 
to  do  them  harm.  Accordingly,  he  kept  sending  emissaries  to  the 
Turks,  begging  them  to  destroy  the  pilgrims.  By  numerous  letters 
as  well  as  by  word  of  mouth  through  these  messengers,  he  informed 
the  Turks  of  the  pilgrims’  approach  and  admonished  them  in  advance 
that  for  their  own  protection  they  ought  not  to  suffer  this  large  com¬ 
pany  to  pass  freely.  Thus  he  played  the  part  of  the  scorpion,  which 
when  met  face  to  face  is  harmless,  but  the  tail  of  which  is  armed  with 
a  poisonous  sting  it  is  well  to  avoid.  Through  Alexius  and  his  emis¬ 
saries,  the  arrival  of  this  expedition  was  well  heralded,  and  from  all 
the  parts  of  the  Orient,  by  both  entreaties  and  money,  the  infidels 
had  gathered  troops  and  allies  to  stop  the  pilgrims  in  their  proposed 
march  across  the  country.^  ^ 

But  the  Christians,  either  purposely  or  by  chance,  separated  from 
one  another  and  advanced  by  different  routes  5  for,  like  sand  without 
lime,  no  bond  of  affection  held  them  together.  Moreover,  they  ut¬ 
terly  scorned  the  military  discipline  which  the  earlier  army  had  ob¬ 
served.  Hence,  a  powerful  adversary  was  raised  up  against  them,  as 
they  deserved,  and  they  were  given  into  the  enemy’s  hand.  For  in  one 
day,  while  on  the  march,  more  than  fifty  thousand  of  both  sexes  fell 
by  the  edge  of  the  sword. 

Those  whom  divine  providence  permitted  to  escape  the  hand  of 
the  enemy  lost  their  baggage  and  equipment  of  every  kind.  Naked  and 

Qilij  Arslan  probably  required  no  prompting  from  Alexius.  The  possibility  of 
collusion  between  them,  however,  did  exist,  for  Qilij  Arslan  aided  Alexius  later  against 
Bohemond  in  Greece  (see  Book  XI,  note  27). 


KING  BALDWIN  I 


433 

empty  handed,  they  sought  safety  as  they  could,  and  it  was  by  chance 
rather  than  by  their  own  efforts  that  they  finally  reached  Cilicia,  At 
Tarsus,  the  capital  of  that  province,  they  lost  Hugh  the  Great,  who 
was  carried  away  by  inevitable  fate.^^  He  was  interred  with  much 
ceremony  in  the  church  of  the  great  teacher  of  the  Gentiles,  in  whose 
native  city  he  died.  Then,  after  allowing  themselves  a  few  days  for 
rest  and  refreshment,  the  pilgrims  resumed  their  march  and  came 
to  Antioch. 

Here  Tancred  was  administering  the  affairs  of  the  principality.  As 
was  his  custom,  he  received  them  all  with  gracious  kindness.  Toward 
the  count  of  Poitou  he  showed  especial  favor,  because  he  was  of  more 
exalted  rank  than  the  others  and  had  suffered  more  on  that  ill-fated 
expedition  in  the  loss  of  all  his  possessions. 

Then,  drawn  by  an  eager  longing  to  see  the  sacred  places,  the  pil¬ 
grim  company  hastened  on  toward  Jerusalem.  Those  who  lacked 
horses  went  by  sea,  others  who  still  possessed  horses,  by  land.  All 
finally  met  at  Antarados,  a  coastal  city  commonly  known  as  Tortosa. 

By  the  advice  of  Raymond,  count  of  Toulouse,  they  attacked  this 
city,  since  it  seemed  possible  to  win  it,  and,  with  the  help  of  God, 
within  a  few  days  they  took  it  by  force.  The  inhabitants  were  either 
slain  or  consigned  to  perpetual  slavery.  They  then  resigned  the  city 
to  the  count  and  divided  the  spoils  with  each  other  according  to  the 
law  of  war  and  again  pressed  on  toward  their  goal.  The  count  re¬ 
mained  to  protect  the  city,  much  against  the  will  of  the  rest,  who 
endeavored  to  persuade  him  to  go  on  with  them.^^ 

14.  The  king  lays  siege  to  Arsuf  and  takes  it  by  force. 

While  the  pilgrim  army,  attended  by  ill  fortune,  was  struggling 
through  the  land  of  Romania,  as  has  just  been  described,  the  king  of 
Jerusalem,  loth  to  idle  away  his  time  in  inactivity,  was  devoting  his 
entire  attention  to  extending  in  every  possible  way  the  narrow  limits 
of  the  kingdom. 

Toward  the  beginning  of  spring,  a  fleet  of  Genoese  had  arrived  at 

This  statement  of  William’s  reg’arding’  the  burial  of  Hugh  in  the  church  of 
St.  Paul  in  Tarsus  seems  too  definite  to  question.  Yet  several  late  writers  assert  that 
he  died  shortly  after  his  arrival  at  Constantinople  in  1098. 

A  characteristic  action  on  the  part  of  Count  Raymond,  but  more  excusable,  since 
he  had  already  been  to  Jerusalem.  However,  it  did  not  add  to  his  popularity. 


KING  BALDWIN  I 


434 

the  port  of  JafFa.^^  They  were  welcomed  with  much  honor  by  the  king 
and  the  citizens  of  Jaffa.  As  Easter  was  at  hand,  they  drew  up  their 
ships  on  land  and  went  up  to  Jerusalem  for  the  festal  day. 

After  the  feast  of  Easter  had  been  celebrated  according  to  custom, 
the  king  sent  wise  men  endowed  with  the  gift  of  persuasion  to  confer 
with  the  leaders  of  the  fleet  and  the  elders  and  chiefs  of  the  troops, 
to  ascertain  whether  they  intended  to  return  or  would  be  willing,  on 
receiving  an  honorable  compensation,  to  devote  themselves  for  a  time 
to  the  divine  service  for  the  purpose  of  extending  the  limits  of  the 
kingdom. 

After  consulting  with  one  another,  they  answered  that,  if  they 
could  remain  in  the  kingdom  under  honorable  terms,  it  was  their  in¬ 
tention — and,  indeed,  had  been  from  the  beginning — to  devote  them¬ 
selves  for  a  time  loyally  to  the  service  of  God  for  the  purpose  of 
increasing  the  kingdom,  A  treaty  satisfactory  to  both  parties  was  there¬ 
upon  made  and  confirmed  by  an  exchange  of  oaths.  It  was  agreed  that 
as  long  as  they  wished  to  remain  in  the  kingdom  with  their  fleet  the 
following  terms  should  hold  with  regard  to  any  cities  or  fortified 
places  belonging  to  the  enemy  which  might  be  taken  by  their  aid. 
They  were  to  have  without  dispute  a  third  part  of  the  slaves  and 
money  taken  from  the  enemy  to  be  divided  among  their  comrades,  the 
remaining  two  thirds  being  reserved  for  the  king.  Moreover,  in  each 
city  which  might  be  won  from  the  infidels  under  these  conditions, 
one  street,  by  treaty,  was  to  belong  to  the  Genoese.  Animated  by  hope 
of  this  and  reliance  on  divine  aid,  the  king  levied  forces  of  both 
horse  and  foot  soldiers  from  the  cities  under  his  sway  and  laid  siege 
to  the  coast  city  of  Arsuf,  both  by  land  and  by  sea.  This  place  is 
also  known  as  Antipatris,  so  called  from  Antipater,  the  father  of 
Herod.  It  lies  in  surroundings  of  great  fertility  and  possesses  many 
advantages  in  the  way  of  woods  and  pasture  lands.  The  previous  year 
Duke  Godfrey,  of  happy  memory,  had  invested  this  town.  As  he  had 
only  a  few  ships,  however,  he  was  unable  to  shut  off  access  to  the 
beleaguered  city  by  sea.  Consequently,  realizing  the  impossibility  of 
success,  he  returned  home  without  accomplishing  his  purpose.^® 

Baldwin  at  once  placed  his  forces  around  the  place  so  that  they 

This  fleet  had  left  Genoa  on  Aug'ust  i,  iioo,  wintered  at  Laodicea,  and  arrived 
at  Jaffa  about  April  i6,  iioi. 

See  Book  IX,  chap.  19. 


KING  BALDWIN  I 


435 

formed  a  circumvallation  and  ordered  a  movable  tower  to  be  con¬ 
structed  from  huge  beams.  When  this  was  finished,  it  was  applied  to 
the  walls  with  sedulous  care  by  the  workmen,  but  its  strength  was  not 
sufficient  to  bear  the  weight  of  the  great  number  which  mounted  it. 
Cansequently  it  fell  to  the  ground,  a  wreck.  In  this  accident  about  a 
hundred  of  our  men  were  seriously  injured. 

Some  of  our  men  were  also  seized  by  the  enemy  and  crucified  be¬ 
fore  the  very  eyes  of  their  friends.  Violent  indignation  filled  the 
hearts  of  the  Christians  at  this  sight.  They  fell  upon  the  enemy  with 
a  furious  attack  and  held  them  pent  up  within  the  city.  So  terrified 
were  these  that  they  secerned  to  have  lost  all  power  even  to  take 
measures  for  their  own  defense. 

The  Christians  had  applied  their  ladders  to  the  walls  and  were  ap¬ 
parently  already  in  possession  of  the  towers  and  ramparts  when  the 
townspeople,  despairing  even  of  life,  sent  mediators  who  obtained  a 
concession  from  the  king.  It  was  agreed  that  on  the  surrender  of  the 
city  they  with  their  wives  and  children,  but  at  the  cost  of  leaving  all 
their  movable  effects,  might  have  free  and  peaceful  exit  from  the  city 
and  be  provided  with  safe  conduct  to  Ascalon.  So,  after  the  fortress 
had  been  captured,  the  army  left  guards  to  garrison  the  city  and 
marched  on  without  delay  to  besiege  Caesarea. 

15.  The  king  likewise  besieges  Caesarea^  a  coastal  cityy  and  takes  it, 

Caesarea  lies  on  the  seacoast  and  was  in  earlier  times  known  as  the 

* 

tower  of  Straton.  According  to  ancient  histories,  Herod  the  Elder 
enlarged  it,  beautified  it  with  noble  buildings,  and  called  it  Caesarea  in 
honor  of  the  Emperor  Augustus.  By  authority  of  the  Roman  emperor 
it  was  made  the  capital  of  Palestina  Secunda.^® 

This  city  has  great  advantages  in  the  way  of  running  streams  and 
well-watered  gardens,  but  it  is  without  a  port.  We  read,  indeed,  that 
this  same  Herod,  at  great  expense  and  effort,  endeavored  without 
success  to  construct  a  harbor  there  which  might  offer  secure  anchor¬ 
age  to  ships. 

Thither  the  king  marched  with  his  army,  and  the  fleet  followed, 
keeping  equal  pace  by  sea  with  those  on  land.  On  arriving  at  their 

Caesarea  had  been  more  important  than  it  now  was  or  was  to  become.  It  was, 
however,  restored  to  its  position  as  an  archiepiscopal  see. 


436  KING  BALDWIN  I 

destination^  they  blockaded  the  city,  set  up  hurling  engines  in  strategic 
positions,  and  made  a  violent  assault  on  the  place.  Frequent  skirmishes 
round  the  gates  struck  fear  to  the  hearts  of  the  townspeople  j  huge 
rocks  hurled  without  intermission  from  the  machines  weakened  the 
walls  and  towers  and  even  shattered  the  houses,  so  that  not  a  moment 
of  rest  was  granted  the  besieged. 

Meanwhile,  a  machine  of  surprising  height,  much  higher  than  the 
towers,  had  been  prepared,  from  the  top  of  which  the  Christians  could 
freely  and  easily  assault  the  city.  For  about  fifteen  days  the  citizens 
and  our  army  persevered  in  this  contest,  the  latter  attacking  with  all 
their  might  and  the  townspeople  with  equal  fury  resisting.  The  en¬ 
gagements  were  violent  and  unceasing.  The  Christians  knew,  however, 
that  the  citizens  were  unequal  to  such  severe  labors,  for  they  had 
been  rendered  soft  and  effeminate  through  long-continued  leisure 
and  peace  and  were  wholly  without  experience  in  the  practice  of  arms. 
From  day  to  day  it  was  noticeable  that,  wearied  by  the  burden  of  war, 
they  were  offering  a  less  strenuous  resistance.  Accordingly  our  men 
chafed  against  further  delay.  Cheering  one  another  on,  they  declined 
to  wait  until  the  machine  under  construction  was  raised,  but  with  one 
accord  made  a  concerted  attack  with  unusual  fury.  The  besieged,  at¬ 
tacked  within  their  walls,  were  panic-stricken.  In  despair  even  of  life, 
they  no  longer  tried  to  protect  their  walls  or  paid  any  attention  to 
means  of  defense.  When  the  Christians  recognized  this  state  of  affairs, 
they  applied  their  ladders  to  the  walls,  eagerly  mounted  the  ram¬ 
parts,  and  quickly  seized  the  towers  and  fortifications.  By  the  zealous 
efforts  of  others  the  gates  were  unbarred,  the  city  was  broken  open 
by  force,  and  the  king  entered  with  his  troops. 

Armed  soldiers  were  now  roving  freely  about  everywhere.  They 
broke  into  houses  where  the  citizens  had  vainly  thought  to  find  pro¬ 
tection.  They  killed  the  fathers  of  families,  seized  utensils  of  every 
kind,  and  laid  violent  hands  on  all  that  seemed  desirable,  together 
with  the  very  houses.  They  put  the  household  retainers  to  the  sword 
and  took  possession  of  the  private  apartments.  It  is  needless  to  speak 
of  the  fate  of  those  who  happened  to  encounter  our  forces  in  the 
streets  and  squares  of  the  city,  for  even  those  who  carefully  sought  out 
hiding  places  in  the  byways  were  unable  to  avoid  death. 

Many  who  perchance  might  otherwise  have  been  granted  life 
brought  death  upon  themselves.  They  swallowed  gold  pieces  and 


KING  BALDWIN  I 


437 

precious  gems.  This  roused  the  cupidity  of  the  Christians  to  such  a 
degree  that  they  clove  their  victims  through  the  middle  in  search  of 
treasures  that  might  be  hidden  in  their  very  vitals. 

1 6.  Many  citizens  ferish  in  a  certain  chafel  of  the  city,  A n  arch- 
bishof  is  affointed  for  the  caf  lured  city. 

Occupying  an  elevated  position  in  one  section  of  the  city  was  a  public 
chapel  where,  according  to  tradition,  there  had  once  existed  a  temple 
of  marvellous  workmanship  built  by  Herod  in  honor  of  Augustus 
Caesar.  Thither  almost  the  entire  population  had  fled,  hoping,  since 
it  was  a  place  of  prayer,  that  they  might  be  safe  within  its  precincts. 

Into  this  place  the  Christians  forced  their  way.  There  followed  such 
a  terrible  massacre  of  the  refugees  within  that  the  feet  of  the  de¬ 
stroyers  were  stained  with  the  blood  of  the  slain,  and  the  very  sight 
of  the  multitude  of  corpses  inspired  horror. 

In  this  same  chapel  was  found  a  vase  of  brilliant  green  shaped  like 
a  bowl.  The  Genoese,  believing  that  it  was  of  emerald,  took  it  in 
lieu  of  a  large  sum  of  money  and  thus  acquired  a  splendid  ornament 
for  their  church.  They  still  show  this  vase  as  a  marvel  to  people  of 
distinction  who  pass  through  their  city  and  persuade  them  to  believe 
that  it  is  truly  an  emerald,  as  its  color  indicates. 

Practically  the  entire  adult  population  of  the  city  was  slain  in  one 
place  or  another.  Only  the  young  boys  and  girls  were  spared.  Here 
in  truth  might  be  seen  literally  fulfilled  that  which  is  written  in 
the  prophets:  the  lord  ‘^delivered  his  strength  into  captivity  and  his 
glory  into  the  enemy’s  hand.” 

When  the  work  of  the  sword  ceased  and  the  destruction  of  the 
citizens  was  accomplished,  the  spoils  of  every  description  were 
gathered  into  one  place.  Thereupon,  according  to  the  tenor  of  the 
agreement,  a  third  part  was  set  aside  for  the  Genoese,  and  the  two- 
thirds  remaining  were  given  to  the  king  and  his  men  as  their  share. 
After  their  scanty  means  had  become  exhausted  on  the  way,  our  peo¬ 
ple  had  been  poor  and  needy  and  had  struggled  on  even  to  that  day 

William  is  apparently  sceptical  of  its  quality  as  an  emerald.  Professor  E.  H.  Byrne, 
the  authority  on  Genoese  commerce  in  the  twelfth  century,  informed  the  writer  that 
the  vessel,  though  now  broken  and  recognized  as  glass,  is  still  highly  prized  in  Genoa. 
According  to  Paris  it  was  for  some  time  regarded  as  the  Holy  Grail  (P.  Paris,  Gtiil- 
liatcme  de  Tyr  et  ses  continuateurSy  I,  353,  note  3). 

Ps.  78:  61.  William  is  here  using  the  term  ‘^prophets’^  loosely. 


KING  BALDWIN  I 


438 

in  the  same  state  of  poverty.  Now  for  the  first  time,  enriched  with 
money  and  laden  with  spoils,  they  began  to  be  more  prosperous,  since 
a  goodly  portion  of  the  plunder  was  apportioned  them.^^ 

Then  before  the.  king  as  he  sat  in  the  place  of  judgment  were 
brought  the  governor  of  the  city,  who  in  their  language  is  called  an 
amir,  and  the  judge,  or  kadi,  who  had  charge  of  the  administration 
of  justice.^®  In  expectation  of  a  future  ransom,  these  two  officials 
were  granted  life,  but  they  were  put  in  chains  and  ordered  closely 
guarded. 

Then  as  the  king  was  pressed  for  time,  other  matters  calling  him 
away,  a  certain  Baldwin  who  had  come  on  the  expedition  with  Duke 
Godfrey  was  chosen  archbishop  of  the  city.^^  Some  of  the  soldiers 
were  left  to  guard  the  city,  and  the  king  with  the  others  hastened 
on  to  Ramlah. 

17.  The  king  arrives  at  Ramlah  and  there  awaits  the  arrival  of 
the  enemy  who  are  said  to  be  affroaching.  He  engages  them 
and  is  victorious. 

The  city  of  Ramlah  is  situated  in  the  plain  near  Lydda,  which  is 
Diospolis.  I  have  not  been  able  to  learn  the  ancient  name  of  this  city, 
but  the  general  opinion  is  that  the  place  did  not  exist  in  early  times. 
Ancient  histories  say  that  it  was  founded  after  the  time  of  the  seducer 
Muhammad  by  Arab  princes  who  succeeded  him.  It  was  a  populous 
city,  surrounded  by  a  wall  with  towers  when  the  Christian  army  first 
arrived  in  the  land  of  Syria,  and  to  it  people  flocked  in  great  num¬ 
bers.  But  it  had  neither  outer  defenses  nor  a  moat,  and  when  the 
legions  of  the  crusaders  poured  into  those  parts,  all  the  inhabitants 
left  and  fled  to  Ascalon,  which  had  far  better  fortifications. 

So  the  Christians  found  the  city  abandoned  by  its  inhabitants,  as 
we  have  said.  It  would  have  been  difficult  to  occupy  the  entire  city 

One  item  of  interest  among  the  spoils  at  Caesarea  was  the  large  quantity  of  pepper 
found  there,  so  much  that  each  ordinary  soldier  was  allotted  two  pounds  of  it. 

According  to  Albert,  the  Muslims  of  Acre  purchased  the  release  of  the  kadi  for 
1,000  besants. 

Guibert  de  Nogent  says  that  Baldwin  branded  himself  with  the  sign  of  the  cross 
when  he  started  on  the  crusade.  He  was  made  abbot  of  that  group  of  monks  who, 
according  to  William,  were  established  in  the  monastery  of  St.  Mary  of  the  Valley 
of  Jehoshaphat  by  Godfrey  (see  Guiberti  gesta  dei  fer  FrancoSy  R.H.C.Oc.y  IV,  183, 
251). 


KING  BALDWIN  I 


439 

when  the  inhabitants  were  so  few.  They  therefore  merely  fortified  a 
stronghold  with  walls  and  a  moat  in  one  part  of  it. 

A  rumor  was  current  at  this  time,  which  proved  to  be  not  far  from 
the  truth,  to  the  effect  that  the  caliph  of  Egypt  had  dispatched  one 
of  the  chiefs  of  his  army  with  a  large  force  of  soldiers  to  the  vicinity 
of  Ascalon.  In  accordance  with  his  usual  custom,  he  had  ordered  that 
officer  to  advance  without  delay  against  the  needy  and  mendicant 
people  who  had  presumed  to  enter  his  dominions  and  disturb  his 
peace.  The  officer  was  either  to  wipe  them  out  utterly  with  the  sword 
or  bring  them  back  with  him  to  Egypt  in  chains.  The  forces  in  the 
train  of  that  commander  were  said  to  consist  of  eleven  thousand 
knights  and  twenty  thousand  foot  soldiers.^- 

It  was  this  rumor  that  had  forced  the  king  to  leave  Caesarea  so 
hastily,  for  he  feared  that  this  host,  relying  on  its  vast  numbers,  would 
attempt  to  invade  the  kingdom,  a  course  which  would  be  most  disas¬ 
trous  to  its  welfare. 

For  nearly  a  month  Baldwin  waited  at  Ramlah  j  then,  as  the  enemy 
did  not  appear,  he  returned  to  Jaffa.  Finally,  in  the  third  month,  the 
Egyptian  forces  dared  no  longer  neglect  their  lord’s  order  j  in  fact, 
they  dreaded  lest  he  be  already  angry  because  they  had  so  long 
deferred  action.  Making  a  virtue  of  necessity,  they  summoned  courage, 
repaired  their  strength,  and,  with  lines  drawn  up  in  battle  formation, 
made  a  swift  descent  upon  our  territory  to  attack  us. 

When  this  was  announced  to  the  king,  he  ordered  his  forces  to  be 
summoned.  They  were  small,  because  the  limited  extent  of  his  pos¬ 
sessions  precluded  the  possibility  of  a  large  number.  However,  he 
concentrated  around  Lydda  and  Ramlah  as  large  a  force  as  possible. 
This  was  composed  of  two  hundred  and  sixty  knights  and  nine  hun¬ 
dred  foot  soldiers. 

As  soon  as  it  became  evident  that  the  enemy  was  approaching,  the 
king  ordered  his  forces  to  be  drawn  up  in  six  battalions  and  marched 
out  to  meet  the  foe.  At  the  head  of  the  troops  went  a  certain  devout 
abbot,  carrying  reverently  in  his  hands  the  Cross  of  the  Lord.  Thus 
arrayed,  the  Christians  surveyed  the  ranks  of  the  infidels.  Then  with 
eyes  raised  to  heaven,  they  invoked  aid  from  on  high  and  rushed  for- 

William  has  reversed  Fulcher’s  proportions  of  horsemen  to  foot  soldiers  but  has 
not  cut  down  the  total  numbers,  which  are  still  too  high. 


440  KING  BALDWIN  I 

ward  in  a  furious  charge.  Unappalled  by  the  vast  numbers  of  their 
adversaries,  they  pressed  them  hard  with  their  swords,  aware  that 
they  were  fighting  for  life  itself. 

The  Egyptians,  likewise,  resisted  with  all  their  might  and  in  their 
own  fashion  strove  to  ward  off  the  attack.  For  well  they  knew  that 
unless  they  should  return  victorious  they  had  reason  to  fear  for  their 
wives  and  children,  their  possessions,  and  the  estates  which  they  had 
left  in  Egypt. 

It  happened  that  the  enemy’s  vanguard  had  engaged  one  of  our 
divisions.  With  their  superior  numbers,  they  quickly  threw  it  into 
confusion  and  put  it  to  flight.  The  infidels  followed  in  such  hot  pur¬ 
suit  that  the  fugitives  were  nearly  annihilated.  Our  other  divisions, 
however,  resisted  very  vigorously.  Pressing  on  with  fury,  they 
wrought  carnage  unspeakable.  The  king,  by  word  and  example,  as 
beseemed  so  great  a  prince,  encouraged  now  these,  now  those.  To 
those  who  were  so  hard  pressed  that  they  were  on  the  point  of  giving 
way  he  furnished  needed  strength  with  his  own  forces  and  thus  re¬ 
stored  their  courage. 

For  a  long  time  the  result  of  the  battle  was  doubtful,  but  victory 
was  finally  granted  to  the  Christians  from  on  high,  and  the  enemy 
was  routed.  They  suffered  the  loss  of  their  leader,  who  perished  by 
the  sword  while  fighting  valiantly  on  the  field  of  combat. 

The  ranks  of  the  enemy  were  broken 3  some  of  their  battalions 
had  perished,  while  others  had  fled  beyond  recall.  When  the  king 
perceived  this,  he  commanded  that  no  one  under  pain  of  death  should 
dare  to  think  of  taking  spoils.  On  the  contrary,  he  ordered  them  to 
pursue  the  foe,  not  to  spare  the  sword  but  to  kill  all  without  mercy. 
He  himself  set  the  example ;  followed  by  several  divisions  of  cavalry 
and  swift  foot  soldiers,  he  continued  the  pursuit  to  Ascalon,  a  dis¬ 
tance  of  about  eight  miles.  The  approach  of  night  put  an  end  to  the 
frightful  slaughter.  Then  the  king  recalled  his  forces  by  the  sound  of 
the  horn  and  returned  to  the  field  of  battle.  There  he  divided  the 
spoils  among  his  soldiers  according  to  the  law  of  war  and  then  passed 
the  night  on  the  field  as  victor. 

According  to  report,  about  five  thousand  of  the  enemy  were  slain 
at  that  place.  When  our  troops  were  counted,  it  was  found  that 
seventy  knights  were  missing  and  a  much  larger  number  of  foot  sol¬ 
diers,  but  the  exact  loss  is  not  known. 


KING  BALDWIN  I 


441 


18.  Thence  he  fasses  to  Jaffa  where  he  comforts  the  citizens y 
who  were  frostrated  with  terror. 

The  Egyptian  forces  who  had  routed  the  Christians  in  the  conflict  of 
the  preceding  day  pursued  the  fugitives  as  far  as  Jaffa.  Assuming  the 
weapons,  breastplates,  and  shields  of  the  fallen  foe,  they  made  a  bold 
stand  before  that  city  and  shouted  to  the  citizens  in  stentorian  tones 
that  the  king  and  the  entire  Christian  army  had  fallen  in  battle.  As 
convincing  proof  of  this  statement,  let  them  gaze  upon  the  well-known 
arms  of  their  friends  and  servants.  At  sight  of  these,  the  citizens  and 
the  queen,  who  was  also  in  the  city,  could  not  doubt  that  they  were 
speaking  the  truth  and  gave  themselves  up  to  lamentations.  After 
consulting  with  the  elders  and  those  of  greater  experience  and  fore¬ 
sight,  they  came  to  the  conclusion  that  there  was  but  one  thing  to  do. 
A  message  must  be  sent  to  Tancred,  prince  of  Antioch,  begging  him 
to  hasten  to  the  assistance  of  the  imperilled  realm,  now  deprived  of  a 
leader,  for  the  entire  hope  of  the  faithful  people,  aside  from  God, 
rested  in  him. 

Meanwhile  the  king  had  spent  the  night  on  the  battlefield.  As  soon 
as  day  returned,  however,  he  roused  his  victorious  cohorts  and  set 
out  for  Jaffa.  But  as  they  were  marching  along,  they  happened  to 
meet  the  infidels  whose  sinister  story  the  night  before  had  so  terrified 
the  people  of  Jaffa.  When  these  troops  first  caught  sight  of  the  Chris¬ 
tians,  they  supposed  them  to  be  their  own  comrades,  for  they  con¬ 
fidently  believed  that  our  army  had  been  utterly  destroyed  on  the 
previous  day.  So  they  advanced  with  assurance  and  had  almost  joined 
our  ranks,  when  the  king,  with  shouts  of  encouragement  to  his  follow¬ 
ers,  took  the  initiative  and  attacked  them.  He  was  followed  by  some 
of  his  cavalry  at  full  speed.  Fighting  gallantly  for  life,  all  fell  upon 
the  infidels.  A  desperate  fight  with  swords  at  close  quarters  ensued. 
The  enemy  were  caught  so  closely  massed  together  that  they  could 
not  escape.  Many  were  killed  and  the  rest,  panic-stricken  with  fear 
of  death,  turned  and  fled.  The  Christians  gave  thanks  to  God.  Then 
laden  with  spoils  and  enriched  by  the  enemy’s  goods,  joyously  they 
resumed  their  march  and  hastened  on  to  J aff a. 

Meanwhile,  the  hearts  of  the  people  at  Jaffa  were  utterly  pros¬ 
trated  over  the  news  of  the  disaster.  When  they  caught  sight  of  the 
returning  army,  however,  it  was  as  if  they  had  been  roused  from 


442  KING  BALDWIN  I 

heavy  sleep.  With  tears  of  joy,  they  opened  the  gates  and  rushed  forth 
to  meet  them.  They  told  of  the  sad  news  which  they  had  received 
and  of  the  depths  of  despair  into  which  they  had  been  plunged.  To¬ 
gether  they  entered  the  city  and  passed  the  day  in  joyous  celebration 
as  they  recounted  to  each  other  the  wondrous  mercy  which  the  Lord 
had  manifested  toward  them. 

When  the  king  learned  that  the  queen  and  her  advisers,  rendered 
desperate  by  fear,  had  written  to  Tancred,  he  at  once  dispatched  a 
swift  messenger  thither  with  letters  announcing  the  king’s  marvellous 
success.  The  eminent  prince,  in  great  anxiety  over  the  catastrophe 
that  had  befallen  the  realm,  was  about  to  set  out  on  the  march.  The 
news  of  the  king’s  victory  rejoiced  his  heart  greatly  and  he  gave  much 
thanks  to  the  Creator. 

19.  The  newcomer's  cafture  Tortosa  and  give  it  over  into  the 
hand  of  the  count  of  Toulouse.  They  then  froceed  to  J eru'- 
Salem.  The  king  meets  them  at  Beirut. 

Meanwhile,  the  nobles  who  had  lost  such  a  large  part  of  their  army 
in  the  land  of  Romania  by  the  tragic  disasters  already  related  had  ar¬ 
rived  at  Antioch.  Marching  on  from  there,  they  captured  from  the 
enemy  the  city  of  Tortosa,  as  related,  and  had  handed  it  over  to  the 
count  of  Toulouse.  They  then  hastened  on  toward  Jerusalem.  Mean¬ 
while,  the  king,  fearing  that  their  march  might  be  hindered  at  Dog 
river,  went  out  with  his  forces  to  meet  them  and  seized  the  pass  be¬ 
forehand.  Nor  was  this  an  easy  task  which  he  undertook  on  their 
behalf,  for  hard  by  lay  four  noble  and  populous  hostile  cities :  namely. 
Acre,  Tyre,  Sidon,  and  Beirut.  These  must  be  passed  before  he  could 
arrive  at  his  destination. 

When  the  king  with  his  company  had  surmounted  the  difficulties 
of  the  pass,  he  found  there  the  illustrious  men  mentioned  above.  They 
were:  William,  count  of  Poitou  and  duke  of  Aquitaine  j  Stephen,  count 
of  Bloisj  Stephen,  count  of  Burgundy  j  Godfrey,  count  of  Vendomej 
Hugh  de  Lusignan,  the  brother  of  Raymond,  count  of  Toulouse  j  and 
many  other  nobles.  Most  joyous  and  happy  were  they,  first,  because 
they  had  found  the  long-dreaded,  dangerous  pass  unimpeded  j  and, 
secondly,  because  the  king  was  there  to  meet  them.  They  rushed  into 
each  other’s  arms  and  exchanged  gracious  greetings  with  the  kiss  of 
peace.  Pleasant  converse  with  one  another  so  refreshed  them  that 


KING  BALDWIN  I 


443 

their  hardships  and  losses  seemed  to  have  slipped  from  their  minds. 
It  was,  indeed,  as  if  they  had  suffered  no  ill  fortune  on  the  way.  The 
king  showed  them  every  kindness  that  the  laws  of  humanity  and  af¬ 
fection  dictated.  Then  he  led  them  with  him  back  to  Jerusalem. 

As  the  feast  of  Easter  was  at  hand,  they  passed  the  festal  day  in 
the  Holy  City  and  then  went  to  Jaffa  with  the  intention  of  returning 
to  their  own  country.  There  the  count  of  Poitou,  who  was  greatly 
hampered  by  lack  of  means,  took  ship  and,  after  a  prosperous  voyage, 
arrived  safely  in  his  own  land.  The  two  Stephens  also  sailed  from 
that  port,  but  after  suffering  much  on  the  sea  for  some  days,  they  were 
compelled  by  contrary  winds  to  return  to  Jaffa. 

20.  The  Egyftmns  invade  the  land  of  the  Christians  with  vast 
forces.  The  king  marches  out  against  them.  He  engages  in 
battle  without  due  f recaution  and  is  defeated. 

All  these  pilgrims  of  whom  we  have  been  speaking  were  still  in  the 
East  when  the  people  of  Ascalon  joined  forces  with  the  Egyptians 
who  had  escaped  from  the  battle  described  above  and  invaded  our 
dominions  in  the  vicinity  of  Lydda,  Saurona,  and  Ramlah.  Their 
army  was  said  to  consist  of  about  twenty  thousand  men.  When  this 
report  reached  the  king,  he  forgot  his  usual  caution.  He  did  not  wait 
to  muster  forces  from  the  neighboring  cities  or  to  summon  the  nobles 
who  were  with  him  in  the  city,  but  depending  on  his  own  strength 
alone  he  rode  forth  rashly — nay,  in  headlong  haste — attended  by 
barely  two  hundred  knights.  The  nobles  in  the  city,  however,  real¬ 
ized  that  it  would  reflect  disgrace  upon  them  if,  in  such  a  pressing 
emergency,  they  sat  back  idly  without  sharing  in  the  labors  of  their 
brethren  j  therefore,  they  obtained  horses  from  their  friends  and 
relations  and  followed  the  lord  king. 

Baldwin  had  set  forth  ahead  of  the  rest  with  reckless  haste.  But 
when  he  surveyed  the  legions  of  the  enemy,  he  was  amazed  at  their 
multitude  and  began  to  regret  that  he  had  been  so  precipitate.  He 
now  realized  that  the  saying,  “Impetuosity  does  all  things  badly,” 
might  well  be  applied  to  him.  Deeply  he  repented  his  rash  action, 
but  he  was  already  so  close  to  the  foe  that  neither  shame  nor  peril 
of  death  permitted  him  to  retreat. 

But  in  the  enemy’s  ranks  shrewd  men  who  had  had  much  ex¬ 
perience  in  the  practice  of  arms  observed  that  the  Christian  forces. 


KING  BALDWIN  I 


444 

contrary  to  their  custom,  were  advancing  in  straggling  array  without 
regard  for  military  rules.  The  usual  companies  of  foot  soldiers  and 
the  cavalry  squadrons  were  also  lacking.  The  sight  inspired  their 
hearts  with  greater  hope  of  victory.  Accordingly,  thus  emboldened, 
they  drew  up  their  battalions  in  fighting  formation  and  made  a  massed 
attack  upon  the  king’s  forces.  This  charge  was  made  with  more  than 
usual  fury,  because  they  saw  that  the  Christians,  on  their  part,  had 
neglected  their  usual  military  order.  Overwhelmed  by  the  vast  num¬ 
bers  of  the  foe  and  their  furious  onset,  our  forces  could  not  endure 
the  stress  of  battle  and  fled  precipitately  with  the  loss  of  many  men. 

Those  who  fell  in  this  engagement,  however,  left  a  bloody  victory 
to  their  foes,  for  they  fought  valiantly  even  to  the  death  and  slew 
many  in  hand-to-hand  combat.  In  fact,  they  had  broken  up  the  enemy’s 
lines  and  were  on  the  point  of  routing  them  when  the  infidels,  seeing 
our  small  numbers  and  their  own  great  host,  regained  their  lost 
courage  and  rallied  their  forces.  They  shouted  encouragement  to  one 
another  and  once  more  came  on  in  a  furious  charge  which  put  the 
Christians  to  flight,  as  has  been  said.  Our  people  who  made  good 
their  escape  fled  to  the  town  of  Ramlah,  where  they  hoped  to  be 
safe. 

The  two  Stephens  fell  in  that  engagement,  together  with  other  no¬ 
bles  whose  names  and  number  we  do  not  remember.  We  feel  that  it 
is  a  matter  for  congratulation  that  the  noble  Count  Stephen  of  Char¬ 
tres,  an  outstanding  figure  among  his  own  people  both  on  account  of 
his  illustrious  lineage  and  on  account  of  his  glorious  deeds,  met  with 
this  fate.  It  is  evident  that  the  Lord  dealt  with  him  according  to 
His  own  great  mercy,  for  He  permitted  Stephen  to  wipe  out  by  a 
splendid  end  the  mark  of  infamy  which  his  own  conduct  had  branded 
upon  his  name  when  he  deserted  the  forces  before  Antioch.  For  since 
he  redeemed  his  reputation  by  such  a  brilliant  end,  his  former  fault 
should  not  in  justice  be  held  against  him.  We  believe,  indeed,  that 
those  who  fall  in  the  ranks  of  the  faithful,  fighting  with  the  warriors 
of  the  cross  for  the  name  of  Christ,  deserve  that  not  only  disgrace  but 
all  derelictions  and  sins  whatsoever  be  erased  from  their  records. 


KING  BALDWIN  I 


445 


21.  The  kingy  fleeing  from  the  field  of  battle y  retreats  into  the 
citadel  of  Ramlah.  Thanks  to  the  kindness  of  a  certain  Arab 
chief y  he  is  res  cued  y  but  others  are  slain  at  that  flace. 

When  the  king  saw  that  he  was  completely  surrounded  by  the  le¬ 
gions  of  the  enemy,  he  and  others  withdrew  into  the  citadel  to  escape 
the  imminent  peril  of  death,  for  there  was  no  other  place  of  refuge. 
He  felt  but  little  confidence  in  the  defenses  of  the  place,  however, 
and  during  the  whole  night  he  was  weighed  down  with  anxiety  about 
his  life  and  safety.  But  in  the  silence  of  midnight,  the  noble  Arabian 
chief  whose  wife  the  king  had  befriended  shortly  before,  as  has  been 
already  related,  secretly  left  the  enemy’s  army  and,  entirely  unat¬ 
tended,  presented  himself  before  the  citadel.  In  grateful  remembrance 
of  the  kindness  shown  her  and  loathing  the  sin  of  ingratitude,  he  ap¬ 
proached  the  sentinels  on  the  walls  and  in  low  tones  addressed  them, 
saying,  ^^I  have  a  message  to  give  to  the  king  in  all  privacy.  Cause 
me  to  be  brought  into  his  presence  at  once,  for  the  matter  is  of  the 
greatest  importance.” 

The  message  was  conveyed  to  the  king,  who  listened  to  it  and 
ordered  the  prince  to  be  brought  before  him.  On  being  admitted,  the 
Arab  made  himself  known  and  recalled  to  the  king’s  mind  the  great 
favor  recently  rendered  to  his  wife.  He  declared  that  he  was  under 
undying  obligation  to  repay  this  kindness  by  a  service  somewhat 
similar.  Thereupon  he  disclosed  the  enemy’s  plans  and  warned  the 
king  that  he  must  leave  the  fortress  at  once.  For  at  peep  of  dawn  the 
infidels  proposed  to  besiege  the  place,  and  all  prisoners  taken  therein 
would  be  sentenced  to  death.  He  urged  the  king  to  depart  with  him 
immediately  and  promised  that,  by  the  help  of  God,  he  would  him¬ 
self  conduct  him  without  hindrance  to  a  place  of  safety,  since  he  knew 
that  country  well.  Baldwin  finally  agreed  to  flee  with  the  chief.  He 
took  with  him  only  a  very  few  of  his  followers,  lest  perchance  a  larger 
number  might  rouse  the  suspicion  of  the  foe.  Under  the  guidance  of 
this  chief,  he  went  up  into  the  mountainous  country.  Here  the  Arab 
assured  the  king  that  whenever  an  opportunity  presented  itself  he 
would  show  him  loyal  obedience  and  ready  devotion.  He  then  left 
him  and  returned  to  the  army  of  the  foe. 

Encouraged  by  the  victory  just  won,  the  infidels  now  completely 
surrounded  the  citadel  and  made  a  furious  attack  on  the  fugitives  who 


KING  BALDWIN  I 


446 

had  taken  refuge  there.  They  took  the  place  by  storm  and  treated  the 
prisoners  according  to  their  own  free  pleasure.  Some  were  put  to 
death,  and  the  rest  condemned  to  be  led  in  chains  into  perpetual  slav¬ 
ery.  So  fearful  a  massacre  of  noble  and  valiant  men  is  not  to  be  found 
in  the  annals  of  the  kingdom  up  to  that  time.  The  realm  was  almost 
demoralized,  the  courage  of  all  gave  way,  and  the  hearts  of  the 
wisest  melted  within  them.  Into  such  depths  of  despair  were  they 
cast  that  had  not  the  Dayspring  from  on  high  in  all  mercy  speedily 
attended  them,  they  had  been  ready  to  leave  the  kingdom. 

Our  people  were  indeed  small  in  numbers,  nor  could  those  who 
arrived  from  countries  beyond  the  sea  with  safety  reach  the  East. 
Fear  of  the  enemy^s  coastal  cities,  of  which  there  were  many,  both  to 
the  right  and  to  the  left,  prevented  this.  For,  as  we  have  said,  of  all 
the  cities  on  the  coast,  from  Laodicea  of  Syria  even  to  the  very  border 
of  Egypt,  only  two,  Jaffa  and  the  recently  conquered  Caesarea,  were 
held  by  the  Christians.  Consequently  when  newly  arrived  pilgrims 
saw  the  weak  and  almost  desperate  state  of  the  realm,  they  returned 
to  their  own  land  as  soon  as  they  had  accomplished  their  vows,  lest 
they  too  might  be  involved  in  the  same  calamities. 


22.  The  king  escapes  by  devious  routes  and  comes  first  to  Arsuj 
and  then  to  Jaffa.  All  the  forces  of  the  realm  flock  to  his  aid. 

A  battle  is  fought  from  which  the  Christians  emerge  tri’- 
umfhant. 

As  we  have  already  related,  the  king  fled  to  the  hills,  having  lost 
his  comrades.  Rescued  by  the  aid  of  his  swift  horse  and  guided  by  the 
noble  Arab,^^  he  had  escaped,  and  throughout  that  night  he  lay  hiding 
in  lonely  places  in  great  trepidation  of  mind.  When  morning  came, 
he  set  out  with  two  companions  whom  he  chanced  to  meet,  and  fol¬ 
lowing  bypaths  through  the  midst  of  a  country  beset  by  the  enemy,  he 
at  length  arrived  safely  at  Arsuf.  Here  he  was  welcomed  with  joy  by 
the  faithful  who  dwelt  in  that  city  and,  after  taking  food,  was  greatly 
refreshed.  For  he  had  almost  collapsed  under  the  strain  of  hunger 
and  thirst  before  he  reached  that  place.  It  seemed,  indeed,  that  the 
peculiar  circumstances  surrounding  his  arrival  had  been  ordered  from 

According-  to  some  of  the  chroniclers,  Baldwin  owed  his  almost  miraculous  escape 
to  his  Arab  horse,  “Gazela,’’  rather  than  to  the  g^ratitude  of  an  Arab  chieftain.  The 
rescue  by  an  Arab  at  this  time  is  as  legendary  as  the  story  of  the  original  courtesy. 


KING  BALDWIN  I 


447 

on  high.  For  scarcely  an  hour  before  he  arrived  a  great  part  of  the 
enemy’s  force  had  departed,  after  keeping  up  a  continuous  attack 
before  the  gate  during  the  entire  day.  If,  on  his  approach,  the  king 
had  encountered  them  thus  engaged,  he  could  scarcely  have  escaped 
their  hands. 

Meanwhile,  various  reports  concerning  the  fate  of  the  king  were 
abroad,  for  the  few  who  had  escaped  from  the  battle  fled  to  Jerusalem 
and  declared  that  the  king  was  among  the  number  of  those  who 
had  fallen. 

The  bishop  of  Lydda,  on  hearing  of  the  massacre  of  the  Christians 
who  were  seized  in  the  citadel  of  Ramlah,  had  left  his  church  and  fled 
to  Jaffa.  When  asked  about  the  king,  he  confessed  that  he  knew 
nothing  about  him.  He  insisted,  however,  that  the  refugees  in  the 
citadel  had  come  to  a  pitiable  end.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  slaughter 
had  taken  place  almost  before  his  very  eyes,  and  he  did  not  hesitate  to 
acknowledge  that  he  had  fled  secretly  to  save  his  life. 

Throughout  the  entire  country  where  that  report  circulated,  every¬ 
where  was  sorrow,  everywhere  groans  and  tears.  Each  despaired  of 
his  own  life  and  hoped  only  for  speedy  death,  that  he  might  not  wit¬ 
ness  the  misfortune  of  his  people  and  behold  the  desolation  of  the 
kingdom.  At  this  crisis  when  the  entire  realm  was  given  over  to  sor¬ 
row,  mourning,  and  lamentations,  lo,  the  king,  like  the  morning  star 
which  shines  forth  in  the  midst  of  darkness,  set  out  from  Arsuf  and 
betook  himself  by  a  swift  sailing  ship  to  Jaffa.  His  arrival  was  greeted 
with  joy,  and  his  unexpected  appearance  put  to  flight  the  shadows 
and  brought  back  the  bright  day.  All  the  evils  that  had  beset  the 
path  of  the  Christians  seemed  dispelled.  The  joyful  news  spread 
rapidly  throughout  the  kingdom,  and  this  second  news  raised  to 
buoyant  hope  those  whose  spirits  had  been  cast  into  the  very  depths 
by  the  first  false  rumor. 

Meanwhile,  Hugh  de  St.  Omer,  the  lord  of  Tiberias,  hurrying  to 
the  relief  of  the  king  at  the  behest  of  the  people,  had  arrived  at  Arsuf 
with  eighty  knights.  As  soon  as  Baldwin  learned  this,  he  at  once  set 
out  to  meet  him,  accompanied  by  such  forces  as  he  was  able  to  find  at 
Jaffa.  For  the  enemy  was  roving  freely  all  through  that  district,  and 
he  feared  that  they  might  lay  ambuscades  for  Hugh  and  his  company, 
or  even  assemble  troops  and  openly  try  to  hinder  their  march.  On 
meeting,  the  two  leaders  embraced  each  other  with  heartfelt  joyj 


KING  BALDWIN  I 


448 

they  then  joined  forces  and  returned  to  Jaffa,  where  the  townspeople 
received  them  with  many  manifestations  of  delight.  Messengers  were 
immediately  dispatched  to  solicit  aid  from  the  dwellers  in  the  hills. 
These  quickly  gathered  forces  and  within  a  few  days  arrived  at  Arsuf. 
They  were  obliged  to  take  a  roundabout  route,  since  the  enemy  was 
in  full  possession  of  the  country  between.  From  Arsuf  they  were  beset 
with  the  greatest  difficulty,  even  the  peril  of  their  lives,  for  they 
encountered  the  enemy  on  the  road.  Finally,  however,  by  the  help  of 
God,  they  reached  Jaffa.  The  number  of  those  just  arrived  was  about 
ninety  and  included  knights  of  mixed  worth. 

The  arrival  of  these  allies  inspired  the  king  with  renewed  hope,  for 
he  longed  to  retaliate  upon  the  enemy  and  to  repay  with  usury  the 
wrongs  which  they  had  inflicted  upon  him.  Accordingly,  he  arranged 
his  squadrons  of  cavalry  and  his  companies  of  foot  soldiers  according 
to  the  rules  of  war  and  went  forth  against  the  foe.  He  was  indifferent 
to  their  vast  numbers,  for  his  reliance  was  on  the  help  of  the  Lord. 

The  foe  was  close  at  hand,  only  about  three  miles  distant.  They 
were  busily  engaged  in  making  mats  of  wickerwork,  ladders,  and 
machines  of  various  kinds  from  selected  material.  They  proposed 
(and  it  seemed  an  easy  task)  to  storm  the  hostile  city  and  to  capture 
the  king  and  all  those  within  as  if  they  were  the  vilest  slaves.  But  in 
the  midst  of  their  varied  activities,  lo,  the  king  with  his  army  was 
actually  upon  them.  The  infidels  at  once  perceived  that  the  adversaries 
whom  they  had  regarded  as  conquered  were  now  taking  the  initiative 
and  challenging  them  to  battle.  Wholly  without  fear  of  those  whom 
they  considered  already  vanquished,  they  seized  arms  and  made  ready 
for  the  encounter.  But  the  Christians  were  firmly  resolved  to  repay 
twice  over  the  wrongs  that  they  had  suffered.  They  came  on  with  an 
impetuous  charge,  even  as  the  lioness  whose  fury  has  been  roused 
by  the  capture  of  her  cubs.  Imbued  with  strength  from  on  high,  and 
led  by  divine  grace,  they  fought  with  all  their  strength  for  their  wives 
and  children,  for  their  fatherland,  and  for  liberty.  They  broke  up  the 
ranks  of  the  enemy  with  their  swords,  killed  a  great  many,  and  com¬ 
pelled  the  rest  to  flee  ignominiously.  On  account  of  their  small  num¬ 
bers,  however,  the  Christians  deemed  it  unwise  to  continue  the  pursuit 
very  long.  Instead,  they  went  back  to  the  enemy’s  camp,  where  they 
collected  an  enormous  amount  of  booty,  asses  and  camels,  pavilions 
and  tents.  In  addition  they  carried  off  with  them  all  sorts  of  food  and 


KING  BALDWIN  I 


449 

provisions.  Thus  the  king  returned  to  Jaffa  in  triumph.  There  the 
people  greeted  him  with  acclamations  of  joy,  and  the  realm  was  at 
peace  for  about  seven  months. 


23,  Meanwhile y  Tancred  receives  under  his  control  the  noble 
cities  oj  Afamea  and  Laodicea. 

While  these  various  activities  were  being  carried  on  throughout  the 
realm,  the  illustrious  Tancred  assembled  forces,  both  horse  and  foot, 
from  his  entire  people  and  invested  the  noble  city  of  Apamea,  the 
capital  of  Coelesyria.  For  some  time  he  continued  to  press  on  the 
siege  with  all  possible  energy,  as  is  the  custom  of  all  good  lords.  Every 
device  which  is  customarily  used  in  storming  an  enemy’s  fortress  was 
employed,  and  no  device  which  might  cause  heavy  loss  to  the  be¬ 
sieged  was  left  untried.  At  last,  by  the  aid  of  divine  mercy,  coupled 
with  his  own  indefatigable  zeal  and  gallant  efforts,  he  took  the  city. 
This  capture  extended  the  limits  of  his  principality  immensely.  On 
the  same  day,  according  to  report,  he  proceeded  to  Laodicea,  which 
was  held  by  the  Greeks,  and  received  that,  too,  under  his  domination. 
This  took  place  under  the  original  terms  agreed  upon  between  him¬ 
self  and  the  Laodiceans:  namely,  that  whenever  he  should  be  able 
to  conquer  Apamea,  on  that  same  day  the  city  of  Laodicea  also  should 
be  surrendered  to  him  without  contest.  These  two  famous  cities  are 
said  to  have  been  founded  by  Antiochus,  the  son  of  Seleucus,  who 
called  them  after  his  two  daughters,  the  one,  Apama,  and  the  other, 
Laodicea. 

We  are  now  speaking  of  Laodicea  of  Syria,  for  there  is  another 
Laodicea  which  is  numbered  among  the  seven  cities  of  Asia  Minor. 
This  latter  city  is  the  one  which  St.  John  refers  to  in  the  Apocalypse, 
as  follows:  ^^What  thou  seest,  write  in  a  book,  and  send  unto  the 
seven  churches  .  .  .  unto  Ephesus,  and  unto  Smyrna,  and  unto  Per- 
gamos,  and  unto  Thyatira,  and  unto  Sardis,  and  unto  Philadelphia,  and 
unto  Laodicea.” 

The  other  Laodicea  was  made  a  colony  by  the  Emperor  Severus, 

These  towns  were  more  probably  named  by  Seleucus,  Alexander’s  general,  for  his 
mother,  Laodice,  and  his  wife,  a  Persian  princess,  Apama.  The  city  of  Laodicea,  with 
which  the  crusaders  had  had  both  pleasant  and  unpleasant  relations  ever  since  1097, 
was  not  captured  until  1103  after  a  siege  of  a  year  and  a  half,  while  Apamea  was  not 
captured  until  1106. 

Re.  1 :  1 1 . 


KING  BALDWIN  I 


450 

according  to  the  history  of  Ulpian,  who  speaks  as  follows  about  it  in 
his  Digest  in  the  chapter  entitled  “De  censibus”:  “There  is  also  the 
colony  Laodicea  in  Syria,  to  which  the  Emperor  Severus  granted 
Italian  rights  as  reward  for  their  services  in  the  civil  war.” 

And  so  with  the  aid  of  the  Lord,  Tancred  accomplished  the  work 
of  many  days  in  one  campaign.  At  one  and  the  same  time  he  won  two 
cities,  each  of  which  had  ample  domains,  with  many  fortified  towns 
and  outlying  fields.  Tancred  was  indeed  a  man  who  loved  God  and 
was  beloved  of  Him.  Notable  for  his  faith,  renowned  for  his  valiant 
deeds,  he  was  acceptable  to  the  people  on  account  of  his  many  services  j 
in  fact  he  was  successful  in  all  he  undertook. 

24.  Baldwin  du  Bourgy  count  of  Edessay  marries  the  daughter 
of  Duke  Gabriel, 

At  this  time,  the  noble  Baldwin,  count  of  Edessa,  a  man  commend¬ 
able  in  all  respects,  who  had  succeeded  the  lord  king  in  the  county  of 
Edessa,  was  administering  the  land  subject  to  him  with  great  vigor 
and  success.  He  was  held  in  dread  and  suspicion  by  the  enemies  who 
surrounded  him.  Since  he  had  neither  wife  nor  children,  he  married 
Morfia,  daughter  of  one  Gabriel,  duke  of  Malatia,  to  whom  we  have 
referred  before.  With  her  he  received  as  dowry  a  large  sum  of  money, 
of  which  he  stood  in  great  need.  Gabriel  was  Armenian  by  birth, 
language,  and  habit,  but  Greek  in  faith.^"^ 

Baldwin’s  domains  were  in  splendid  condition,  enjoying  a  state  of 
complete  peace,  when  one  of  his  kinsmen,  Joscelin  de  Courtenay,  a 
nobleman  of  France  from  the  district  of  Gatinais,  came  to  visit  him.**® 
As  Joscelin  had  neither  lands  nor  other  wealth,  Baldwin  conferred 
upon  him  extensive  possessions  so  that  he  might  not  be  compelled  to 
turn  to  a  stranger  to  earn  a  livelihood.  This  grant  included  all  that 
part  of  Baldwin’s  own  land  lying  adjacent  to  the  great  river  Euphrates. 
It  contained  the  cities  Coritium  and  Tulupa,  the  extensive  and  well- 
fortified  castles  Turbessel,  Ham  tab,  Ravendal,  and  others.  The  count 
reserved  for  himself  the  region  beyond  the  Euphrates,  as  being  nearer 

Corf  us  juris  cimlts^  Digest^  L.  xv.  1. 

The  marriage  of  Baldwin  du  Bourg  and  Morfia,  daughter  of  Gabriel,  is  dated 
sometime  before  Bohemond’s  release  in  1103.  GabriePs  wealth  was  evidently  fabulous, 
for  he  gave  his  daughter  a  dowry  of  50,000  gold  besants  and  aided  Baldwin  on  later 
occasions  with  further  large  sums. 

Joscelin  de  Courtenay  was  a  first  cousin  of  Baldwin  du  Bourg. 


KING  BALDWIN  I  451 

to  the  enemy’s  domain,  and  retained  only  one  city  of  the  interior, 
namely,  Samosata. 

Joscelin  was  a  man  well  endowed  with  worldly  wisdom,  circum¬ 
spect  in  all  he  did.  He  displayed  much  prudence  in  the  care  and  dis¬ 
position  of  his  private  affairs  j  he  was  a  good  provider  and  the  best 
of  lords  to  those  of  his  household.  When  circumstances  demanded, 
he  showed  some  liberality,  but  at  other  times  he  was  economical,  a 
careful  conserver  of  his  domestic  goods.  He  was  temperate  in  eating 
and  paid  but  slight  attention  to  dress  and  the  adornment  of  his  body. 
He  ruled  with  earnest  care  that  portion  of  the  country  so  liberally 
granted  him  by  the  lord  count  and  possessed  all  good  things  in  great 
abundance. 


25.  Bohemond  is  released  from  the  bonds  of  the  enemy  and  re^ 
turns  to  Antioch.  The  Patriarch  Daimbert  takes  refuge  with 
him  and  is  kindly  received. 

About  this  time,  Bohemond,  prince  of  Antioch,  a  magnificent  man 
commendable  in  all  respects,  returned  to  Antioch.  After  four  years 
spent  in  the  chains  of  the  enemy,  divine  grace  looked  upon  him,  and 
on  payment  of  a  ransom  he  was  released  from  his  bonds. A  joyous 
reception  awaited  him  from  the  patriarch  and  clergy  as  well  as  from 
the  entire  populace,  for  both  the  province  and  the  kingdom  had  long 
earnestly  yearned  for  his  return.  When  he  learned  with  what  loyal 
wisdom  and  foresight  his  kinsman  Tancred  had  administered  the  princi¬ 
pality  entrusted  to  his  care  during  the  absence  of  its  lord  and  how  he 
had  extended  the  domains  of  Antioch  by  the  capture  of  two  splendid 
cities,  Bohemond  thanked  him  heartily.^®  As  proof  of  esteem  and  a 
well-merited  reward  for  his  services,  he  bestowed  upon  Tancred  and 
his  heirs  the  greater  part  of  that  region  to  be  held  by  them  in  per¬ 
petual  right,  and,  not  long  after,  he  resigned  the  entire  principality 
to  him,  as  will  be  related  in  the  following  pages. 


Bohemond  was  released  probably  in  May,  1103,  after  a  captivity  of  three  years. 
His  ransom  was  paid  by  the  Armenian  Kogh  Vasil,  Baldwin  du  Bourg,  and  Bernard, 
patriarch  of  Antioch.  William  fails  to  mention  that  Tancred  contributed  nothing  to  his 
uncle^s  release  (R.  B.  Yewdale,  Bohemond  /,  Prince  of  Antioch^  p.  96). 

William  is  apparently  determined  to  preserve  Tancred^s  reputation  as  unblem¬ 
ished.  According  to  contemporary  evidence  Bohemond  was  very  wrathful  at  Tancred 
for  his  failure  to  contribute  to  the  ransom.  He  deprived  him  not  only  of  the  principality 
but  also  of  the  places  which  he  had  conquered  (R.  L.  Nicholson,  Tancredy  pp.  136—37). 


KING  BALDWIN  I 


452 

During  this  time,  Arnulf,  archdeacon  of  Jerusalem,  to  whom  we 
have  so  often  referred,  had  continued,  according  to  his  usual  custom, 
to  sow  the  seeds  of  discord  .and  hatred  between  the  king  and  the 
Patriarch  Daimbert  in  the  hope  of  stirring  up  a  quarrel.  As  a  result, 
their  former  enmity,  which  had  apparently  died  down,  began  to 
revive.®^ 

Through  the  assiduous  efforts  of  that  same  seducer,  the  clergy  also 
had  been  roused  against  the  patriarch.  Finally  this  ill  feeling  increased 
to  such  an  extent  that  the  man  of  God,  a  lover  of  peace,  could  not  en¬ 
dure  the  constant  vexations  to  which  he  was  subjected.  He  left  his 
church  and  the  city  at  the  same  time  and,  poor  and  needy,  wholly 
bereft  of  counsel  and  aid,  fled  to  Bohemond.  The  prince  received  him 
with  great  honor,  his  sympathy  and  pity  being  roused  the  more  in 
as  much  as  he  felt  that  he  himself  had  been  mainly  responsible  for 
Daimbert’s  elevation  to  the  patriarchate  of  Jerusalem.  In  order  that 
the  man  of  God  might  not  be  obliged  to  live  with  him  under  condi¬ 
tions  ill  befitting  one  of  so  lofty  a  station,  Bohemond  generously  as¬ 
signed  him  a  benefice.  With  the  consent  of  Bernard,  patriarch  of  An¬ 
tioch,  he  was  granted  the  church  of  St.  George,  below  the  city  of 
Antioch,  together  with  its  great  estates  and  rich  revenues.  There,  up 
to  the  time  when  Bohemond  crossed  to  Apulia,  as  will  be  related 
presently,  Daimbert  dwelt  continuously  with  him. 

t 

26.  After  the  exfulsion  of  Daimbert y  one  Ebremar  is  f laced 
without  sanction  over  the  church  at  J erusalem.  The  king 
besieges  A  ere  without  success »  As  he  is  returning  thence y  he  is 
seriously  wounded, 

w 

Now,  led  astray  by  the  wicked  Arnulf,  the  king  departed  from  the 
fear  of  the  Lord  and,  after  the  expulsion  of  Daimbert,  was  guilty  of 
even  worse  acts.  For  he  thrust  into  the  patriarchal  chair  a  simple- 
minded  priest  of  deep  religious  character,  named  Ebremar.  This 
priest,  a  plain  man,  had  come  with  the  first  expedition  and,  because 
of  his  upright  life,  was  highly  esteemed  by  all.  But  in  this  matter 

The  most  detailed  account  o£  the  resumption  of  this  quarrel  is  given  by  Albert. 
William  fails  to  mention  that  charges  had  been  brought  against  Daimbert,  who  was 
tried  by  a  synod  at  Jerusalem  over  which  the  papal  legate,  Robert,  presided  on  Octo¬ 
ber  2,  1102.  Daimbert  was  declared  deposed  and  left  Jerusalem  in  the  company  of 
Tancred,  who  had  taken  part  in  the  recent  campaign  against  the  Egyptians.  Daimbert 
was  apparently  content  to  remain  in  Antioch  for  nearly  two  years  before  making  his 
appeal  to  the  papacy. 


KING  BALDWIN  I 


453 

he  showed  himself  to  be  a  man  of  stupid  and  thoughtless  ignorance, 
since  he  believed  that  he  would  be  permitted  to  usurp  the  patriarchal 
throne  while  the  rightful  Incumbent  was  still  living. 

Likewise  in  this  same  year,  which  was  the  year  1103  of  the  In¬ 
carnation  of  the  Lord,  toward  the  beginning  of  spring,  the  king,  after 
observing  the  feast  of  the  Lord’s  resurrection  at  Jerusalem,  called  out 
all  the  forces  of  the  kingdom  and  laid  siege  to  Acre.^^ 

Acre  is  a  city  on  the  seacoast  in  the  province  of  Phoenicia,  one  of 
the  suffragan  cities  which  is  under  the  metropolis  of  Tyre.  Its  double 
harbor,  lying  both  inside  and  outside  the  walls,  offers  a  safe  and  tran¬ 
quil  anchorage  to  ships.  It  is  well  located  between  the  mountains  and 
the  sea  and  possesses  wide  domains  with  rich  and  fertile  fields.  The 
river  Belus  flows  past  the  city. 

According  to  the  story  generally  received,  it  was  founded  by  two 
brothers,  Ptolemais  and  Acco.  They  fortified  it  with  walls  of  solid 
masonry  and  divided  it  into  two  sections,  which  were  called  from  their 
names.  Hence  even  today  it  is  known  indifferently  as  Ptolemais  or 
Acre,  as  is  the  case  with  most  of  the  cities  of  Syria,  each  of  which  has, 
as  a  rule,  two  or  even  three  names. 

Hither  came  the  king  with  his  legions,  but,  as  he  had  no  fleet,  he 
was  unable  to  shut  it  in  so  that  it  would  be  forced  to  surrender.  How¬ 
ever,  he  cut  down  the  orchards  which  surrounded  it,  killed  some  of 
the  townspeople,  and  drove  off  as  booty  the  flocks  and  herds  found 
outside  the  city.  Then  he  raised  the  siege  and  departed  to  his  own 
land. 

He  intended  to  return  through  Caesarea.  It  chanced,  however, 
that  at  a  place  called  Petra  Incisa  near  ancient  Tyre,  between  Ca- 
pharnaum  and  Dora,  which  today  is  known  as  Districtum  [the  Pass] , 
he  encountered  brigands  and  highway  robbers.  They  were  hiding  in 
ambush,  but  the  king  fell  upon  them  fiercely,  killed  most  of  them,  and 
put  the  rest  to  flight.  One  of  them,  however,  as  he  fled,  hurled  a 
javelin  which  by  ill  luck  struck  the  king.  It  entered  from  behind 
through  the  ribs  near  the  heart  and  just  missed  dealing  a  fatal  blow. 
The  care  of  the  physicians,  however,  with  their  use  of  incisions  and 
cautery,  at  length  restored  Baldwin  to  some  degree  of  health,  but  at 
certain  times  ever  after  he  suffered  a  recurrence  of  trouble  from  this 
wound.®^ 

This  ineffective  siege  occurred  during  April  and  May,  1103. 

This  accident  befell  Baldwin  sometime  in  July,  1103. 


454 


KING  BALDWIN  I 


27.  The  count  oj  Toulouse  hudds  a  fortress  before  the  city  of 
Tripoli  and  calls  it  Mount  of  the  Pilgrims. 

During  this  same  time,  Raymond,  count  of  Toulouse,  of  good 
memory,  a  most  excellent  and  magnificent  man  and  a  true  worshipper 
of  God,  had  conquered  the  city  known  as  Tortosa  and  was  showing 
great  energy  and  prowess  in  the  work  of  extending  his  domains  round 
about.  Anxious  to  make  use  of  every  means  to  drive  the  adversaries 
of  the  Christian  name  out  of  those  lands,  he  had  built  a  fortress  on  a 
hill  facing  the  city  of  Tripoli,  about  two  miles  away.  Since  the  place 
was  founded  by  pilgrims,  he  gave  it  a  name  reminiscent  of  that  cir¬ 
cumstance,  that  it  might  be  known  forever  as  the  Mount  of  the  Pil¬ 
grims.  This  name  survives  even  to  the  present  day. 

The  Mount  of  the  Pilgrims  is  well  fortified  both  by  its  natural  site 
and  by  the  skill  of  those  who  built  it.  From  it  as  a  base,  almost  daily 
Raymond  caused  new  trouble  to  the  people  of  Tripoli.  As  the  result 
of  this  constant  harrying,  the  natives  of  the  entire  district  and  even 
those  who  dwelt  in  the  city  itself  were  forced  to  pay  him  an  annual 
tribute  and  in  all  matters  obeyed  him  as  if  he  owned  the  city  with¬ 
out  dispute. 

In  that  place,  his  wife,  a  woman  devoted  to  God,  bore  him  a  son 
who  received  the  ancestral  name  Alphonse,  and  who  later  succeeded 
his  father  as  count  of  Toulouse.®^ 

28.  The  king  besieges  Acre  a  second  time^  and  with  the  assistance 
of  the  Genoese  takes  the  flace  by  force. 

In  the  year  of  the  Incarnation  of  the  Lord  1104,  in  the  month  of 
May,  Baldwin  mustered  the  entire  strength  of  his  people,  from  the 
least  even  unto  the  greatest,  and  hastened  to  Acre  to  lay  siege  to  that 
city  a  second  time.  He  had  seized  the  opportunity  as  most  auspicious, 
because  just  at  that  time  a  fleet  from  Genoa  of  seventy  beaked  ships 
called  galleys  had  arrived  at  the  land  of  Syria.  As  soon  as  the  king 
learned  of  their  arrival,  he  sent  a  message  to  the  commanders  of  the 
fleet,  inviting  them  in  a  friendly  way  to  fight  for  Christ  before  going 
back  to  their  own  land.  He  called  their  attention  to  the  good  ex- 

Alphonse  was  named  for  his  maternal  grandfather,  Alphonse,  king  of  Castile, 
whose  natural  daughter,  Elvira,  was  the  third  wife  of  Count  Raymond.  He  had  the 
distinction  of  being  a  Western  feudal  lord,  born  in  the  Holy  Land. 


KING  BALDWIN  I 


455 

ample  set  by  their  fellow  citizens  whose  zealous  work  had  helped  win 
for  the  realm  the  city  of  Caesarea,  whereby  everlasting  glory  had 
accrued  to  the  citizens  of  Genoa  and,  in  addition,  much  worldly  recom¬ 
pense. 

Through  the  able  work  of  shrewd  and  diplomatic  mediators  who 
exerted  themselves  nobly  to  effect  the  negotiation,  an  agreement  with 
these  people  was  reached.  On  condition  that  they  should  be  given  in 
perpetuity  a  third  part  of  the  returns  and  revenues  collected  at  the 
port  of  Acre  from  sea-borne  imports  and  in  addition  be  granted  a 
church  in  the  city  and  full  jurisdiction  over  one  street,  the  Genoese 
consented  to  lend  loyal  aid  in  taking  the  aforesaid  city.  These  terms 
proved  acceptable  to  the  king  and  his  chief  men  3  the  agreement  was 
confirmed  by  an  exchange  of  oaths  and  committed  to  writing  to  be 
preserved  forever  under  the  form  of  a  charter. 

On  the  day  set,  the  Genoese  blockaded  Acre  by  sea,  and  the  king 
with  his  forces  laid  siege  on  land.  All  possibility  of  exit  and  entrance 
was  completely  shut  off  by  the  encircling  camp,  and  the  citizens  suf¬ 
fered  all  the  innumerable  ills  which  always  attend  a  siege.  Machines 
such  as  the  fertile  ingenuity  of  experts  is  wont  to  devise  were  placed 
in  position  round  the  city  for  the  destruction  of  the  enemy  3  towers  also 
were  erected  from  which  were  hurled  huge  rocks,  whose  constant  bat¬ 
tering  shattered  the  ramparts  and  even  destroyed  buildings  within 
the  city  itself. 

Exhausted  by  repeated  engagements  both  with  the  fleet  which 
guarded  the  shore  and  with  the  king’s  army  on  land,  their  numbers 
depleted  by  the  loss  of  many  defenders  through  various  mishaps,  the 
enemy  found  it  difficult  to  bear  the  constant  pressure  of  the  besiegers. 
Accordingly,  when  for  twenty  successive  days  the  Christian  warriors 
had  put  forth  all  their  strength  in  assaulting  and  the  infidels  with  like 
persistency  had  resisted,  the  city  was  finally  surrendered  to  the  king. 
The  stipulations  imposed  were  that  those  who  wished  to  leave  should 
be  permitted  to  depart  freely  wherever  they  would,  taking  with  them 
their  wives  and  children  and  all  their  movable  possessions.  Those 
who  chose  to  remain  in  their  homes,  however,  and  not  to  desert  their 
native  soil  might  enjoy  favorable  conditions  by  the  payment  of  a  fixed 
sum  annually  to  the  king. 

William  had  probably  seen  this  document  in  the  archives.  His  mention  of  it  reveals 
his  unusual  interest  in  diplomacy,  law,  and  commerce. 


KING  BALDWIN  I 


456 

As  soon  as  the  city  was  won,  the  king  assigned  possessions  and  dom¬ 
iciles  to  the  Genoese  according  to  the  services  rendered  by  each  man. 
Thus,  for  the  first  time,  a  safe  and  convenient  approach  was  opened 
to  those  arriving  by  sea,  a  more  commodious  anchorage  was  gained, 
and  the  shore  freed,  to  some  extent  at  least,  from  the  attacks  of  the 
foe. 

29.  Haran  of  Mesopotamia  Is  besieged  by  Tancredy  Baldzuifiy 
and  others.  The  citizens y  forced  by  hunger y  resolve  to  sur- 
render  the  city. 

In  this  same  year,  Bohemond,  accompanied  by  all  the  leading  men 
of  his  province,  Tancred,  Baldwin,  count  of  Edessa,  and  Joscelin,  the 
latter^s  kinsman,  united  and,  with  mutual  accord,  agreed  to  cross  the 
Euphrates  and  besiege  the  city  of  Carrhae  [Haran]  near  Edessa, 
which  was  held  by  the  infidels.  In  accordance  with  this  proposition, 
each  leader  zealously  convoked  military  forces  from  his  own  land, 
gathered  allies  from  all  around,  and,  on  the  day  appointed,  crossed 
the  Euphrates  and  came  to  Edessa. 

Three  venerable  men,  distinguished  lights  of  the  church,  took  part 
in  this  ill-fated  expedition:  namely,  Bernard,  patriarch  of  Antioch j 
Daimbert,  patriarch  of  Jerusalem,  an  exiled  wanderer  and  refugee, 
who  was  at  that  time  living  at  Antioch  5  and  Benedict,  archbishop  of 
Edessa. 

All  these  leaders,  intent  on  carrying  out  their  project,  assembled 
at  the  city  just  mentioned  and  then,  at  the  head  of  their  legions,  ad¬ 
vanced  toward  the  place  of  their  destination. 

We  learn  from  histories  of  olden  times  that  Haran  is  the  place 
to  which  Terah  led  “Abram  his  son,  and  Lot  the  son  of  Haran  his 
son’s  son,”  when  they  left  Ur  of  the  Chaldees  and  went  into  the  land 
of  Canaan  to  live,  according  to  the  story  contained  in  the  book  of 
Genesis.  There,  too,  Terah  died,  and  there  also  Abraham  received 
the  Lord’s  command  to  leave  his  land  and  his  kinsfolk  and  follow 
the  promises  of  God.^®  This  is  the  place,  too,  where  Crassus,  the  Ro¬ 
man  dictator,  was  forced  by  the  Parthians  to  drink  the  gold  for  which 
he  had  been  so  eager. 

Immediately  after  arriving  at  Haran,  the  leaders  blockaded  the 
city  closely,  as  had  been  their  plan  from  the  first.  There  was,  how- 

Ge.  11:31,  12:3. 


KING  BALDWIN  I 


457 

everj  slight  need  of  assaulting  the  place,  for  the  supply  of  provisions 
within  the  city  was  scanty — in  fact,  almost  nothing.  It  was  necessary 
only  to  use  some  means  of  preventing  the  besieged  from  going  back 
and  forth.  The  reason  for  this  lack  of  food  was  as  follows:  a  long  time 
before  this,  Baldwin  had  earnestly  applied  himself  to  working  out 
some  method  by  which  the  citizens  might  be  driven  to  such  destitu¬ 
tion  that  they  would  finally  be  forced  through  hunger  to  surrender 
the  city  to  him.  The  following  was  the  method  which  seemed  best 
adapted  for  accomplishing  his  design. 

Edessa  and  Haran  were  barely  fourteen  miles  apart.  Between  them 
flowed  a  river  whose  waters,  conducted  by  canals,  served  to  irrigate 
the  adjacent  plain  and  rendered  it  so  fertile  that  it  produced  abundant 
crops.  From  the  earliest  times  it  had  been  understood  that  all  which 
was  grown  on  this  side  of  the  river  should  belong  to  the  people  of 
Edessa  without  dispute,  while  that  produced  in  the  fields  beyond  the 
river  should  be  the  property  of  the  inhabitants  of  Haran. 

Baldwin  knew  that  no  provisions  could  come  to  the  enemy  from 
without  but  that  they  themselves  must  raise  all  their  food  on  this 
common  ground.  He  preferred,  therefore,  to  suffer  inconvenience 
himself  rather  than  allow  the  foe,  who  could  not  readily  be  supplied 
from  elsewhere,  to  be  nourished  from  these  common  fields.  Accord¬ 
ingly,  now  for  a  long  time  by  making  frequent  sallies  upon  them  he 
had  prevented  them  from  practicing  agriculture  there.  He  hoped  and 
believed  that  he  would  be  able  to  secure  ample  provisions  for  his  own 
citizens  from  the  region  lying  beyond  the  Euphrates  as  well  as  from 
the  country  midway  between  Edessa  and  that  river.  But  the  people 
of  Haran,  deprived  of  the  supplies  which  they  had  been  accustomed 
to  obtain  from  this  common  land,  would,  according  to  his  forecast, 
be  reduced  to  a  condition  of  desperate  need.  The  result  proved  that 
he  was  correct.  For  several  years  past  he  had  prevented  them  from 
cultivating  these  fields,  and  thus  it  was  that  the  besiegers  found  the 
city  in  great  distress,  as  we  have  said,  from  lack  of  food.  Yet  the  citi¬ 
zens,  having  long  been  aware  that  the  Christians  were  coming,  had 
sent  letters  and  messengers  to  the  princes  of  the  Orient,  begging  them 
for  assistance  and  stating  that  they  would  have  to  give  way  unless  help 
came  to  them  soon.  Meanwhile,  the  pressure  of  famine  daily  increased, 
and  they  saw  that  their  hope  of  relief  from  the  princes  to  whom  they 
had  appealed  was  futile.  Therefore,  after  holding  counsel  with  one 


KING  BALDWIN  I 


458 

another,  they  decided  that  it  was  better  to  surrender  the  city  than  to 
waste  away  within  its  walls  through  hunger  and  to  perish  from  lack 
of  food- 

30.  The  Christians  lose  the  city  while  they  are  disfuting  over  the 
question  of  who  shall  rule  it.  Aid  comes  to  the  besieged.  A 
battle  is  fought  there  at  close  quarters.  The  Christians  are 
routed  under  conditions  of  extreme  danger  to  themselves. 

On  making  this  decision,  the  townspeople  went  forth  and  surrendered 
unconditionally  to  the  besiegers.  At  this  juncture,  however,  an  un¬ 
fortunate  contention,  due  to  jealousy,  arose  among  the  leaders.  Prince 
Bohemond  and  Count  Baldwin  began  to  wrangle  over  the  question  as 
to  which  one  of  them  should  receive  the  city  and  whose  standard 
should  lead  the  way  into  the  city.  As  a  result,  the  actual  surrender 
was  deferred  until  the  morrow,  that  there  might  be  time  to  give  care¬ 
ful  consideration  to  that  trifling  matter.  And  so  they  learned  by  real 
experience  the  truth  of  the  saying,  “Delay  drags  danger  along  in  its 
train,”  as  well  as  this  other  proverb,  “When  all  is  ready,  it  is  hazard¬ 
ous  to  delay.”  For  before  the  following  day  dawned,  a  vast  host  of 
enemies  had  arrived,  an  army  of  Turks  so  numerous  and  formidable 
that  the  Christians  began  to  doubt  whether  it  would  be  possible  to 
save  even  their  lives. 

The  relief  forces  brought  with  them  vast  supplies  of  provisions. 
With  shrewd  foresight  they  had  adopted  the  wise  plan  of  dividing 
their  troops  into  two  contingents.  One  of  these  was  to  engage  the 
Christians  without  regard  to  the  outcome,  whether  successful  or  disas¬ 
trous,  and  in  the  meantime  the  other  was  to  supply  the  city  with  food. 
This  plan  was  carried  out.  Soon  after  daybreak,  the  infidel  leaders  at 
once  drew  up  their  forces  in  battle  array  and  arranged  their  lines  as 
if  for  immediate  conflict,  while  those  who  had  the  responsibility  for 
the  baggage  were  stationed  somewhat  apart  from  the  rest. 

Although  the  infidels  were  preparing  for  battle,  they  had  little 
hope  of  success  or  even  of  keeping  up  a  show  of  resistance  very  long, 
their  only  purpose  being  to  engage  the  Christians  in  battle  so  that 
supplies  might  be  carried  into  the  beleaguered  city. 

When  our  leaders  saw  the  enemy  making  these  preparations,  they 
in  their  turn  drew  up  their  forces  in  battle  formation.  The  two  patri¬ 
archs  went  among  the  soldiers  and  strove  with  words  of  exhortation 


KING  BALDWIN  I 


459 

to  inspire  them  with  courage  j  but,  since  the  favor  of  God  was  lacking, 
their  admonitions  were  without  result.  At  the  first  encounter  the 
enemy  became  masters  of  the  field,  for  the  Christians  turned  their 
backs  on  the  foe  in  disgraceful  flight,  abandoned  their  camp  with  all 
it  contained,  and  thought  only  of  seeking  safety,  which,  alas,  was 
nowhere  to  be  found.  The  infidels  at  once  cast  aside  their  bows,  their 
customary  weapons,  and  fought  with  their  swords  in  a  hand-to-hand 
combat  in  which  the  Christians  were  almost  annihilated. 

The  count  of  Edessa  and  Joscelin,  his  kinsman,  were  taken  prison¬ 
ers  and  carried  off  in  chains  to  a  far  distant  part  of  the  enemy ^s  land. 
Bohemond,  however,  with  Tancred  and  the  two  patriarchs,  escaped 
from  the  tumult  while  the  battle  was  still  raging  and,  by  carefully 
choosing  sequestered  bypaths,  succeeded  in  reaching  Edessa  in  safety. 
The  archbishop  of  that  city,  a  man  without  experience  in  warfare,  was 
caught  in  the  warring  crowd  and  taken  prisoner.  Thus  the  number 
of  captives  was  increased.  But  he  chanced  to  fall  into  the  custody  of  a 
certain  Christian.  When  this  man  discovered  the  identity  of  the  arch¬ 
bishop,  he  was  moved  by  loving  compassion  and  permitted  him  to 
escape  uninjured,  although  by  this  action  he  risked  his  own  life. 
Within  a  few  days,  the  archbishop,  under  the  protection  of  God,  re¬ 
turned  to  Edessa  where  he  was  received  with  many  manifestations  of 

joy*  ^ 

The  prince  of  Antioch  was  still  at  Edessa  when  the  news  came  that 
the  count,  in  punishment  for  his  sins,  had  been  taken  prisoner  by  the 
enemy.  It  was  his  opinion,  in  which  the  citizens  concurred,  that 
Edessa  and  the  entire  region  should  be  placed  under  the  care  of 
Tancred,  with  the  understanding,  however,  that  on  the  release  of  the 
count,  the  government  should  be  restored  to  him  immediately  with¬ 
out  dispute.  Bohemond  took  Joscelin’s  land  under  his  own  care. 

Never  during  the  rule  of  the  Latins  in  the  East,  whether  before 
or  after  this  event,  do  we  read  of  a  battle  so  disastrous  as  this  one, 
which  resulted  in  so  terrible  a  massacre  of  brave  men  and  so  disgrace¬ 
ful  a  flight  of  the  people  of  our  race.^*^ 

This  battle  occurred  in  the  spring’  of  1104.  Qalanisi  dates  it  May  7,  1104,  and 
names  the  Muslim  leaders  as  Sukman  Ibn  Ortuq  and  Jikirmish,  lord  of  Mosul  (H.  A.  R. 
Gibb,  trans.,  The  Damascus  Chronicle^  p.  60). 


HERE  ENDS  THE  TENTH  BOOK 


THE  ELEVENTH  BOOK  BEGINS 


END  OF  THE  REIGN  OF  BALDWIN  I: 
FURTHER  CONQUESTS  BY  JERUSALEM 

AND  ANTIOCH 


I.  Bohemond,  frince  of  Antiochy  intrusts  the  care  of  his  frinci- 
fality  to  Tancred  and  hastens  across  the  sea  to  France,  He 
marries  the  daughter  of  the  king  of  the  Franks,  Daimberty 
'patriarch  of  J erusalemy  goes  to  Rome,  The  king  abandons 
his  legitimate  wife  without  legal  procedure. 

When  the  summer  was  over,  Bohemond,  accompanied  by  Daimbert, 
patriarch  of  Jerusalem,  sailed  for  Apulia.  He  was  burdened  with 
heavy  debts,  and  in  the  lands  across  the  sea  he  hoped  to  obtain  means 
for  the  payment  of  his  obligations  and  also  to  bring  back  reinforce¬ 
ments  of  knights.  To  his  beloved  kinsman,  Tancred,  he  intrusted  the 
responsibility  and  general  administration  of  his  principality  with  full 
powers.^ 

On  arriving  in  Apulia,  he  made  a  short  stay  in  his  own  country.^ 
He  then  crossed  the  Alps,  accompanied  by  an  honorable  retinue  of 
loyal  followers,  and  came  to  the  court  of  Philip,  the  illustrious  king 
of  the  Franks.  The  latter  bestowed  upon  him,  as  one  of  many  favors, 
two  of  his  own  daughters.  Constance,  the  child  of  a  legitimate  mar¬ 
riage,  the  prince  took  as  his  wife  in  the  bonds  of  matrimony;  ^  the 
other,  Cecilia,  he  sent  from  Apulia  as  the  destined  bride  of  his  nephew, 
Tancred.^  This  maiden  was  the  daughter  of  the  countess  of  Anjou, 

^  Fall  of  H04.  The  fleet  of  thirteen  ships  on  which  he  sailed  evaded  the  Greeks 
and  reached  Bari,  January,  1105.  Evidently  Emperor  Alexius  already  had  suspicions 
of  Bohemond’s  ultimate  plans  (R.  B.  Yewdale,  Bohemond  7,  Prince  of  Antioch^  p.  102). 

-  He  spent  a  year  in  Italy,  though  relatively  little  of  the  time  in  Bari.  He  saw  Pope 
Paschal  II  several  times.  His  departure  across  the  Alps  is  dated  early  in  1106  (Yewdale, 
Bohemond  7,  p.  108), 

®  Constance  was  the  daughter  of  Philip  I  and  his  first  wife,  Bertha  of  Holland.  She 
had  been  married  to  Hugh  I,  count  of  Champagne,  but  was  separated  from  him  on 
grounds  of  consanguinity  by  early  1105. 

^  Cecilia  was  the  daughter  of  Philip  I  and  his  second  wife,  Bertrada  de  Montfort. 
This  marriage,  though  performed  by  a  compliant  bishop,  did  not  receive  the  sanction 
of  the  church  and  was  one  of  the  causes  for  the  excommunication  of  Philip.  Bertrada 
had  been  married  to  Fulk  IV  of  Anjou,  from  whom  Philip  had  seized  her.  He  put  aside 


END  OF  REIGN  OF  BALDWIN  I  461 

who  deserted  her  husband  for  Philip  and  bore  him  this  child  while 
his  wife  was  still  living. 

After  accomplishing  his  business  with  the  king  and  attending  to 
affairs  in  other  lands  beyond  the  mountains,  Bohemond  returned  to 
Apulia.  He  led  with  him  a  large  company  of  both  knights  and  foot 
soldiers  who  desired  to  make  the  pilgrimage  across  the  sea. 

Daimbert,  however,  proceeded  to  the  church  at  Rome  and  there 
unfolded  the  full  measure  of  the  wrongs  under  which  he  was  suffer¬ 
ing.  At  the  same  time,  he  described  in  detail  the  success  of  ArnulPs 
treachery  and  the  wicked  purposes  of  the  king,  whereby  he  was  try¬ 
ing  to  humiliate  the  Church  of  God.  The  patriarch’s  story  excited  the 
sympathy  of  all  and  won  for  him  universal  favor.  Not  only  had  the 
king,  contrary  to  the  rules  of  the  Church,  committed  the  monstrous 
offense  against  Daimbert  which  I  have  mentioned,^  but,  in  addition, 
he  had  put  away  his  legitimate  wife,  whom  he  had  married  at  Edessa 
while  he  was  count  of  that  place.®  Regardless  of  the  rights  of  matri¬ 
mony  and  without  procedure  of  law,  he  compelled  her,  though  she 
had  been  convicted  of  no  crime  and  had  confessed  none,  to  become  a 
nun  in  the  convent  of  St.  Anna,  the  mother  of  the  Mother  of  God, 
the  immaculate  Virgin  Mary.*^ 

This  convent  is  situated  in  the  eastern  part  of  Jerusalem,  near  the 
gate  called  the  gate  of  Jehoshaphat  and  close  by  the  lake  which  in 
early  times  was  known  as  the  sheep  pool.  A  grotto  is  still  shown  there 
where,  according  to  ancient  tradition,  Joachim  and  Anna  lived  and 
where  the  immaculate  Virgin  is  said  to  have  been  born.  In  that  con¬ 
vent  three  or  four  poor  women  had  professed  the  religious  life,  and 
the  king,  for  the  sake  of  placing  his  wife  with  them,  enlarged  their 
possessions  and  extended  their  patrimony. 

Many  and  varied  reasons  have  been  given  to  account  for  Baldwin’s 
separation  from  his  wife.  Some  say  that  the  king  dismissed  her  in  or- 


his  legitimate  wife,  Bertha,  whose  relatives  joined  Fulk  in  appealing  to  the  pope  for 
redress. 

®  Presumably  the  deposition  of  Daimbert  (Book  X,  chaps.  25  and  26),  DaimberPs 
delay  in  appealing  from  the  decision  of  the  council  at  Jerusalem,  October,  1102,  raises 
a  question  whether  this  appeal  was  not  suggested  by  Bohemond.  Doubtless  Bohemond, 
in  his  several  visits  with  the  pope  in  1105,  strongly  supported  Daimbert^s  case. 

®  This  was  Arda,  the  daughter  of  Thoros  I,  whom  Baldwin  had  married  at  Edessa 
in  109S. 

^  The  convent  of  St.  Anna  became  one  of  the  most  popular  and  wealthiest  of  the 
monastic  foundations  restored  or  set  up  by  the  Latins. 


END  OF  REIGN  OF  BALDWIN  I 


462 

der  to  marry  a  richer  woman  of  higher  rank.®  In  this  way  he  could 
improve  his  condition  and  relieve  the  poverty  which  weighed  so  heav¬ 
ily  on  him,  for  he  would  acquire  wealth  from  outside  under  the  name 
of  dowry.  Others  claim  that  the  queen  was  indiscreet  and  careless  in 
observing  the  bonds  of  marriage  and  thus  had  incurred  the  anger  of 
her  husband. 

At  first  she  appeared  content  to  put  on  the  habit  of  religion,  and, 
in  the  early  period  of  her  profession,  she  lived  an  honorable  life,  to  all 
appearance,  in  that  monastery.  Finally,  however,  she  seized  a  fa¬ 
vorable  opportunity  to  approach  the  king  and,  by  false  stories,  ob 
tained  permission  to  visit  her  kindred  at  Constantinople.  She  claimed 
that  she  wished  to  obtain  means  to  relieve  the  poverty  of  her  com¬ 
munity  and,  under  this  pretext,  left  the  realm.  But  she  at  once  laid 
aside  the  habit  of  religion  and  began  to  abandon  herself  to  a  sordid 
and  immoral  life.  Without  regard  for  her  reputation  and  the  queenly 
dignity  of  her  former  estate,  she  prostituted  herself  to  all  who  came.® 


2.  Raymondy  count  of  ToulousCy  dies,  William  Jordany  his 
nefheWy  succeeds  him,  RidwaUy  a  powerful  Turkish  chief y 
invades  our  territories .  Tancred  attacks  him  and  compels 
him  to  flee  in  disorder. 

On  the  last  day  of  February,  in  the  following  year,  which  was  the 
year  1105  of  the  Incarnation  of  our  Lord,  Raymond,  count  of  Tou¬ 
louse,  of  good  memory,  died  at  the  castle  which  he  had  built  before 
Tripoli  and  called  Mount  of  the  Pilgrims.  He  was  a  religious  and 
God-fearing  man,  a  true  confessor  of  Christ,  worthy  of  praise  in  every 
respect,  one  whose  deeds  of  prowess  and  life  of  notable  virtues  merit 
a  special  treatise. 

He  was  succeeded  by  William  Jordan,  a  nephew,  who  carried  on 

the  siege  of  Tripoli  with  the  same  earnest  care  and  devoted  himself 

/ 

®  This  explanation  is  preferred  by  some  modern  writers  who  think  that  her  chief 
defect  was  her  father’s  failure  to  complete  the  payment  of  her  dowry.  This,  coupled 
with  the  fact  that  she  had  borne  no  children  and  the  further  fact  that  Baldwin  was 
greatly  in  need  of  money  and  other  help,  might  have  accounted  for  Baldwin’s  dis¬ 
missal  of  her. 

®  This  story,  which  would  be  hard  to  substantiate,  is  discredited  by  Iskenderian  who 
feels  that  the  later  decision  to  restore  her  to  her  rightful  place  (chap.  29)  completely 
refutes  the  slander  (Galust  T.  Iskendarian,  Die  Kreuzfahrer  und  ihre  Beziehungen 
zu  den  armenischen  N achbarfilrsten  bis  zum  Vnter gauge  der  Grafschaft  Edessa^  p.  59, 
note  215). 


END  OF  REIGN  OF  BALDWIN  I 


463 

with  intrepid  valor  to  the  task,  until  the  arrival  of  Count  Bertram. 
Then,  however,  disagreements  arose  over  the  matter  and  he  relaxed 
his  efforts  somewhat,  as  will  be  related  presently. 

We  believe  that  the  notable  perseverance  and  courage  of  the  ven¬ 
erable  Raymond  should  be  admired  and  lauded  not  only  by  the  pres¬ 
ent  generation  but  by  those  of  the  future  as  well.  For  when  he  had 
once  undertaken  the  pilgrimage  for  Christ,  he  patiently  and  reso¬ 
lutely  continued  on  that  way  to  the  very  end  of  his  life.  In  his  native 
land  he  was  a  distinguished  man  of  very  great  power,  possessed  of 
extensive  ancestral  holdings,  and  he  might  have  had  in  abundance 
everything  he  desired.  Yet  he  chose  to  leave  land  and  kindred  in 
humble  obedience  to  the  Lord  rather  than  to  flourish  in  the  taber¬ 
nacles  of  sinners  among  his  own  people.  After  the  Holy  City  had  been 
restored  to  freedom,  the  other  leaders  who  had  undertaken  the  same 
pilgrimage  felt  that  they  had  obtained  the  fulfillment  of  their  desires 
and  returned  to  their  own  lands.  But  he,  having  once  assumed  the 
cross,  feared  to  lay  it  aside.  Even  when  his  own  friends  and  members 
of  his  household  eagerly  suggested  that,  since  his  vow  had  been  ac¬ 
complished,  he  should  return  to  the  country  which  so  longed  for  his 
presence,  he  preferred  to  offer  himself  as  a  holocaust  to  the  Lord, 
rather  than  to  return  to  the  attractions  of  the  world.  In  this  he  fol¬ 
lowed  the  example  of  his  Master,  who,  when  they  said  to  Him,  “De¬ 
scend  from  the  cross,”  preferred,  after  His  passion  was  ended,  to  be 
taken  down  by  the  hands  of  strangers,  rather  than  to  fail  in  the  work 
which  He  had  undertaken  for  our  redemption.^® 

During  the  same  year  also,  Ridwan,  lord  of  Aleppo,  a  powerful 
prince,  gathered  allies  from  the  regions  near  by,  both  by  entreaty  and 
by  promise  of  payment,  and  with  a  vast  host  entered  the  land  of 
Antioch.  The  whole  district  was  terrorized  by  his  inroads  and  by  the 
repeated  conflagrations  which  he  caused.  As  soon  as  Tancred  learned 
this,  he  summoned  his  forces,  both  knights  and  foot  soldiers,  and 
marched  to  the  place  where,  as  all  reports  agreed,  the  army  of  Rid¬ 
wan  was  assembled.  He  set  out  from  Antioch  and  led  his  army  to 
Artasium.  Here,  as  had  been  reported,  he  found  a  vast  number  of  the 
enemy  assembled.  After  first  invoking  aid  from  on  high  and  obtain¬ 
ing  it,  as  his  merits  deserved,  he  attacked  the  foe  with  vigor.  Although 

William  here  probably  rejflects  a  g^eneral  change  in  opinion  towards  Raymond, 
whose  conduct  on  the  crusade  had  antagonized  so  many  persons. 


END  OF  REIGN  OF  BALDWIN  I 


464 

at  first  they  made  a  show  o£  resistance,  their  ranks  were  soon  thrown 
into  disorder  and  put  to  flight.  Many  were  the  captives,  and  countless 
the  numbers  of  the  slain.  Moreover,  the  standards  of  Ridwan  were 
captured  and  retained.  The  prince  had  been  the  first  to  start  the  flight 
in  order  to  save  his  life.^^ 

This  victory  comforted  our  people  greatly,  and  as  recompense 
for  their  repeated  losses  in  similar  encounters  they  seized  many  of 
the  best  of  the  enemy ^s  chargers,  after  their  riders  had  been  thrown 
to  the  ground. 

3.  The  Egyftlans  invade  the  kingdom  with  an  immense  host. 

The  king  engages  them  in  battle.  He  kills  many^  captures 
somcy  and  puts  the  rest  to  flight. 

In  the  same  year,  some  of  the  great  men  of  his  kingdom  came  to  the 
caliph  of  Egypt  and  said,  ^^This  tribe  of  pilgrims  who  have  lately 
invaded  your  kingdom  by  force  have  thus  far,  with  reckless  disre¬ 
gard  for  life,  succeeded  in  resisting  the  commanders  whom  you  have 
sent  against  them.  They  have  been  successful  in  this  bold  undertak¬ 
ing  because  they  have  relied  on  the  vast  numbers  of  the  earlier  armies 
which  came  to  the  Orient.  But  now  these  people  have  for  the  most 
part  returned  to  their  own  lands.  Those  who  remain,  deprived  of  the 
assistance  of  fresh  pilgrim  recruits,  have  become  greatly  reduced  in 
numbers  by  frequent  campaigns,  so  that  their  strength  is  utterly  ex¬ 
hausted.  Therefore  it  seems  to  us  opportune,  if  your  Majesty  ap¬ 
proves,  that  a  leader  chosen  from  your  great  men  be  sent  to  deliver 
the  land  now  held  by  that  unhappy  people.” 

These  words  pleased  the  caliph  and  seemed  good  in  his  sight.  He 
ordered  a  mighty  host  to  be  convoked  and  a  large  fleet  prepared. 
Over  each  army  he  appointed  special  commanders  and  dispatched 
them  into  Syria.  Their  arrival  at  Ascalon  brought  consternation  to  the 
entire  land. 

As  soon  as  news  of  this  invasion  reached  the  king,  he  marched 
quickly  to  Jaffa  with  the  entire  strength  of  the  kingdom.  Further¬ 
more,  he  issued  a  legal  edict  commanding  that  all  the  forces  from 
each  city  should  assemble  without  delay  at  Jaffa.  Those  summoned 

This  defeat  of  Ridwan  by  Tancred  occurred  April  20,  1105. 

The  use  of  this  legal  phrase,  not  employed  by  Fulcher,  from  whom  the  informa¬ 
tion  is  derived,  bears  upon  the  question  of  William^s  conception  of  the  royal  power. 


END  OF  REIGN  OF  BALDWIN  I 


46s 

arrived  speedily.  Among  others  came  Ebremar,  the  patriarch  of  Je¬ 
rusalem,  bearing  with  him  the  healing  wood  of  the  Life-giving 
Cross. 

After  the  arrival  of  these  reinforcements,  our  forces  were  num¬ 
bered  and  found  to  consist  of  five  hundred  knights  and  two  thousand 
foot  soldiers.  The  enemy’s  strength  was  reputed  to  be  about  fifteen 
thousand,  in  addition  to  the  fighters  in  the  fleet.^^ 

As  soon  as  the  enemy’s  land  army  marched  out  from  Ascalon,  the 
fleet  was  ordered  to  sail  for  Jaffa.  The  land  army  proceeded  to  Azot 
and  was  there  divided  into  two  sections.  One  of  these  was  to  advance 
toward  Ramlah  and  challenge  the  king  to  fight  while  the  other  pro¬ 
ceeded  to  Jaffa.  Then  while  the  king  was  engaged  with  the  first  divi¬ 
sion,  the  other  contingent  was  to  attack  Jaffa,  after  first  summoning 
to  its  aid  the  forces  which  had  come  by  sea.  Accordingly,  announced 
by  the  blare  of  trumpets  and  the  roll  of  drums,  the  first  division  in 
battle  array  entered  the  land  of  Ramlah.  This  was  done  with  a  definite 
purpose,  that  while  this  contingent  was  luring  the  king  and  his  forces 
against  it,  the  other  army  following  the  shore  might  arrive  safely  at 
Jaffa.  These  plans  failed,  however,  for  when  the  king  approached  at 
the  head  of  his  forces,  the  hearts  of  the  infidels  melted  within  them 
and  they  gave  way  to  panic.  They  called  the  other  division  to  their 
aid,  but  even  when  thus  reinforced  they  felt  themselves  scarcely  strong 
enough  to  escape  the  king’s  hand. 

The  king  and  his  men  fell  upon  the  legions  united  against  them 
and  pressed  them  hard  in  the  most  spirited  fashion.  At  the  same  time, 
by  word  and  example,  Baldwin  encouraged  his  men  and  thus  re¬ 
doubled  their  strength.  The  patriarch  with  the  Life-giving  Cross  in 
his  hand  also  passed  along  the  lines.  He  too  cheered  the  fighters  who 
were  about  to  go  into  battle  and  admonished  them  to  remember  Him 
who  for  the  salvation  of  sinners  was  willing  to  die  on  that  Cross.  He 
exhorted  them  to  fight  valiantly  against  the  enemy  of  the  name  and 
faith  of  Christ.  Thus  they  might  hope  to  obtain  the  remission  of  their 
sins  and  win  the  hundredfold  reward  which  the  Lord  ever  grants  to 
His  servants.  Animated  and  encouraged  by  these  words,  the  Chris¬ 
tians  implored  aid  from  on  high  and  threw  themselves  with  increased 

This  further  effort  of  Al-Afdal,  which  aroused  so  much  alarm,  is  described  in 
smaller  numbers  than  his  earlier  attacks.  William  here  repeats  the  exact  figures  used 
by  Fulcher. 

Azot  or  Isdud,  about  ten  miles  north  of  Ascalon. 


466  END  OF  REIGN  OF  BALDWIN  I 

fury  upon  the  foe.  They  succeeded  in  killing  a  vast  number  and  forced 
the  rest,  to  flee. 

In  this  engagement  the  governor  of  Ascalon  fell,  but  the  com¬ 
mander  in  chief  of  the  entire  host  escaped  by  flight.  About  four  thou¬ 
sand  of  the  enemy  are  said  to  have  been  slain  that  day,  but  only  sixty 
of  our  people  were  found  among  the  dead. 

Thus,  led  by  the  mercy  of  God,  our  forces  held  possession  of  the 
enemy’s  camp,  where  they  found  many  troops  of  camels,  besides  asses 
and  horses.  Filled  with  joy  and  exultation,  therefore,  they  went  back 
to  Jaffa,  laden  with  the  richest  of  spoils.  They  brought  back  with 
them  also  many  prisoners.  On  that  day  a  certain  nobleman  was  cap¬ 
tured  who  at  one  time  had  been  governor  of  Acre.  For  the  ransom 
of  this  prisoner  the  king  is  said  to  have  received  later  twenty  thou¬ 
sand  gold  pieces. 

During  this  time,  the  enemy’s  fleet  still  lay  in  the  harbor  of  Jaffa. 
As  soon  as  the  news  of  the  disaster  to  their  land  forces  reached  them, 
however,  they  took  advantage  of  a  favoring  south  breeze  and  with¬ 
drew  to  the  port  of  Tyre.  Later,  as  they  were  about  to  set  sail  for 
Egypt  from  this  port,  a  sudden  storm  arose  over  the  sea.  The  fleet 
was  scattered  and  twenty-five  ships,  unable  to  endure  the  violence  of 
the  waves,  were  driven  upon  our  shore.  Our  soldiers  took  as  prison¬ 
ers  more  than  two  thousand  sailors  and  rowers,  and  in  addition  many 
of  the  foe  were  drowned.^® 

4.  Dmmbert  the  'patriarchy  while  on  his  return  journey y  fol¬ 
lowed  by  an  apostolic  letter y  dies  at  Messina  in  Sicily, 
Ebremary  the  unlawful  occupant  of  his  seCy  hastens  to  Rome, 

Gibeliny  the  archbishop  of  Arles y  is  sent  to  J erusalem  as  papal 
legate  and  is  afterward  made  patriarch. 

Meanwhile,  Daimbert,  patriarch  of  Jerusalem,  had  been  long  de¬ 
tained  at  Rome  by  Pope  Paschal  and  the  Roman  church  until  it  could 
be  determined  whether  the  king  of  Jerusalem  and  those  who  had  ex¬ 
pelled  Daimbert  intended  to  make  any  charge  against  him,  whereby 
they  might  seem  to  have  legal  justification  for  their  actions.  No  one 
appeared,  however,  to  lay  any  accusation  against  him,  and  nothing 

The  battle  occurred  August  27,  1105  (see  H.  Hagenmeyer,  ed.,  Fulcheri  Carno- 
tensis  historia  Hierosolymitana^  p.  503).  William’s  account  is  but  a  summary  of  the 
extensive  and  jubilant  description  by  Fulcher. 


END  OF  REIGN  OF  BALDWIN  I 


467 

reprehensible  could  be  found  in  the  case,  except  that  the  patriarch  had 
been  expelled  by  royal  violence.  He  was  therefore  given  an  apostolic 
letter  and  sent  back  to  his  own  land,  in  full  favor,  to  resume  the  see 
from  which  he  had  been  wrongfully  ousted. 

He  went  to  Sicily,  and  while  lingering  there  perforce  awaiting  a 
crossing,  he  was  stricken  with  a  serious  illness  from  which  he  died  on 
June  16.  He  had  occupied  the  patriarchate  in  peace  for  four  years  and 
had  been  in  exile  three. 

Ere  the  news  of  Daimbert’s  death  arrived,  Ebremar,  the  unlawful 
possessor’  of  this  office,  decided  to  sail  across  the  sea  and  visit  the 
church  at  Rome.  He  had  learned  that  Lord  Daimbert  was  returning 
in  full  favor  to  resume  his  rightful  seat,  and  he  wished  to  assert  his 
own  innocence  and  explain  that  it  was  contrary  to  his  desire  and  with 
great  reluctance  on  his  part  that  he  had  been  placed  in  that  position. 
On  arriving  at  Rome,  he  received  no  satisfaction  but  was  informed 
that  a  legate  to  be  stationed  at  Jerusalem  would  be  sent  back  with  him 
to  make  a  full  investigation  of  the  case.  Gibelin,  archbishop  of  Arles, 
a  man  well  advanced  in  years,  was  appointed  to  this  mission.  By  the 
pope^s  orders,  he  was  to  proceed  to  Jerusalem  and  there,  after  con¬ 
voking  a  council  of  the  bishops  of  the  realm,  he  was  to  investigate 
fully  the  facts  relating  to  Ebremar^s  case.^*^ 

Through  suitable  and  competent  witnesses  to  whom  no  exception 
could  be  taken,  it  was  established  to  the  legate’s  satisfaction  that  Daim¬ 
bert  had  been  driven  out  without  legitimate  cause  by  the  machinations 
of  Arnulf  and  the  violence  of  the  king,  and  that  Ebremar  had  taken 
possession  of  the  chair  of  a  priest  still  living  and  in  the  communion 
of  the  Roman  church.  Accordingly,  by  virtue  of  the  authority  in¬ 
vested  in  him,  Gibelin  deposed  Ebremar  from  the  patriarchate.  But 

Daimbert’s  occupancy  of  the  patriarchate  was  scarcely  two  full  years.  Even 
these,  by  William’s  own  account,  were  far  from  peaceful.  His  exile  included  two 
years  at  Antioch  and  some  time  in  Italy.  There  is  some  dispute  as  to  the  date  of 
Daimbert’s  death.  William’s  account  seems  to  indicate  1107  as  the  year,  but  Hagen- 
meyer  is  convinced  that  June  15,  1105,  must  be  accepted  as  the  correct  date  (H. 
Hagenmeyer,  Chronologic^  no.  747). 

The  letter  of  Pope  Paschal  II  to  King  Baldwin,  dated  at  the  Lateran  December 
4,  1107,  suggests  a  different  explanation  for  Ebremar’s  journey  to  Rome.  He  left 
Jerusalem  after  the  news  of  Daimbert’s  death  and  went  there  to  receive  papal 
approval  as  patriarch.  Archdeacon  Arnulf,  however,  followed  him  with  letters 
charging  Ebremar  with  incompetence  and  disregard  of  synodal  decree.  The  pope 
intrusted  the  case  to  Gibelin,  archbishop  of  Arles,  who  was  to  take  testimony  in 
Jerusalem  and  decide  accordingly (  R.  Rohricht,  Regesta  regni  Hierosolymitani,  no. 

49)- 


468  END  OF  REIGN  OF  BALDWIN  I 

out  of  consideration  for  the  deep  piety  of  the  man  and  his  unusual 
simplicity  of  character,  he  was  granted  the  charge  of  the  church  of 
Caesarea,  which  was  then  vacant.^® 

Later,  that  the  subject  might  be  handled  with  all  due  considera¬ 
tion,  according  to  custom,  a  special  day  was  set  when  the  clergy  and 
people  might  discuss  the  question  of  electing  a  patriarch  for  the 
church  at  Jerusalem.  After  various  expressions  of  opinion  on  this 
side  and  on  that  had  been  offered  for  deliberation,  the  unanimous 
choice  fell  on  Gibelin,  the  legate  of  the  apostolic  see,  and  he  was 
placed  in  the  patriarchal  chair.  It  is  claimed  that  this  choice  also  was 
brought  about  by  the  subtle  plotting  of  Arnulf,  who  thought  that 
Gibelin,  being  old  and  decrepit,  would  not  survive  long  in  the  patri¬ 
archal  office. 

In  the  same  year,  1107  of  the  Incarnation  of  our  Lord,^®  the 
Ascalonites,  with  their  usual  wickedness,  placed  five  hundred  knights 
and  a  thousand  soldiers  in  ambush  in  suitable  places  along  the  high¬ 
way  which  leads  from  Jerusalem  to  the  sea.  They  had  heard  that  a 
company  of  our  people  had  left  the  city  of  Jaffa  on  the  way  to  Jeru¬ 
salem,  and  in  the  hope  of  effecting  by  strategy  what  they  could  not 
accomplish  by  strength,  they  were  lying  in  wait  for  them  in  ambush. 
So,  as  the  pilgrims,  ignorant  of  all  these  plots,  were  proceeding  on 
their  way,  they  fell  into  the  trap  set  for  them.  In  deep  anxiety,  they 
were  hesitating  whether  to  fight  or  retreat  when  the  enemy  fell  upon 
them  and  thus  removed  all  opportunity  for  further  deliberation. 
Perceiving  that  they  must  either  fight  valiantly  or  fall  ignomlniously, 
our  men  made  a  virtue  of  necessity  and,  with  renewed  boldness  and 
courage,  rushed  with  intrepid  hearts  upon  those  whom  but  now  they 
had  regarded  as  formidable.  The  infidels  were  taken  by  surprise  and, 
unable  to  endure  the  attack,  took  to  flight.  Our  forces  pursued  them 
for  a  while  j  many  were  killed  and  some  prisoners  were  taken.  So, 

The  exact  date  of  Archbishop  Baldwin’s  death  has  not  been  determined,  but  it 
was  to  his  post  that  Ebremar  was  assigned,  iio8.  He  held  office  for  many  years  and 
died  late  in  1129  or  early  in  the  following  year. 

It  is  not  improbable  that  Arnulf  had  hoped  to  regain  the  office  after  the  death 
of  Daimbert  and  had  for  that  reason  hastened  after  Ebremar  to  Rome  in  protest 
against  the  latter’s  plea.  William’s  conjecture  about  Arnulf’s  part  in  the  election  of 
Gibelin  gains  color  from  the  later  developments. 

This  is  slightly  confusing,  for  the  election  of  Gibelin  occurred  in  1108. 
William’s  inclination  to  round  out  an  incident  once  begun  caused  him  to  overlook 
the  fact  that  both  1107  and  1108  were  involved  in  the  patriarchal  succession. 


END  OF  REIGN  OF  BALDWIN  I  469 

aided  by  divine  grace,  the  Christians  won  the  victory  and,  with  the  loss 
of  only  three  men,  continued  on  the  way  to  Jerusalem.^^ 

5.  The  noble  Hugh  de  St,  OfneVy  lovd  of  Tiberias^  builds  a 
fortress  in  the  mountains  overlooking  the  city  and  names  tt 
Toron,  Not  long  after y  while  fighting  with  the  Damascenes y 
he  is  fatally  wounded  andy  though  victorious y  'perishes.  The 
Ascalonites  attempt  to  set  pitfalls  for  our  people y  but  fall  into 
the  trap  which  they  themselves  had  set. 

At  this  time  the  city  of  Tyre  was  still  held  by  the  infidels,  who  were 
trying  to  block  the  advance  of  the  Christians  in  every  way.  Hugh 
de  St.  Omer,  a  noble  and  powerful  man  of  distinguished  memory  in 
the  Lord,  had  succeeded  Tancred  as  lord  of  the  city  of  Tiberias.  He 
was  continually  making  surprise  attacks  upon  Tyre  and  harrying  it  as 
far  as  the  distance  (thirty  miles)  between  the  two  places  permitted. 
In  going  back  and  forth  between  the  two  places  the  soldiers  were 
frequently  exposed  to  danger,  because  there  was  no  fortress  or  forti¬ 
fied  place  of  any  kind  between  the  two  cities  whither  they  might  re¬ 
treat  when  pursued  by  the  enemy.  To  alleviate  this  difficulty,  the 
illustrious  man  resolved  to  build  a  stronghold  on  the  top  of  the 
mountains  overlooking  Tyre,  about  ten  miles  distant  from  that  city. 
The  original  name  of  this  place  was  Tibenin,^^  and,  since  the  fortress 
was  situated  on  a  very  high  and  steep  mountain,  he  gave  it  the  name 
of  Toron.  This  place,  famed  for  its  salubrious  air  and  delightful 
climate,  lies  in  the  tribe  of  Asher  between  the  sea  and  Mt.  Lebanon 
and  is  about  equally  distant  from  the  two  cities,  Tyre  and  Banyas.  The 
soil  is  very  fertile  and  is  admirably  adapted  to  the  cultivation  of  vines 
and  trees.  It  also  produces  abundant  crops  under  the  care  of  the 
farmer.  Consequently,  this  site  not  only  offered  its  founder  advan¬ 
tages  well  suited  to  his  needs  at  the  time,  but  even  now,  because  of 
its  rich  soil  and  the  excellence  of  its  famous  fortifications,  it  is  of  the 
greatest  benefit  to  the  city  of  Tyre  and  indeed  to  the  whole  locality. 

Shortly  after  building  this  fortress,  the  noble  Hugh  entered  the 
enemy’s  country,  attended  by  seventy  knights,  and  engaged  four 
thousand  Damascenes  in  battle.  Twice  on  the  same  day  he  was  severely 

This  battle  occurred  in  November,  1107. 

It  is  still  called  Tibnin,  Toron  having  been  long  forgotten  except  as  a  memory 
of  the  crusaders. 


END  OF  REIGN  OF  BALDWIN  I 


470 

repulsed  by  the  foe.  Once  more  he  tried,  this  time  under  better  con¬ 
ditions,  for  he  had  received  additional  forces  and  was  inspired  with 
courage  from  on  high.  By  the  will  of  God,  he  put  the  enemy  to 
flight,  but  he  himself  was  fatally  wounded  by  an  arrow  and  perished. 
He  was  a  wise  and  valiant  man  and,  as  his  services  deserved,  he  was 
worthy  of  all  praise  and  most  acceptable  to  the  king  and  his  realm. 
The  enemy  lost  two  hundred  men  in  that  engagement,  and  a  like 
number  of  horses  were  seized  by  our  people. 

Soon  after  this,  also,  many  signs  and  portents  were  seen  in  the 
eastern  sky.  For  a  period  of  forty  days  and  more,  a  comet  followed 
by  a  long  train  of  fire  appeared  after  nightfall.  In  the  morning,  from 
sunrise  to  the  third  hour  of  the  day,  the  sun  seemed  to  have  two  at¬ 
tendant  suns  equal  to  itself  in  size  but  of  less  brilliancy.  A  rainbow 
was  also  seen  round  the  sun  with  all  its  colors  clearly  defined.  All  these 
omens  seemed  verily  to  portend  a  change  in  the  affairs  of  men.^^ 

6.  Bohemond  returns  to  A  fulia  jrom  France  with  a  large  jorce. 

He  enters  the  land  of  the  Greeks  for  the  furfose  of  fillage. 

But  as  he  is  about  to  return  to  Syria  he  dieSy  leaving  behind 
him  a  son  called  Bohemond* 

At  this  time,  Alexius,  the  wicked  and  treacherous  emperor  of  Con¬ 
stantinople,  was  putting  many  obstacles  in  the  way  of  pilgrims  who 
desired  to  pass  through  his  lands  on  their  way  to  Jerusalem.  Against 
the  first  expedition,  which  had  nevertheless  been  the  means  of  much 
gain  to  him,  as  has  been  related,  he  had  invoked  the  aid  of  Qilij 
Arslan,  a  very  powerful  Turkish  satrap,  and  of  all  the  barbarous  na¬ 
tions  of  the  entire  Orient.  Against  the  second,  which  was  under  the 
command  of  the  count  of  Poitou,  he  had  stirred  up  the  same  infidel 
nations  and  peoples  by  means  of  many  messengers.  As  the  result  of 
his  treachery,  the  second  expedition  was  almost  wholly  destroyed. 
Not  merely  once  or  twice  did  he  employ  this  foul  play  against  the 
Christians  3  nay,  as  often  as  an  opportunity  of  causing  them  loss  or 
ruin  occurred,  he  regarded  it  as  a  gain  for  himself.  Nevertheless, 
when  they  presented  themselves  before  him,  he  gave  them  kindly 

Such  phenomena  are  usually  recalled  as  portents  after  some  tragedy.  Fulcher, 
from  whom  this  account  was  taken,  was  a  genuine  naturalist  and  recounted  them 
without  attempting  to  identify  the  events  which  they  portended. 


END  OF  REIGN  OF  BALDWIN  I 


471 

answers  and  showered  them  abundantly  with  gifts,  in  order  that  he 
might  more  readily  deceive  them.  Thus  he  upheld  the  proverbial 
reputation  of  his  nation,  of  whom  it  is  said,  fear  the  Greeks  even 
when  they  bear  gifts.”  For  in  general  he  looked  upon  the  advance 
of  the  Latins  with  suspicion  and  did  not  suffer  their  strength  to  be 
augmented  or  their  power  extended  when  it  was  possible  to  pre¬ 
vent  it.^^ 

These  wrongs  were  still  fresh  in  Bohemond’s  mind  when  he  re¬ 
turned  from  the  countries  beyond  the  mountains  with  a  force  of  five 
thousand  knights  and  forty  thousand  foot  soldiers,  and  he  proposed 
to  advance  the  cause  of  all  the  Latins.  On  October  9  he  arrived  by  sea 
in  the  land  of  the  emperor.-®  After  storming  and  pillaging  all  the  cities 
on  the  coast,  he  laid  waste  Epirus,  both  Prima  and  Secunda,  and  then 
laid  siege  to  Durazzo,  the  metropolis  of  Epirus  Prima.  He  ravaged  all 
the  surrounding  country  with  fire  and  devastation  and  dealt  with  it 
according  to  his  own  good  pleasure.  He  was  preparing  to  force  his  way 
to  the  remotest  parts  of  the  empire  and,  by  the  help  of  God,  to  wipe 
out  the  wrongs  of  the  Latins. 

When  the  emperor  heard  that  Bohemond  had  entered  his  land  with 
a  great  army  of  Latins,  he  gathered  his  own  troops  and  advanced  to 
meet  him,^*^  stationing  his  forces  near  those  of  Bohemond.  At  this 
crisis,  however,  through  the  intervention  of  common  friends,  a  treaty 
was  arranged  between  the  two  and  oaths  of  good  faith  were  exchanged. 
The  emperor  agreed  that  thenceforward,  in  good  faith  without  fraud 
or  evil  intent,  he  would  furnish  advice  and  aid  to  the  faithful  of  Christ 
who  desired  to  pass  to  the  Orient  and  would  not  suffer  any  impediment 
to  be  placed  in  their  way  by  those  whom  he  was  able  to  control.  When 
these  terms  had  been  agreed  upon  and  confirmed  by  the  giving  of  an 

Virgil  Aen.  ii.  49. 

This  reputation  of  Alexius  had  become  widespread  in  the  West  by  now.  It  was 
probably  deliberately  promoted  by  Bohemond  and  his  friends  (see  A.  C.  Krey,  “A 
Neglected  Passage  in  the  Gesta,”  Munro — Crusades^  pp.  57—78),  Yewdale  was  con¬ 
vinced  that  Bohemond  made  no  pretense  of  a  crusade  to  Syria  but  definitely  and  openly 
recruited  this  expedition  for  an  attack  upon  Alexius  (Yewdale,  Bohemond  /,  p.  107). 

This  expedition  is  described  in  detail  by  Yewdale  as  “The  Crusade  of  1107” 
and  as  “the  first  example  of  a  crusade  for  political  purposes.’^  He  sets  October  9, 
no 7,  as  the  date  of  departure  from  Brindisi,  the  arrival  at  Avlona  being  a  day  later. 

Alexius,  who  usually  kept  himself  well  informed  about  his  neighbors,  did  not 
wait  until  Bohemond’s  arrival  to  make  necessary  preparations.  According  to  Qalanisi, 
Qilij  Arslan  had  sent  one  of  his  commanders  with  a  large  force  to  help  Alexius 
against  Bohemond’s  expedition  (see  H.  A.  R.  Gibb  ed.,  The  Damascus  Chronicle^  p.  80). 


END  OF  REIGN  OF  BALDWIN  I 


472 

oath,  Bohemond  also  promised  under  solemn  oath  to  observe  friend¬ 
ship  and  fidelity  to  the  emperor  forever. 

He  then  sent  forward  the  company  of  pilgrims  who,  under  their 
vows,  were  bound  to  accomplish  the  journey  to  Jerusalem.  He  himself 
returned  to  Apulia,  where  private  affairs  detained  him  still  longer.  In 
the  following  summer  the  necessary  preparations  for  the  journey  had 
been  partly  made  and  ships  had  been  assembled.  But  while  he  was  pre¬ 
paring  to  depart  and  had  summoned  forces  from  all  around,  he  was 
seized  with  a  serious  malady  and  yielded  to  fate.-^  He  left,  as  the  heir 
of  his  name  and  principality,  one  son  by  the  Lady  Constance,  the 
daughter  of  the  illustrious  Philip,  king  of  the  Franks.^® 

In  the  course  of  the  same  year,  his  father-in-law,  Philip,  the  glorious 
king  of  the  Franks,  also  died.^^ 

7.  Mighty  hosts  of  Turks  from  the  lands  of  the  East  endeavor 
to  seh:,e  the  county  of  Edessa^  but  Tancredy  with  the  aid  of 
the  klngy  valiantly  resists  them. 

At  this  time,  while  the  nobles  whom  I  have  mentioned  above,  namely, 
Count  Baldwin  and  Joscelin,  his  kinsman,  were  still  held  prisoners  by 
the  enemy,  a  vast  host  of  Turks  assembled  from  the  lands  of  the  East 
in  countless  numbers.  Seizing  the  opportunity  presented  by  the  absence 
of  these  princes,  they  went  down  into  Mesopotamia  and,  with  a  strong 
hand,  began  to  ravage  the  country  round  Edessa.  They  took  certain 
fortresses  by  storm,  burned  villages,  and  captured  farmers  and  others 
engaged  in  cultivating  the  fields.  No  place  was  safe  outside  the  circuit 
of  the  walled  cities  j  consequently  the  tilling  of  the  fields  ceased,  and 
food  began  to  fail  entirely. 

Tancred,  to  whom  the  care  of  the  region  had  been  committed,  was 
at  this  time  detained  in  the  land  of  Antioch,  for  on  the  departure  of 
Bohemond  he  had  taken  over  the  responsibility  of  that  country  also, 
as  has  been  stated  above.  When  he  learned  of  the  depredations  of  the 

The  oath  was  taken  over  a  number  of  the  most  sacred  relics  to  be  found  in 
Constantinople.  The  treaty  was  signed  September,  1108.  A  very  elaborate  account 
of  the  oath  and  the  ceremony  is  given  by  Anna  Comnena  (Elizabeth  A.  S.  Dawes, 
trans.,  The  Alexiad  of  the  Princess  Anna  Comnena ^  pp.  348,  359). 

His  death  occurred  in  Apulia,  March  7,  11  ii  (Yewdale,  Bohemond  /,  p.  133, 
note  97). 

Bohemond  II,  who  was  the  second  child  of  the  marriage,  was  born  in  1109. 

The  death  of  Philip  I  occurred  in  the  year  1108,  which  was  the  same  as  that 
of  Bohemond^s  defeat  and  treaty  but  not  of  his  death. 


END  OF  REIGN  OF  BALDWIN  I 


473 

enemy  around  Edessa,  however,  he  sent  for  the  king  of  Jerusalem, 
making  clear  the  reason  for  the  summons,  and  himself  got  together  as 
large  forces  as  possible  from  all  the  towns  and  fortresses.  Within  a  few 
days,  as  he  was  hastening  thither  in  great  anxiety  about  his  country,  he 
was  joined  by  the  king  with  a  large  force.  The  two  armies  were  at  once 
united  and  together  crossed  the  Euphrates.  On  arriving  at  Edessa,  they 
found  the  infidels,  as  had  been  reported,  roving  hither  and  yon  over 
the  entire  district  without  hindrance.  But  when  they  learned  that  our 
forces  were  coming,  they  recalled  their  troops  and  began  to  roam  about 
less  freely.  They  had  often  experienced  the  strength  of  our  soldiers  and 
feared  to  fight  with  themj  yet  they  were  unwilling  to  return  to 
their  own  land,  for  they  knew  that  neither  the  king  nor  Tancred  had 
leisure  to  remain  long  in  that  locality.  They  endeavored,  therefore,  to 
detain  them  there,  hoping  that  the  protracted  delay  would  force  the 
leaders  to  depart,  when  they  themselves  would  be  able  to  resume  their 
usual  depredations.  But  our  chiefs,  well  understanding  their  intentions, 
adopted  a  plan  which  seemed  well  adapted  to  the  critical  situation. 

The  region  in  the  vicinity  of  the  river  Euphrates  produces  most 
abundant  crops.  Taking  advantage  of  this  fact,  they  ordered  food  sup¬ 
plies  of  every  kind  to  be  gathered  there  and  transported  by  horses, 
camels,  asses,  and  mules  across  the  river.  In  this  way,  the  towns  and 
fortresses  were  supplied  with  a  large  quantity  of  food,  sufficient  for  a 
long  time.  Special  attention  was  devoted  to  provisioning  the  city  of 
Edessa,  even  to  an  overabundance.  Then,  relieved  of  anxiety  about  the 
cities  and  fortresses,  since  these  had  been  well  supplied  with  arms,  men, 
and  food,  the  leaders  returned  to  the  Euphrates,  for  matters  of  greater 
importance  demanded  their  attention.  As  the  Christians  were  crossing 
the  river,  however,  in  little  boats,  frail  and  few  in  number,  the  enemy, 
following  in  pursuit,  attacked  some  of  the  lesser  people  who  were 
still  on  the  farther  shore  waiting  their  turn  to  cross.  Before  the  very 
eyes  of  Tancred  and  the  king,  some  of  these  were  killed  and  others 
dragged  away  as  prisoners.  No  assistance  could  be  given,  for  the  river, 
which  was  not  fordable,  lay  between,  and,  with  the  few  boats  available, 
it  would  have  been  difficult  to  ferry  back  a  second  time  so  large  a  force. 
Our  troops  were  forced,  therefore,  to  return  to  their  own  land  in  deep 
anguish  of  heart  over  the  fate  of  the  poor  people  whom  they  had  seen 
in  their  very  presence  either  killed  or  taken  prisoners.®^  The  chief  men 

f 

® 2  This  campaign  into  the  regions  of  Edessa  is  placed  by  Fulcher  in  the  summer 


END  OF  REIGN  OF  BALDWIN  I 


474 

in  charge  of  the  region  on  this  side  of  the  Euphrates  were  directed  to 
exercise  the  greatest  care  in  fortifying  that  locality.  The  people  who 
were  either  killed  or  captured  on  the  banks  of  the  Euphrates  were  poor 
Armenians  who,  in  the  hope  of  finding  a  safe  place  of  abode,  were  flee¬ 
ing  before  the  devastation  caused  by  the  Turks. 

8.  Baldwin y  count  of  Edessa,  and  Josceiin  return  from  caftivity 
among  the  enemy .  T hey  stir  uf  war  against  T ancred. 

In  the  following  year,  1109  of  the  Incarnation  of  our  Lord,  Baldwin, 
count  of  Edessa,  and  Josceiin,  his  kinsman,  returned  to  their  own  land. 
For  five  successive  years  they  had  been  detained  in  captivity  among  the 
enemy.  Now  after  giving  hostages  and  agreeing  to  pay  a  certain  fixed 
sum  of  money  which  was  demanded  as  ransom,  they  had  recovered 
their  liberty.  Most  mercifully  did  the  Lord  deal  with  them.^'^  For  their 
hostages  by  chance  killed  the  guards  who  had  charge  of  them  in  a 
certain  fortress  while  the  men  were  heavy  with  sleep  and  wine.  Then 
by  travelling  stealthily  at  night  over  devious  bypaths,  they  made  their 
way  to  their  own  land. 

It  is  said  that  when  the  count  reached  Edessa,  Tancred  at  first  re¬ 
fused  to  allow  him  to  enter.  At  last,  however,  remembering  the  oath 
which  he  had  taken  when  the  city  was  put  in  his  charge  at  the  time  of 
the  count^s  capture,  he  changed  his  mind  and  ordered  that  the  city  as 
well  as  the  entire  region  be  surrendered  to  Baldwin.  Later,  the  two 
leaders,  in  resentment  of  this  treatment,  declared  war  against  Tancred. 
Josceiin  was  especially  active  against  the  prince,  for  his  own  fortresses 
lay  on  this  side  of  the  Euphrates  and  he  was  therefore  nearer  the  land 
of  Antioch.  One  day,  with  a  large  company  of  Turks  whom  he  had 
called  to  his  aid,  he  was  attempting  to  make  a  raid  upon  Tancred’s  land. 
The  latter,  however,  aware  of  his  intention,  marched  out  against  him, 
and  a  battle  was  fought  between  them.  About  five  hundred  men  on 
Tancred’s  first  front  fell,  but  finally  his  battalions  regained  their  cour¬ 
age,  rallied,  and,  after  cutting  down  a  large  number  of  Turks,  succeeded 
in  routing  Joscelin^s  forces. 


of  mo  after  the  capture  of  Beirut  {H.F.y  p.  537).  Perhaps  Fulcher’s  failure  to  men¬ 
tion  either  Baldwin  du  Bourg  or  Josceiin  misled  William. 

The  release  of  Baldwin  and  Josceiin  occurred  in  the  summer  of  1108  or  later 
in  that  year.  Tancred  had  made  no  effort  to  bring  about  their  release  (see  H.F., 
p.  477,  note  2). 


END  OF  REIGN  OF  BALDWIN  I 


475 

At  this  point,  however,  the  chief  nobles  of  the  land  and  those  of 
more  practical  common  sense  intervened.  They  realized  that  the  en¬ 
mity  existing  between  two  men  of  such  exalted  rank  was  exceedingly 
dangerous  and  might  prove  a  source  of  actual  detriment  to  the  Chris¬ 
tian  people.  Accordingly,  they  undertook  the  role  of  peacemakers  and 
succeeded  in  bringing  about  a  reconciliation  between  the  two.®'* 

9.  Bertram^  son  of  the  count  of  Toulouse y  comes  to  ^yrla  with 
the  fleet  of  the  Genoese y  seeking  to  succeed  his  father.  Wil¬ 
liam  Jordan  offoses  him.  Jubail  is  taken. 

About  this  time,  Bertram,  son  of  Raymond,  count  of  Toulouse,  of 
good  memory,  landed  with  a  fleet  of  Genoese  near  Tripoli.^^  William 
Jordan,  his  kinsman,  was  still  besieging  this  city.  He  had  been  carrying 
on  the  work  without  intermission  from  the  time  when  the  venerable 
Raymond  had  been  called  away  from  the  task  by  death.  A  quarrel  soon 
arose  between  the  two,  however,  for  Bertram  claimed  the  right  of 
succession  from  his  father,  while  William  put  forward  the  claims  of 
his  own  labors  and  the  expenses  incurred  through  four  years  of  con¬ 
tinual  responsibility.  The  former  desired  to  succeed  as  legitimate  heir 
to  his  father’s  possessions,  while  William  was  striving  to  obtain  for 
himself  the  city  which  he  had  so  indefatigably  stormed.  The  con¬ 
troversy  raged  for  a  long  time,  but  finally  common  friends  interposed 
and  effected  a  compromise.  It  was  arranged  that,  for  the  sake  of  peace, 
the  cities  of  Arka  and  Tortosa  with  their  appurtenances  should  be  con¬ 
ceded  to  William  Jordan,  while  Tripoli,  Jubail,  and  the  Mount  of  the 
Pilgrims,  likewise  with  their  dependencies,  should  be  given  to  Ber¬ 
tram.  This  was  accordingly  done,  and  by  a  concession  on  the  part  of 
each,  an  agreement  was  reached. 

Then  William,  in  return  for  the  portion  assigned  to  him,  became 
the  man  of  the  prince  of  Antioch,  pledging  fealty  to  him.  Bertram  re¬ 
ceived  the  investiture  of  the  lands  allotted  to  him  from  the  king  of 
Jerusalem  and  showed  him  the  customary  fealty.  In  drafting  the  agree- 

This  reconciliation  has  been  dated  April  18,  1109  (see  H.F.y  p.  480,  note  9). 

Bertram  was  the  son  of  Raymond’s  first  marriage,  being  named  after  his 
maternal  grandfather,  Bertram  I  of  Provence.  He  had  led  a  somewhat  stormy 
career  in  the  West,  and  his  journey  to  Syria  was  characterized  by  a  series  of  ad¬ 
ventures  involving  encounters  with  Greeks  and  Latins  as  well  as  Muslims.  His 
journey  to  Syria  at  this  time  must  be  regarded  as  a  personal  adventure  rather  than 
the  attainment  of  an  inheritance.  The  Genoese  fleet  with  which  he  came  gave  him 
definite  advantage  in  pushing  his  claims.  (See  H.P.,  pp.  526-27,  note  3.) 


END  OF  REIGN  OF  BALDWIN  I 


476 

ment,  it  was  stipulated  that  if  either  should  die  without  heir  the  other 
should  succeed  him  as  ruler  of  the  whole.^® 

But  after  the  question  had  been  settled  in  this  fashion,  a  quarrel 
chanced  to  spring  up  from  some  trivial  cause  between  the  squires  of 
the  two  families.  William  Jordan  immediately  mounted  his  horse  and 
rode  swiftly  thither  in  the  hope  of  settling  it,  but  he  was  struck  by  a 
chance  arrow,  from  the  effects  of  which  he  died.  Some  claimed  that 
Count  William  perished  by  the  crafty  machinations  of  Bertram,  but 
even  to  the  present  day  the  author  of  the  fatal  wound  is  not  definitely 
known. 

His  rival  and  competitor  for  the  possession  of  Tripoli  having  been 
removed  in  this  way,  Bertram  was  left  in  sole  command  of  the  cam¬ 
paign.  The  Genoese  fleet  with  which  he  had  come  consisted  of  seventy 
galleys,  under  the  command  of  two  noble  Genoese,  Ansaldus  and 
Hugh  Embriacus.^^  It  was  soon  apparent  that  they  were  wasting  their 
efforts  in  the  siege  of  Tripoli  at  that  time.  It  was  therefore  deemed 
advisable,  in  the  meantime,  to  attempt  something  worthy  of  remem¬ 
brance.  Accordingly,  they  begged  Bertram  in  a  friendly  way  to  ac¬ 
company  them  to  Jubail  by  land,  and  they  themselves  directed  the  fleet 
thither. 

» 

Jubail  is  a  city  on  the  coast  of  Phoenicia,  one  of  the  dependent  cities 
which  are  recognized  as  subject  to  the  metropolitan  of  Tyre,  with 
metropolitan  right.  Ezekiel  the  prophet  mentions  it,  saying,  ^‘The  an¬ 
cients  of  Gebal  [Jubail]  and  the  wise  men  thereof  were  in  thee  thy 
calkers.”  Again,  in  the  first  book  of  Kings,  it  is  written  thus  con¬ 
cerning  the  same  city:  “So  they  [the  Jubailites]  prepared  timber  and 
stones  for  the  building  of  the  house  [of  the  Lord] .”  The  ancient  name 
of  this  place  was  Eve,  for  Eveus,  the  sixth  son  of  Canaan,  is  believed  to 
have  been  its  founder. 

Our  author  here  follows  Albert  rather  than  Fulcher,  who  states  that  King 
Baldwin  had  just  begun  an  effort  toward  such  an  agreement  when  the  accident  to, 
or  murder  of,  William  Jordan  occurred. 

An  instance  of  William’s  judicial  attitude,  based  upon  a  comparison  of  con¬ 
flicting  accounts. 

William  probably  received  this  story  from  Ugo  Embriaco,  the  grandson.  This 
famous  Genoese  family  controlled  most  of  the  colonial  empire  of  that  city  in  Syria 
by  William’s  time.  The  founder  of  the  family  in  the  East  was  Guglielmo  [Hugh] 
Embriaco,  leader  of  the  expedition.  He  left  his  son  Ugo  and  Ansaldo  Corso  to  ad¬ 
minister  the  Genoese  holdings  (see  E.  H.  Byrne:  “The  Genoese  Colonies  in  Syria,” 
Munro-CrtisadeSy  pp.  146—54). 

Eze.  27:9. 

^*^1  Ki.  5:18.  The  Douay  translation  here  brings  out  William’s  meaning  more 
clearly  than  the  King  James  version. 


END  OF  REIGN  OF  BALDWIN  I 


477 

On  arriving  before  Jubail,  the  armies  invested  the  city  both  by  land 
and  by  sea.  The  citizens  were  thrown  into  a  state  of  panic,  for  they  had 
no  confidence  in  the  strength  of  their  defenses.  A  deputation  was  ac- 

sent  to  the  commanders  of  the  fleet,  Ansaldus  and 
Embriacus,  to  announce  that  under  certain  conditions  the  citizens  were 
willing  to  unbar  the  entrances  and  admit  them  as  lords.  It  was  stipu¬ 
lated  that  those  who  desired  to  leave  be  given  an  opportunity  to  do  so 
unhindered,  with  their  wives  and  children,  but  that  those  who  did  not 
wish  to  abandon  their  homes  in  the  city  be  permitted  to  remain  under 
favorable  conditions.  The  terms  asked  were  granted,  and  they  there¬ 
upon  surrendered  the  place  to  the  two  commanders.  One  of  these, 
Hugh  Embriacus,  received  the  city  for  a  definite  time  on  consideration 
of  a  fixed  annual  payment  to  the  treasury  of  the  Genoese,  This  same 
man  was  the  grandfather  of  the  Hugh  who  rules  that  city  today  and 
bears  the  same  name  and  surname.^  ^ 

When  the  city  had  been  taken  in  this  way,  the  fleet  again  returned 
to  Tripoli. 

10.  King  Baldwin  hastens  to  Trifoli.  The  siege  is  carried  on 
with  great  vigor y  and  the  city  is  taken. 

When  the  king  learned  that  the  fleet  of  the  Genoese,  after  the  capture 
of  Jubail,  was  still  lingering  in  the  vicinity  of  Tripoli,  he  hurried 
thither.  He  wished  to  enlist  them  in  his  own  service  under  certain  con¬ 
ditions,  until  by  their  aid  he  could  capture  one  of  the  coast  cities.  For 
there  still  remained  on  our  shore  four  rebellious  cities :  namely,  Beirut, 
Sidon,  Tyre,  and  Ascalon,  a  circumstance  which  greatly  hindered  our 
plans  for  enlarging  our  young  kingdom.  The  king’s  presence  brought 
great  joy  to  all  who  were  at  the  siege,  both  on  land  and  sea,  and  ren¬ 
dered  them  more  zealous  about  the  work  in  hand.  His  coming  was  a 
source  of  much  comfort  to  those  who  were  laboring  at  the  siege  before 
the  city.  They  were  inspired  with  greater  courage  and  felt  confident 
that  their  strength  had  been  increased.  To  the  besieged,  on  the  other 
hand,  his  arrival  brought  a  corresponding  discouragement  and  utterly 
took  away  their  feeble  hope  of  resisting.  In  proportion  as  the  strength 
of  the  Christians  increased,  so  their  own  force  seemed  to  diminish,  and 

This  incident  of  the  capture  of  Jubail  is  not  mentioned  by  either  Fulcher  or 
Albert.  Caifaro  does  describe  it,  but  there  is  some  uncertainty  about  the  date,  whether 
during^  or  after  the  capture  of  Tripoli.  Rohricht  is  wrong  in  thinking  that  William 
has  confused  Jabala  and  Jubail  (see  Byrne,  loc.  cit.). 


END  OF  REIGN  OF  BALDWIN  I 


478 

all  that  augmented  the  power  of  their  foes  made  their  own  weakness 
more  apparent.  In  view  of  this  situation,  our  soldiers  renewed  the  at¬ 
tack  with  the  vigor  of  fresh  recruits,  and  whenever  an  opportunity 
offered  they  pressed  the  enemy  hard  with  extraordinary  spirit.  It  was 
as  if  they  were  at  the  very  beginning  of  the  siege,  while  in  reality  they 
had  been  carrying  it  on  with  great  effort  for  almost  seven  successive 
years. 

The  townspeople  saw  that  the  strength  of  the  Christians  was  in¬ 
creasing  daily,  while  their  own,  on  the  contrary,  was  decreasing.  They 
were  worn  out  by  long-continued  effort  and  had  no  hope  of  succor. 
Accordingly,  they  took  counsel  together  with  a  view  to  putting  an  end 
to  such  great  hardships.  Messengers  were  sent  to  the  king  and  the 
count  with  proposals  of  surrender  under  the  following  conditions: 
those  who  wished  should  be  allowed  to  depart  freely  and  without 
hindrance  and  to  transfer  their  households  and  goods  whithersoever 
they  desired  5  but  those  who  did  not  wish  to  go  should  be  permitted 
to  remain  in  their  houses  in  peace  and  safety  and  to  retain  their  posses¬ 
sions,  under  a  fixed  annual  payment  to  the  count. 

The  king  listened  to  the  demands  of  the  citizens  and,  after  consult¬ 
ing  with  the  count  and  the  chief  men,  decided  to  accede  to  their  wishes 
and  receive  the  city  at  once.  The  decision  was  satisfactory  to  all.  The 
citizens  were  therefore  summoned  and  their  petition  granted  just  as 
they  desired.  It  was  agreed  under  oath  that  these  conditions  should  be 
kept  in  all  good  faith  without  fraud  or  evil  intent.  The  city  was  then 
surrendered  and  the  entrances  unbarred  for  all  who  wished  to  enter. 
Tripoli  was  taken  on  the  tenth  day  of  June  in  the  year  of  the  Incarna¬ 
tion  of  our  Lord  1109.  At  the  same  time  Bertram  pledged  fealty  to 
the  king  and  became  his  liege  man.  Hence  his  successors  even  to  the 
present  are  bound  to  show  the  same  fealty  to  the  king  of  Jerusalem.^" 

1 1.  Baldwin^  count  of  Edessay  goes  to  Malatla  to  visit  his  father- 
in-law y  GabrieL  He  successfully  carries  through  a  notable 
scheme. 

After  he  had  recovered  his  liberty,  Baldwin,  count  of  Edessa,  deter¬ 
mined  to  go  to  Malatia  with  his  comrades  in  arms  to  visit  his  father-in- 
law,  who  was  a  very  rich  man.  The  count  had  many  men  in  his  service, 

The  capture  of  Tripoli  is  dated  June  26,  H09,  by  Hagenmeyer,  who  regards 
William’s  date  as  a  mistranslation  of  Fulcher’s  poetical  statement  about  the  matter. 


END  OF  REIGN  OF  BALDWIN  I 


479 

and  he  lacked  the  money  to  pay  them  their  stipends  for  the  military 
service  and  duties  which  they  had  faithfully  performed.  Accordingly 
he  had  devised  a  very  shrewd  and  cunning  plan,  every  detail  of  which 
had  been  skilfully  worked  out  in  anticipation  of  the  time  when  he 
should  appear  before  his  father-in-law. 

So,  after  all  necessary  arrangements  for  the  journey  had  been  made, 
he  proceeded  thither.  His  father-in-law  gave  him  an  affectionate  wel¬ 
come,  far  beyond  the  requirements  of  hospitality,  and  received  him  as 
a  son  and  a  member  of  the  household.  Greetings  were  exchanged,  ac¬ 
cording  to  custom,  and  the  sign  of  peace  given  with  many  embraces. 

The  count  had  been  there  for  some  time,  when  one  day,  after  the 
two  had  been  conversing  for  a  long  time  on  necessary  matters,  the 
knights  approached,  as  had  been  previously  arranged  between  them, 
and  interrupted  the  colloquy.  Then  one,  acting  as  spokesman  for  the 
rest,  addressed  the  count  as  follows:  ‘^No  one  knows  better  than  your¬ 
self,  O  count,  how  faithfully  and  valiantly  this  band  of  knights  has 
for  a  long  time  fought  for  you,  in  reliance  upon  your  faithful  promise. 
Well  you  know  how  many  hardships,  how  many  trials  in  the  shape  of 
night  vigils,  hunger  and  thirst,  cold  and  excessive  heat,  they  have  en¬ 
dured  in  order  to  save  you  and  the  land  divinely  committed  to  your 
care  from  harm  at  the  hand  of  the  enemy,  to  avert  from  the  citizens  and 
the  remnant  of  people  still  in  residence  the  attacks  of  the  infidel,  and 
to  thwart  the  attempts  of  the  enemies  of  the  cross  of  Christ.  This  com¬ 
pany  calls  on  you  to  testify  that  it  has  often  been  of  service  to  you. 
You  know  that  we  have  served  you  for  a  long  time  without  pay;  that 
often,  compelled  by  necessity,  we  have  demanded  to  be  released;  and 
that  as  often,  sympathizing  with  you,  we  have  granted  your  petitions 
for  delay  and  have,  from  day  to  day,  held  out  with  equanimity.  But 
now  our  affairs  have  come  to  such  a  pass  that  we  can  wait  no  longer. 
Poverty  is  invincible.  That  it  is  which  refuses  to  grant  you  longer  de¬ 
lay  and  further  extension  of  time.  Choose  for  yourself.  Either  pay  what 
is  due  and  relieve  our  needs,  or,  according  to  the  agreement,  redeem 
the  pledge  by  which  you  bound  yourself.” 

Gabriel  marvelled  as  to  the  meaning  of  that  speech  and  as  to  what 
the  solemnity  of  tone  portended.  Finally,  by  the  help  of  interpreters, 
he  grasped  the  situation.  He  then  inquired  further  what  might  be  the 
nature  of  the  pledge  by  which  the  count  had  bound  himself  to  make 
payment.  Baldwin,  as  if  restrained  by  shame,  would  give  no  answer. 


END  OF  REIGN  OF  BALDWIN  I 


480 

but  the  spokesman  replied  that  he  had  pledged  his  beard  and  that, 
unless  on  the  day  appointed  he  should  pay  them  the  amount  agreed 
upon,  he  was  to  allow  his  beard  to  be  shaved  off  without  objection  on 
his  part/^ 

Gabriel  was  astounded  at  this  novel  agreement.  Marvelling  beyond 
measure,  he  struck  his  hands  together  and  began  to  pant  and  boil  with 
excessive  rage.  For  Orientals,  both  Greeks  and  other  nationalities, 
cherish  the  beard  with  most  earnest  care,  and  if  perchance  even  one 
hair  be  pulled  from  it,  this  insult  is  regarded  as  the  highest  dishonor 
and  ignominy.  Gabriel  inquired  of  the  count  whether  conditions  were 
as  had  been  stated  and  was  answered  in  the  affirmative.  Almost  beside 
himself  with  astonishment,  Gabriel  again  asked  why  he  had  thus 
pledged  a  thing  that  ought  to  be  guarded  with  the  greatest  care,  the 
characteristic  feature  of  a  man,  the  glory  of  the  face,  the  chief  dignity 
of  man,  as  if  it  were  a  thing  of  no  consequence  that  might  be  lost  with¬ 
out  dishonor.  To  this  the  count  responded,  ^^Because  I  had  nothing  of 
more  value  with  which  to  satisfy  the  pressing  demands  of  my  soldiers. 
But  my  lord  and  father  must  not  be  anxious  over  this,  for  I  hope,  by 
the  mercy  of  God,  to  obtain  a  respite  from  the  knights  until  I  return 
to  Edessa,  when,  to  satisfy  the  demands  of  the  soldiers,  I  shall  redeem 
the  pledge  guaranteed  by  my  honor.” 

But  the  knights,  as  they  had  been  instructed,  declared  with  one 
accord  that  unless  they  were  paid  before  that  time,  they  would  carry 
out  their  threats  and  leave  him  at  once.  Upon  this,  Gabriel,  a  man  of 
simple  character  and  ignorant  of  their  secret  understanding,  hesitated 
for  a  little.  Finally,  however,  he  decided  that  he  would  himself  pay 
the  soldiers  the  sum  for  which  his  son-in-law  was  held,  rather  than 
suffer  one  whom  he  regarded  as  his  own  son  to  suffer  such  dishonor. 
He  inquired  what  the  amount  of  the  debt  was.  He  was  told  that  it  was 
thirty  thousand  micheles.  Now  the  michele  was  a  kind  of  gold  coin 
which  was  used  commonly  in  public  trading  at  that  time.  It  derived 
its  name  from  Michael,  an  emperor  of  Constantinople,  who  had  caused 
the  coin  to  be  stamped  with  his  image.^'^  Thereupon,  Gabriel  promised 

In  the  course  of  time,  however,  the  example  of  the  smooth-shaven  Franks  w’on 
some  of  the  Armenians  to  give  up  their  beards.  Nerses  of  Lampron  rebuked  Leo  II 
for  having  abandoned  the  more  manly  practice  (see  Saint  Nerses  de  Lampron,  ^‘Lettre 
adressee  au  Roi  Leon  II,”  Recueil  des  historiens  des  crotsades^  Documents  armenienSy  I, 
599— 600). 

This  coin  was  a  besant  of  Constantinople,  the  standard  gold  coin  of  the  East,  so 
named  for  the  reason  here  given.  It  was  customary  for  the  Greeks  to  refer  to  these 


END  OF  REIGN  OF  BALDWIN  I 


481 

to  pay  for  his  son-in-law  the  sum  stipulated,  on  condition,  however, 
that  the  count  should  promise  on  his  faith  that  never  again  under  any 
circumstances,  no  matter  what  the  pressure  of  necessity  might  be,  would 
he  bind  himself  to  anyone  in  that  way.  So  the  money  was  paid.  The 
count  then  took  leave  of  his  father-in-law  and,  with  his  retinue,  their 
purses  filled  to  repletion  and  need  driven  away,  returned  in  affluence 
to  his  own  land. 

12.  By  the  zealous  efforts  of  the  kingy  the  church  at  Bethlehem 
is  raised  to  the  dignity  of  a  cathedral. 

King  Baldwin  was  ever  zealously  anxious  for  an  opportunity  to  honor 
the  kingdom  committed  to  him  by  God  and  thereby  to  offer  some  deed 
worthy  of  acceptance  to  the  Lord,  his  protector.  In  the  following  year, 
1 1 10  of  the  Incarnation  of  our  Lord,  he  proposed  with  pious  fervor  to 
raise  the  church  at  Bethlehem  to  the  dignity  of  a  cathedral.  Up  to  that 
time  it  had  been  only  a  priory. 

The  nature  of  this  act  will  be  more  clearly  understood  from  the 
rescript  of  this  edict  made  by  this  most  pious  king.  It  reads  as  follows: 
‘^The  race  of  the  Franks,  inspired  and  admonished  by  divine  grace,  has 
liberated  from  the  desecration  of  the  infidels  the  holy  city  of  Jerusalem, 
so  long  oppressed  by  the  pagans — Jerusalem,  the  city  where  our 
Saviour  by  His  own  death  destroyed  death,  which  first  laid  hold  on 
the  human  race  through  the  sin  of  our  first  parents.  This  city,  worthy 
worshipper  of  God,  was  invested  by  this  nation  on  the  seventh  day  of 
June,  and  on  July  15,  because  God  fought  for  it,  it  was  captured. 

“In  the  year  of  our  Lord  1100,  under  the  inspiration  of  the  divine 
will,  the  clergy  and  Raymond  of  St.  Gilles,  the  two  counts,  Robert  of 
Normandy  and  Robert  of  Flanders,  Tancred,  and  the  other  principal 
men  with  all  the  host  of  the  Franks,  decided  that  my  dearly  beloved 
brother,  the  most  pious  and  merciful  Duke  Godfrey,  should  preside 
over  the  captured  city.  But  on  the  third  day  after  the  expiration  of  the 
first  year  of  his  rule,  by  the  will  of  God,  this  worthy  man  of  God,  the 

ruler  of  the  city,  passed  away  in  peace.^^ 

“I,  Baldwin,  who  by  virtue  of  the  divine  will  was  chosen  to  succeed 
him  as  the  first  king  of  the  Latins  by  the  rejoicing  clergy,  by  the  princes, 

coins  by  the  name  of  the  emperor  rather  than  by  a  more  generic  term.  The  term 
‘^besant”  is  a  generalization  used  by  the  Latins. 

Godfrey  died  July  18,  iioo. 


END  OF  REIGN  OF  BALDWIN  I 


482 

and  by  the  people,  have  looked  with  discerning  eye  upon  the  excellence 
of  the  church  at  Bethlehem,  the  birthplace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
and  the  place  where  my  head  received  the  glittering  diadem  3  and  I 
have  resolved  to  invest  it  with  full  episcopal  dignity."^® 

^Tor  a  long  time,  with  sincere  heart,  I  continually  pondered  this 
cherished  plan.  Finally  I  broached  the  subject  to  the  distinguished 
Archdeacon  Arnulf  and  to  the  chapter  at  Jerusalem  and  earnestly 
begged  them  to  consult  with  me  over  the  matter.  They  acquiesced  in 
my  just  request  and  resolved  to  go  to  Rome  to  discuss  this  matter  as 
well  as  that  of  the  see  of  Jerusalem,  which  at  that  time  was,  as  it  were, 
without  a  father.  Accordingly,  the  Archdeacon  Arnulf  and  Archard, 
who  was  deacon  at  that  time,  undertook  this  embassy.  They  proceeded 
to  Rome  and,  by  the  help  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  obtained  honorable  as¬ 
sistance  in  respect  to  both  matters  from  Paschal  II,  the  pontiff  of  the 
church  universal.  They  then  came  back  to  Jerusalem. 

^^After  their  departure.  Pope  Paschal  sent  to  Jerusalem  Gibelin,  the 
archbishop  of  Arles,  a  man  of  brilliant  intellect  and  most  virtuous  life, 
to  whom,  in  the  presence  of  Arnulf  and  Archard,  he  had  assigned  the 
mission.^*^ 

^^Most  joyfully  was  he  received  by  me,  by  the  clergy,  and  by  the 
people  3  and,  in  virtue  of  the  orders  received  from  Pope  Paschal,  with 
my  good  will  and  the  assent  of  the  chapter  at  Jerusalem  and  the  favor 
of  the  whole  council,  he  dispensed  all  matters  according  to  his  own 
judgment.  He  decreed  that  Aschetinus,  an  illustrious  man  presiding 
over  that  same  church  and  also  precentor  therein,  whom  the  chapter 
at  Jerusalem,  at  my  express  desire  and  that  of  my  chief  men  and  the 
people,  had  chosen  as  bishop  of  Ascalon,  should  become  the  first  bishop 
of  Bethlehem.  Furthermore,  at  my  own  desire  and  command,  he  made 
the  church  at  Ascalon  subject  to  the  see  at  Bethlehem  with  parochial 
right.^® 

Bethlehem  had  not  been  a  bishopric  but  a  parish  of  the  bishopric  of  Ascalon. 
Since  the  latter  was  still  in  the  hands  of  the  Muslims,  such  a  modification  of  former 
ecclesiastical  organization  seemed  justifiable,  especially  for  the  personal  reasons  which 
the  king  added.  The  request,  which  was  granted  by  Pope  Paschal  II,  involved  a 
question  of  policy  regarding  the  whole  reorganization  of  the  church  in  Syria  by  the 
Latins  and  led  to  endless  disputes,  as  appears  later. 

The  sending  of  Gibelin  as  legate  to  Jerusalem  was  primarily  to  settle  the 
problem  of  succession  to  Patriarch  Daimbert  (see  note  17). 

These  words  do  not  indicate  a  subservient  attitude  of  Baldwin  toward  the 
patriarch. 


END  OF  REIGN  OF  BALDWIN  I 


483 

“Finally,  I,  Baldwin,  by  the  grace  of  God  first  Latin  king  of  Jeru¬ 
salem,  have  joyfully  and  with  all  my  power  confirmed  all  his  acts. 

“I  have  also  given  of  my  own  will  and  have  granted  absolutely  to 
the  bishop  and  to  his  successors  to  hold  and  possess  the  city  of  Bethle¬ 
hem,  which  I  had  already  granted  to  the  church  for  the  salvation  of 
my  own  soul  and  that  of  the  most  merciful  duke,  my  brother  Godfrey, 
and  those  of  all  my  relations. 

“I  have  also  granted  and  conceded  to  him  a  village  in  the  territory 
of  Acre,  called  Bedar;  also  another  in  the  territory  of  Nablus,  named 
Seylon  j  and  another  near  Bethlehem,  which  is  called  Bethbezan  j  also 
two  villages  in  the  territory  of  Ascalon,  namely  Zeophir  and  Caicapha, 
with  their  dependencies. 

“I  have  also  made  the  aforesaid  church  free  from  the  accusations 
with  which  the  church  at  Jerusalem  has  troubled  her,  on  the  subject 
of  the  lands  and  vineyards  in  the  suburbs  of  Jerusalem,  which  are  a 
part  of  my  domain. 

“Moreover,  I  decree  that  if  any  cleric  or  layman  induced  by  most 
wicked  avarice  shall  presume  after  my  death  to  violate  that  which  at 
my  petition  has  been  confirmed  with  the  aid  of  the  Holy  Spirit  (con¬ 
cerning  the  church  of  Bethlehem,  illustrious  as  the  birthplace  of  our 
Lord  and  Saviour)  by  Paschal  the  supreme  and  revered  pontiff  of  the 
Roman  church,  through  the  agency  of  Gibelin  archbishop  of  Arles,  his 
legate,  that  man  shall  be  held  guilty  of  the  charge  of  invasion  j  and, 
unless  after  due  warning  he  shall  withdraw  from  his  purpose,  he 
shall  be  severely  dealt  with  and  expelled  absolutely  from  our  realm. 

“Moreover,  if  any  one  of  my  nobles,  or  knights,  or  burghers,  inspired 
by  the  spirit  of  God,  shall  desire  to  give  of  his  possessions  to  this  same 
church  for  the  good  of  his  own  soul  and  those  of  his  relatives,  I  grant 
that  he  be  free  to  carry  out  his  pious  wish  and  that  the  donation  be 
legal  and  be  a  perpetual  charge  on  his  property. 

“This  act  of  concession  and  the  account  of  the  things  done  has  been 
made  and  our  signature  confirming  it  given  in  the  year  iiio  of  the 
Incarnation  of  our  Lord,  in  the  third  indiction  j  Pope  Paschal  II  pre¬ 
siding  over  the  Roman  church  j  Gibelin,  archbishop  of  Arles,  vicar  of 
the  apostolic  see,  being  patriarch-elect  of  Jerusalem.^^ 

The  date  of  this  document  has  not  been  established  more  closely  than  the  in¬ 
terval  from  September  i,  1109,  to  March  24,  mo  (R.  Reg.y  no.  59).  The  use  of 
the  term  ^‘elect^’  would  ordinarily  imply  that  papal  approval  of  Gibelin’s  election 
had  not  yet  been  received. 


END  OF  REIGN  OF  BALDWIN  I 


484 

^^The  witnesses  to  this  act  are: 

Arnulf,  archdeacon 
ArcharDj  deacon 
Eustace  Grenier 

AnsleMj  constable  of  the  Tower  of  David 
Ralph  of  Foritaneto,  viscount  of  Pisellus 
SymoNj  son  of  the  duke 
AnfreDj  a  religious 
Gerard,  the  chamberlain 

AND  MANY  OTHERS.” 

13.  The  city  of  Beirut  is  besieged  both  by  land  and  by  sea^  and  in 
the  second  month  of  the  siege  it  is  taken. 

The  lord  king,  that  glorious  conqueror  and  true  worshipper  of  God, 
was  ever  seeking  with  unwearied  care  to  enlarge  the  kingdom  which 
had  been  entrusted  to  him  by  God.  In  February  of  this  same  year,  tak¬ 
ing  advantage  of  the  fact  that  some  galleys  had  wintered  in  the  king¬ 
dom,  he  gathered  from  all  over  his  realm  such  forces  as  the  strength  of 
the  Christians  afforded  and  laid  siege  to  Beirut. 

This  city  is  situated  on  the  seacoast  in  Phoenicia,  between  Jubail  and 
Sidon,  and  is  one  of  the  suffragan  cities  under  the  metropolitan  of 
Tyre.  It  was  formerly  in  high  favor  with  the  Romans,  who  considered 
it  one  of  their  colonies  and  granted  it  the  rights  of  citizenship.  Ulpian, 
writing  of  the  province  of  Phoenicia,  in  the  Digest^  under  the  heading 
^^De  censibus,”  says,  ^^The  colony  of  Beirut,  also  in  the  same  province, 
was  distinguished  by  the  gracious  favor  of  the  emperor.  The  divine 
Hadrian  in  one  of  his  speeches  speaks  of  it  as  ‘a  colony  of  Augustus 
which  had  Italian  rights.’  ”  This  same  emperor  gave  Beirut  not 
only  Italian  rights  but  also  the  privilege  of  having  Roman  schools, 
which  was  granted  to  a  few  cities  only.  In  the  first  book  of  the  Code^ 
in  that  constitution  which  begins  thus,  “Cordi  nobis  est,”  one  may 
read  as  follows:  “Dorotheus,  also,  teacher  of  law  at  Beirut.”  The 
early  name  of  this  city  is  believed  to  have  been  Gerse,  from  its  reputed 
founder  Gerseus,  the  fifth  son  of  Canaan. 

Corptis  juris  civilisy  Digest y  L.  xv.  i.  i. 

Such  reference  to  the  beginning  or  ‘^incipit”  came  to  be  the  usual  method  of 
citing  Roman  law. 

Corpus  juris  civiliSy  CodCy  ‘^Const.  Cordi,”  2. 


END  OF  REIGN  OF  BALDWIN  I 


485 

When  the  king  arrived  before  Beirut,  he  invited  Bertram,  count  of 
Tripoli,  to  join  him  and  at  once  began  to  hem  in  the  city  with  great 
vigor.  But  ships  had  come  from  Tyre  and  Sidon  with  brave  warriors 
prepared  to  aid  the  city,  and  if  these  people  were  permitted  to  come 
and  go  freely,  all  the  efforts  of  the  besiegers  would  be  in  vain.  When 
the  Christian  fleet  arrived,  however,  on  the  support  of  which  the  king 
had  relied  in  undertaking  the  siege,  these  hostile  ships  were  afraid  to 
trust  themselves  on  the  open  sea  and  immediately  retreated  into  the 
harbor.^^  Thus  the  citizens  were  effectively  shut  off  from  coming  and 
going  by  sea. 

There  was  a  pine  grove  near  the  city,  from  which  the  besieging  host 
could  obtain  abundant  wood  suitable  for  building  scaling  ladders  and 
all  kinds  of  machines.  From  this  material,  therefore,  they  constructed 
wooden  towers,  hurling  engines,  and  every  kind  of  machine  which 
could  be  of  service  in  the  siege.  The  attack  on  the  city  was  kept  up  so 
continuously  that  neither  by  night  nor  by  day  were  the  defenders 
granted  respite  even  for  an  hour.  Thus  working  by  turns  and  succeed¬ 
ing  each  other  in  relays,  the  Christians  exhausted  the  strength  of  their 
foes  by  unendurable  labor. 

For  two  entire  months  they  had  toiled  manfully  at  this  task.  Finally, 
one  day  while  they  were  making  attacks  in  several  places  at  one  time, 
with  more  than  wonted  vigor  several  impatient  soldiers  leaped  upon 
the  wall  from  the  wooden  towers  which  had  been  applied  by  force  to 
the  ramparts.  Others  followed  their  example,  and  still  others  climbed 
up  by  the  scaling  ladders.  They  then  descended  and  forcibly  opened 
the  way  into  the  town. 

The  citizens  fled  to  the  seashore.  Our  army  entered  without  dispute 
and  seized  the  entire  city.  At  the  news  that  the  king  and  his  troops  had 
forced  an  entrance,  the  Christians  on  board  the  ships  leaped  down  and 
took  possession  of  the  harbor.  With  their  swords  they  drove  back  the 
citizens  who  had  fled  thither  in  the  hope  of  finding  safety  and  forced 
them  to  return  into  the  midst  of  their  foes.  Thus  the  unfortunate  towns¬ 
people,  unluckily  caught  between  two  hostile  bands,  beset  now  on  one 
side  and  now  on  the  other,  perished  by  the  sword  between  the  two. 

Finally  the  king,  appalled  at  the  merciless  slaughter,  ordered  the 

The  Christian  fleet  may  have  included  ships  belonging  to  the  kingdom  as  well 
as  those  of  the  Genoese.  The  harbor  of  Beirut  was  one  of  the  most  commodious  on 
the  Syrian  coast. 


END  OF  REIGN  OF  BALDWIN  I 


486 

herald  to  proclaim  the  end  of  the  butchery  and  granted  life  to  the  van¬ 
quished  survivors  who  besought  his  mercy. 

This  city  was  taken  on  April  27,  in  the  year  of  the  Incarnation  of 
our  Lord  1111.^“* 

14.  A  fleet  of  Danes  a7id  Norivegtans  arrives  in  Syria »  With 
their  assistance ^  the  king  besieges  Sidon  and  takes  it.  The 
king^s  marvellous  escafe  from  assassination  is  narrated. 

That  same  year,  a  company  of  pilgrims  set  out  from  the  islands  of 
the  West,  especially  from  the  land  called  Norway.  They  had  heard 
that  the  Holy  City  of  Jerusalem  had  been  taken  by  the  faithful  fol¬ 
lowers  of  Christ  and  desired  to  go  thither  for  the  sake  of  devotion. 
Accordingly,  they  prepared  a  suitable  fleet  and  embarked.  Wafted  by 
a  favorable  wind,  they  sailed  through  the  English  Channel.  Then 
passing  through  the  straits  between  Calpe  and  Mt.  Atlas,  they  entered 
this  inland  sea  of  ours  and  sailed  through  its  entire  length  to  Jaffa. 
The  commander  in  chief  of  the  fleet  was  a  tall  young  man  of  fine  ap¬ 
pearance,  a  brother  of  the  king  of  Norway,  They  landed  at  the  port  and 
straightway  started  on  the  way  to  Jerusalem,  the  object  of  their  pil¬ 
grimage.^^ 

When  the  king  was  informed  of  their  arrival,  he  hastened  forth  to 
meet  them.  He  gave  the  prince  a  kindly  greeting  and,  while  in  friendly 
conversation  with  him,  he  endeavored  to  ascertain  whether  the  naval 
expedition  intended  to  remain  for  a  time  in  the  kingdom  j  and  if  so, 
whether  the  members  would  be  willing  to  dedicate  their  services  to 
Christ  for  a  while  so  that,  through  their  zealous  efforts,  the  possessions 
of  the  Christians  might  be  increased  by  the  capture  of  one  of  the  infidel 
cities. 

After  consulting  one  another,  the  Scandinavians  replied  that  they 
had  come  for  the  very  purpose  of  devoting  themselves  to  the  service 
of  Christ.  They  added  that  they  were  ready  to  proceed  with  all  speed 
by  sea  to  any  one  of  the  coast  cities  which  the  king  and  his  army  wished 

The  date  of  the  capture  was  May  13,  iiio.  William  may  have  miscalculated 
the  poetic  formula  in  which  Fulcher  gives  the  date  (H.F.,  p.  536,  note  13). 

This  expedition  of  Sigurd,  the  Crusader,  king  of  Norway  1103— 1130  and 
son  of  Magnus  Barefoot,  is  the  most  celebrated  Scandinavian  contribution  to  the 
crusades.  It  is  described  at  length  in  the  saga  literature  as  well  as  in  contemporary 
Latin,  Greek,  and  Arabic  sources  (see  P.  Riant,  hes  Scandinaves  en  Terre  Saintey 
pp.  174—267  j  K.  Gjerset,  A  History  of  the  Norivegian  PeoflCy  I,  311—36). 


END  OF  REIGN  OF  BALDWIN  I  487 

to  besiege.  They  asked  nothing  for  their  services  except  the  necessary 
food. 

The  king  heard  their  words  with  fervent  interest.  He  immediately 
assembled  all  the  strength  of  the  realm  and  with  as  large  a  force  as 
possible  proceeded  to  Sidon.  At  the  same  time  the  fleet  sailed  from 
the  port  of  Acre  and  sped  thither  in  a  straight  course,  that  both  armies 
might  arrive  before  the  city  almost  simultaneously. 

Sidon  is  a  maritime  city  very  advantageously  situated  between  Beirut 
and  the  metropolis  of  Tyre.  It  forms  a  very  considerable  part  of  Phoe¬ 
nicia.  It  is  often  alluded  to  in  both  ancient  and  modern  writings.  Thus, 
Solomon,  in  the  second  [first]  book  of  Kings,  writing  to  Hiram,  king  of 
Tyre,  says:  “Now  therefore  command  thou  that  they  hew  me  cedar- 
trees  out  of  Lebanon 3  and  my  servants  shall  be  with  thy  servants:  and 
unto  thee  will  I  give  .  .  .  according  to  all  that  thou  shalt  appoint :  for 
thou  knowest  that  there  is  not  among  us  any  that  can  skill  to  hew  timber 
like  unto  the  Sidonians.^’ 

In  the  Gospels  also,  our  Lord  makes  mention  of  this  city,  saying, 
“if  the  mighty  works,  which  were  done  in  you,  had  been  done  in  Tyre 
and  Sidon,”  etc.^'^ 

We  read  that  the  city  was  founded  by  Canaan,  whence  even  to  the 
present  day  it  retains  the  name  of  its  founder.  It  is  one  of  the  suffragan 
cities  of  the  metropolis  of  Tyre. 

Thus  our  forces  invested  Sidon  both  by  land  and  by  sea.  Great  fear 
fell  upon  the  citizens,  for  they  perceived  that  resistance  by  force  would 
be  in  vain.  Accordingly,  in  order  to  avert  the  imminent  peril,  they  tried 
to  bring  about  by  strategy  what  they  could  not  accomplish  by  valor. 

The  king  had  in  his  retinue  a  certain  Baldwin,®  ®  a  trusted  retainer, 
practically  his  valet  de  chamhre.  This  man,  formerly  a  pagan,  had 
asked  for  baptism,  and  the  king  in  his  pious  zeal  not  only  received  him 
at  the  sacred  font,  but  gave  him  his  own  name  and  made  him  one  of 
his  domestics. 

The  nobles  of  Sidon,  determined  to  free  themselves  by  whatever 
means,  secretly  sent  intermediaries  to  negotiate  with  this  man.  They 
promised  him  an  immense  sum  of  money  and  extensive  possessions  in 
the  city  if  he  would  slay  the  king  and  thus  free  them  from  the  great 
danger.  So  intimate  was  Baldwin  with  the  king  and  so  dear  to  him  that 


I  Ki.  5:6,  Mat.  11:21. 

This  incident  is  unsupported  by  any  o£  the  other  accounts. 


488  END  OF  REIGN  OF  BALDWIN  I 

he  often  attended  his  lord  alone  when  the  latter  retired  to  relieve  the 
necessities  of  nature.  Yet  he  willingly  entertained  the  suggestion  made 
and  promised  to  carry  it  into  execution.  In  fact,  he  was  so  entirely  com¬ 
mitted  to  the  crime  that  he  only  waited  for  a  favorable  time  to  accom¬ 
plish  the  deed. 

But  in  the  meantime  some  of  the  Christians  in  the  city  had  gained 
an  inkling  of  the  matter.  Fearing  that  through  the  king’s  imprudence 
this  detestable  deed  might  actually  be  accomplished,  they  wrote  an 
anonymous  letter,  explaining  the  plan  in  detail  and  sent  it  by  means 
of  an  arrow  into  our  army.  The  letter  chanced  to  fall  into  the  hands  of 
the  king.  He  was  greatly  aiffected  by  it  and  justly  so.  He  at  once  called 
his  principal  nobles  and  conferred  with  them  as  to  what  course  should 
be  adopted.  The  guilty  man  was  summoned  before  them;  he  confessed 
his  crime  and  was  sentenced  by  the  judges  to  be  hanged. 

When  this  plot  proved  unsuccessful,  the  citizens  tried  another 
method  of  accomplishing  their  end.  They  sent  messengers  to  beg  that 
the  nobles  be  permitted  to  leave  Sidon,  but  that  the  people  be  allowed 
to  remain  as  before  under  favorable  conditions,  in  order  that  they 
might  continue  to  cultivate  the  fields.  The  request  was  granted.  The 
city  was  surrendered,  and  the  nobles  were  allowed  to  depart  freely 
wherever  they  wished  with  their  wives  and  children. 

The  king  at  once  generously  granted  the  city  to  Eustace  Grenier, 
one  of  his  nobles,  to  be  held  by  hereditary  right.  Then  the  people  of 
the  fleet  took  leave  and,  laden  with  rich  gifts,  returned  to  their  own 
land,  followed  by  the  blessings  of  all.®^ 

This  city  was  taken  on  December  19  in  the  year  1 1 1 1  of  the  Incarna¬ 
tion  of  our  Lord.®^ 

The  legal  procedure  is  that  of  the  feudal  high  court  (see  J.  L.  La  Monte,  Feudal 
Monarchy  in  the  Latin  Kingdom  of  J erusalemy  1 100—1291,  p.  102). 

The  return  to  Norway  was  a  triumphant  journey  through  Constantinople,  where 
Sigurd  was  elaborately  entertained.  His  ships  were  a  source  of  wonder  to  the  Greeks, 
to  whom  he  gave  or  sold  them.  Some  of  his  men  remained  there  to  enter  the  service 
of  the  emperor.  The  rest  returned  with  him  by  land  following  the  crusaders’  trail 
back  to  southern  Germany,  thence  to  Denmark  and  Norway.  He  returned  in  1 1 1 1 
after  an  absence  of  nearly  four  years,  having  left  Norway  in  1107. 

Fulcher,  whose  interest  in  natural  phenomena  grew  with  his  years,  developed 
a  practice  of  describing  important  dates  in  astronomical  terms  and  poetic  form.  This 
device  has  baffled  modern  students  no  less  than  it  did  William,  who  was  at  this  point 
largely  dependent  upon  Fulcher.  According  to  Hagenmeyer  the  date  really  intended 
was  December  5,  mo  {H.F.,  p.  549). 


END  OF  REIGN  OF  BALDWIN  I 


489 


1 5 .  Glbeltriy  'patriarch  of  Jerusaleniy  dies.  He  is  succeeded  by  the 
wicked  and  impious  Arnulf, 

About  the  same  time,  Gibelin,  patriarch  of  Jerusalem,  of  good  mem¬ 
ory,  died.  In  his  place  was  chosen  (without  divine  sanction  in  our 
opinion)  Arnulf,  archdeacon  of  Jerusalem,  who  was  called  in  the  vul¬ 
gar  parlance  mala  coronay  the  man  who  has  been  so  often  mentioned 
in  the  foregoing  pages.  But,  “Who  maketh  a  man  that  is  a  hypocrite  to 
reign  for  the  sins  of  the  people”? 

Arnulf  continued  to  conduct  himself  as  he  had  done  before  and 
even  committed  many  worse  offenses.  Among  other  things,  he  married 
his  niece  to  Lord  Eustace  Grenier,  one  of  the  greatest  lords  of  the 
realm,  ruler  of  two  noble  cities,  Sidon  and  Caesarea.®^  With  her  he 
conferred  upon  Eustace  the  best  portion  of  the  patrimony  of  the 
church:  namely,  Jericho  with  all  its  dependencies,  the  annual  revenue 
of  which  today  is  said  to  be  five  thousand  pieces  of  gold.  But  even  while 
he  was  patriarch  Arnulf  led  an  unchaste  life,  and  his  shame  was  a 
matter  of  common  knowledge.  Seeking  to  disguise  this  fact,  he  changed 
the  order  which  the  first  leaders  after  careful  deliberation  had  estab¬ 
lished  in  the  church  at  Jerusalem  and  introduced  regular  canons.®^  He 
also  induced  the  king  to  marry  another  woman  while  his  wife  was  still 
living,  as  will  be  related  hereafter.®^ 

16,  A  host  of  Turks  from  the  Orient  invades  the  land  of  Anti¬ 
och  with  innumerable  troops y  but  Tancredy  with  the  help 
of  Bertramy  count  of  Tripoliy  makes  a  valiant  resistance. 

Shortly  after  the  taking  of  Sidon,  a  large  body  of  cavalry  was  levied 
in  Persia.  In  order  to  test  their  strength  that  they  might  be  able  to 
boast  of  it  in  the  future,  they  went  up  into  the  land  of  Syria.  From  the 
first  coming  of  the  Latins  even  to  the  fortieth  year  of  the  kingdom  the 

Job  34:  30.  Here  the  Douay  translation  bring^s  out  William’s  meaning*  more  clearly 
than  the  King  James. 

This  niece,  Emelota,  is  mentioned  by  William  alone,  and  the  story  of  the  relation¬ 
ship  to  Arnulf  has  been  regarded  as  doubtful  (see  C.  W.  David,  Robert  Curthose^ 

App.  C). 

This  reform  of  the  canons  of  the  Holy  Sepulchre  was  in  line  with  the  reform 
movement  then  extending  through  the  Church.  They  were  to  live  according  to  the 
Augustinian  rule.  Even  this  pious  act  of  Arnulf  fails  to  win  William’s  approval. 

Countess  Adelaide  of  Sicily  (see  chaps.  21  and  29). 


490  END  OF  REIGN  OF  BALDWIN  I 

Christians  were  never  free  from  that  pest,  a  curse  more  cruel  than  the 
hydra,  which  grows  stronger  as  often  as  its  heads  are  destroyed.®® 
Nearly  every  year  a  multitude  of  this  detestable  people  poured  forth 
from  the  heart  of  Persia  in  such  numbers  that  they  covered  almost  the 
entire  surface  of  the  globe.  But  divine  mercy  pitied  our  sufferings  and 
raised  up  a  rival  kingdom  against  the  overweening  insolence  of  the 
Persians  in  the  race  of  the  Iberians.®^  By  the  grace  of  God,  this  nation 
gained  such  increase  and  strength  through  their  continual  successes  that 
they  crushed  the  pride  of  the  Persians.  Formerly  the  latter  people  had 
been  suspected  and  dreaded  by  the  Iberians,  but  now  these,  in  their  turn, 
became  greatly  superior  to  them  both  in  forces  and  experience  in  arms. 
Thus  the  Persians,  who  for  a  long  time  had  been  wont  to  inspire 
terror  even  in  far-distant  kingdoms,  now  felt  that  it  sufficed  to  find  even 
temporary  peace  within  the  limits  of  their  own  territories. 

The  land  of  Iberia,  also  known  as  Avesguia,  joins  Persia  on  the 
north.  Its  people  are  tall  of  stature  and  noted  for  their  robust  strength 
and  warlike  proclivities.  By  frequent  wars  and  continual  attacks  they 
had  worn  down  the  Persian  forces  so  that  the  latter  no  longer  felt  them¬ 
selves  a  match  for  them.  Hence,  anxious  about  their  own  condition, 
they  ceased  to  harry  the  lands  of  others. 

As  I  was  saying,  the  great  host  mentioned  above  went  forth  from 
their  own  land,  passed  through  Mesopotamia,  and  crossed  the  great 
river  Euphrates.  They  ravaged  the  country  in  the  vicinity  of  the  river 
according  to  their  own  good  pleasure  and  laid  siege  to  Turbessel,  the 
strongest  fortress  of  the  locality.  For  a  whole  month  they  put  forth 
strenuous  efforts  in  vain  before  that  place,  but  finally,  seeing  that  there 
was  no  possibility  of  success,  they  decided  to  abandon  the  attempt  and 
went  on  to  Aleppo.®®  Relying  on  their  great  numbers,  they  hoped  to 
induce  Tancred  to  come  forth  incautiously  and  attack  them. 

But  Tancred  was  a  wise  man,  discreet  in  all  that  he  did.  He  sent 

This  phrase  is  a  literary  allusion.  The  people  mentioned  continued  to  be  trouble¬ 
some  for  a  much  longer  period. 

Iberia  and  Abasgia  were  themes  or  administrative  divisions  of  the  Byzantine 
empire  before  the  coming  of  the  Saljuqs.  They  were  located  just  south  of  the  Cau¬ 
casus  and  were  peopled  then  as  now  by  Georgians,  a  people  of  distinct  physical 
features.  They  were,  however,  subjugated  by  the  Saljuqs,  and  the  warfare  between 
^‘Iberians”  and  ‘Tersians”  at  this  time  could  only  have  been  civil  wars  between 
Saljuq  rivals.  The  disturbing  hosts  on  this  occasion  were  led  by  Mawdud  of  Mosul. 

This  campaign  occurred  during  August  and  September,  iiii.  Baldwin  returned 
in  October. 


END  OF  REIGN  OF  BALDWIN  I 


491 

messengers  to  the  king  with  letters  begging  that  he  would  come  quickly 
to  aid  him.  Baldwin  at  once  mustered  his  forces  and,  taking  Bertram, 
count  of  Tripoli,  with  him,  again  marched  to  the  vicinity  with  his 
troops.  When  they  reached  the  city  of  Rugia,  they  found  Tancred  al¬ 
ready  there  with  his  army.  Thence,  in  orderly  line  of  march,  they  pro¬ 
ceeded  against  the  foe  and  finally  reached  Shayzar,  where  the  enemy 
had  encamped. 

For  a  time  the  two  armies  surveyed  each  other.  Finally,  however, 
the  Turks  refused  battle  and  left  the  region.  The  Christians  then  took 
leave  of  one  another  and  returned  to  their  own  lands. 


17*  Tyre  is  besieged^  The  citlxensy  however y  fut  uf  a  strenuous 
dejensey  and  the  furfose  of  the  besiegers  is  frustrated. 

At  this  time,  of  all  the  coastal  cities  from  Laodicea  of  Syria  to  Ascalon, 
which  is  the  last  city  of  the  kingdom,  Tyre  alone  was  still  under  the 
yoke  of  the  infidel.  By  the  will  of  God,  the  king  had  delivered  all  the 
rest.  Accordingly,  he  decided  to  devote  himself  to  liberating  that  also. 
He  assembled  all  the  ships  that  could  be  found  along  the  entire  coast, 
prepared  a  fleet,  such  as  it  was,  and  directed  it  to  proceed  toward  Tyre 
with  all  speed.  He  himself  gathered  all  the  land  forces  and  the  people 
from  all  over  the  realm  and  marched  thither.  He  placed  his  troops  in 
a  circle  around  the  city  and  besieged  it. 

Tyre  lies  in  the  bosom  of  the  sea  like  an  island  closed  round  about 
by  waters.  It  is  the  capital  and  metropolis  of  Phoenicia,  which  extends 
from  the  Valenian  brook  to  Petra  Incisa,  on  the  boundary  of  Dora,  and 
contains  within  its  circuit  fourteen  suffragan  cities. 

The  advantages  afforded  by  the  situation  of  this  city  will  be  described 
more  fully  later  when  the  story  of  its  final  siege  and  capture,  granted 
divinely  by  the  will  of  God,  is  narrated. 

So  Tyre  was  besieged.  As  Baldwin  was  most  anxious  for  the  success 
of  the  undertaking,  he  applied  himself  heart  and  soul  to  harassing  the 
place  in  every  way,  that  it  might  be  forced  to  surrender.  He  employed 
all  the  methods  ordinarily  used  in  besieging  a  city  and  exerted  himself 
to  the  utmost  to  bring  it  under  his  power.  A  series  of  almost  constant 
skirmishes  and  attacks  exhausted  the  strength  of  the  citizens  y  the  walls 
and  towers  were  shattered  by  violent  blows  from  the  engines,  and 
never-ceasing  showers  of  spears  and  arrows  fell  upon  the  city.  As  a 


492  END  OF  REIGN  OF  BALDWIN  I 

culmination  of  woes,  Baldwin  caused  two  wooden  towers  to  be  built, 
far  taller  than  the  stone  towers.  From  the  top  of  these  it  was  possible 
to  look  down  into  the  city  below  and,  as  from  a  vantage  point,  to  hurl 
down  ruin  and  devastation  which  could  not  be  escaped. 

The  citizens,  however,  showed  themselves  to  be  shrewd  and  valiant 
men,  experts  in  all  sorts  of  devices.  They  met  each  scheme  by  a  similar 
one  and  strove  to  repel  in  kind  the  injuries  that  were  being  inflicted 
upon  them.  They  brought  together  great  quantities  of  stones  and 
cement,  mounted  two  towers  which  were  practically  opposite  our 
machines,  and  began  to  build  them  higher.  Thus  within  a  very  short 
time  these  rose  far  above  the  wooden  machines  opposed  to  them  outside 
the  walls.  From  there  the  defenders  hurled  fire  upon  the  engines  be¬ 
low  and  were  prepared  to  burn  everything,  unopposed. 

The  king  now  perceived  that  every  scheme  of  his  own  was  at  once 
frustrated  by  a  similar  scheme.  Moreover,  he  was  exhausted  by  the 
long-continued  labors  which  for  four  months  and  more,  at  no  slight 
expense,  he  had  wasted  before  the  walls  of  Tyre.  Accordingly,  he  gave 
up  the  attempt,  defeated  in  his  purpose.  The  siege  was  raised.  He  him¬ 
self  returned  to  Acre,  and  the  rest  eagerly  departed  to  their  homes. 

1 8.  Tancred  diesy  leaving  the  frincifality  to  Roger y  son  of  Richard, 

About  this  time  died  Tancred,  of  illustrious  memory  and  pious  recol¬ 
lection  in  the  Lord.  The  entire  church  of  the  saints  will  ever  recount 
his  alms  and  works  of  piety.  While  he  was  lying  upon  his  deathbed, 
he  had  about  him  in  his  service  a  young  man  named  Pons,  the  son  of 
Bertram,  count  of  Tripoli.  Knowing  that  the  day  of  his  death  was  fast 
approaching,  the  prince  is  said  to  have  asked  that  this  young  man  be 
brought  into  his  presence  and  also  his  own  wife  Cecilia,  the  daughter 
of  Philip,  king  of  the  Franks.  He  is  said  to  have  advised  the  two  to 
marry  after  his  death.  And  so  it  happened  that,  after  Tancred’s  death 
— ^Bertram,  count  of  Tripoli  and  father  of  the  young  man,  having  also 
died — Pons  married  his  widow."^® 

By  Tancred’s  last  will,  Roger,  son  of  Richard,  one  of  his  kinsmen, 
succeeded  to  the  principality  on  the  following  condition :  that,  when  in 
due  time  the  younger  Bohemond,  son  of  the  elder  Bohemond,  should 

This  siege  lasted  from  November  28,  iiii,  to  April  7,  1112. 

The  marriage  of  Cecilia  and  Pons  did  occur,  though  not  until  August,  1115. 
William  alone  mentions  this  deathbed  scene  and  wish  of  Tancred. 


END  OF  REIGN  OF  BALDWIN  I 


493 

demand  Antioch  with  its  dependencies  as  his  rightful  inheritance,  it 
should  be  rendered  to  him  without  trouble  or  gainsaying.^ ^ 

The  illustrious  Tancred  was  buried  in  the  portico  of  the  church  of 
the  Apostles  in  the  year  1 1 1 2  of  the  Incarnation  of  our  Lord.'^^ 

I9»  M endue y  a  fowerful  Turkish  'prince y  invades  the  kingdom 
with  immense  forces »  The  king  meets  him  in  battle  and  is 
defeated.  The  entire  district  is  harried  beyond  endurance. 

In  the  following  summer,  that  is,  in  the  year  1113  of  the  Incarnation 
of  our  Lord,  Persia  again  poured  forth  her  countless  hosts  like  a  con¬ 
taminated  spring  that  constantly  emits  waters  which  give  rise  to  pesti¬ 
lence.  They  were  commanded  by  a  powerful  prince  of  illustrious  birth, 
Menduc  [Mawdud]  by  name,  who  led  in  his  train  forces  so  vast  that 
their  number  was  without  limit. He  traversed  the  intermediate 
countries  and  reached  the  Euphrates.  He  was  trying  a  new  plan; 
former  armies  of  the  same  nation  had  been  accustomed  to  try  their 
strength  first  on  the  land  of  Antioch,  but  this  plan,  as  the  result  showed, 
was  of  far  different  mind  and  its  purpose  was  different.  Mawdud 
crossed  the  entire  land  of  Coelesyria,  leaving  Damascus  on  the  left, 
passed  Tiberias  between  Lebanon  and  the  coast,  and  encamped  by  the 
bridge  over  the  Jordan. 

When  this  news  was  brought  to  the  king,  he,  well  knowing  that  the 
trust  of  his  foes  lay  in  their  vast  numbers,  called  to  his  aid  Roger,  prince 
of  Antioch,  and  the  count  of  Tripoli.  Before  they  could  arrive,  how¬ 
ever,  he  left  with  his  own  troops  and  established  his  camp  in  the 
vicinity  of  the  foe.  As  soon  as  the  Persians  discovered  this,  they  realized 
that  strategy  rather  than  strength  was  needed.  Accordingly,  they  sent 
out  two  thousand  knights  and  ordered  fifteen  hundred  of  this  number 
to  hide  in  ambush.  The  remaining  five  hundred  were  to  go  on  farther 
in  a  careless  manner  so  that  the  king  and  his  men  would  be  led  to  pur¬ 
sue  them.  All  turned  out  just  as  had  been  planned.  The  king  observed 
the  five  hundred  riding  along  in  a  heedless  and  incautious  manner  as 
if  going  farther.  He  impetuously  summoned  his  men  and  marched 

Roger  was  the  son  of  Richard  of  the  Principate  and  a  sister  of  Tancred’s.  Pre¬ 
sumably  he  had  accompanied  his  father  on  the  crusade.  His  rule  of  Antioch  was  the 
subject  of  the  chronicle  by  Walter  the  Chancellor. 

72  William  apparently  found  Fulcher^s  statement  of  the  day  too  baffling.  Hagen- 
meyer  sets  the  day  of  Tancred’s  death  as  December  12,  1112  (H.F.y  p.  562,  note  2). 

This  Mawdud  had  made  himself  virtual  ruler  of  Mosul,  which  he  held  until 
H13. 


END  OF  REIGN  OF  BALDWIN  I 


494 

against  them.  They  pretended  to  flee,  and  the  king,  pursuing  them  in¬ 
cautiously ,  fell  into  the  ambush  laid  for  him.  The  infidels  rushed  forth 
from  their  hiding  places  and  became  a  considerable  force.  The  five 
hundred  also  turned  back  and  joined  them,  and  the  united  forces  fell 
with  a  furious  attack  on  the  Christians.  At  first  our  people  tried  to  re¬ 
sist — to  drive  them  back  with  swords  as  they  pressed  fiercely  on — ^but 
they  were  overwhelmed  by  the  superior  numbers  of  the  foe  and  forced 
to  flee.  Not  even  in  that  way,  however,  was  safety  to  be  found,  for  a 
terrible  massacre  of  the  fleeing  Christians  ensued.  Even  the  king  him¬ 
self  threw  down  the  standard  which  he  bore  in  his  hand  and  barely 
made  good  his  escape,  as  did  Arnulf  the  patriarch,  who  was  with  him, 
and  other  lords  of  the  realm.  The  camp  and  all  the  baggage  were 
abandoned. 

Thus  the  enemy  obtained  possession  of  our  camp  and,  in  punish¬ 
ment  for  our  sins,  great  confusion  resulted  among  the  people  of  God. 
The  disaster  was  ascribed  entirely  to  the  king,  because  he  had  not 
waited  for  the  assistance  that  had  been  summoned,  but  had  relied  too 
much  on  his  own  strength  and  valor.  For  Roger,  prince  of  Antioch,  and 
the  count  of  Tripoli  were  close  at  hand  and  would  undoubtedly  have 
arrived  in  a  day  or  two.  Thirty  Christian  knights  fell  that  day  and 
twelve  hundred  foot  soldiers. 

m 

After  this  disaster,  the  two  great  and  powerful  leaders  just  referred 
to  arrived  and,  learning  of  the  catastrophe  which  had  occurred,  they 
blamed  the  king  for  his  precipitate  action.  All  the  forces  were  then 
united,  and  as  one  body  they  encamped  in  the  neighboring  mountains, 
whence  they  could  watch  the  enemy^s  host  in  the  valley  below. 

But  the  infidels,  well  aware  that  the  kingdom  had  been  stripped  of 
defenders,  sent  out  bands  of  soldiers  in  every  direction  and  overran  the 
whole  country.  They  wrought  fearful  carnage  everywhere  along  the 
highways  3  they  set  fires,  ransacked  villages,  seized  farmers,  and  treated 
the  entire  region  as  if  it  had  already  been  brought  under  their  power. 

During  these  days,  our  domestics  deserted  us  and  also  the  Saracen 
dwellers  in  our  villages,  which  are  called  casalia,'^^  These  joined  the 

The  date  of  this  battle  is  calculated  by  Hag’enmeyer  as  June  28,  1113.  Qalanisi, 
who  assigns  exactly  that  day,  agrees  with  William’s  account  of  the  reason  for 
Baldwin’s  defeat. 

These  casalia  were  in  some  respects  units  of  agricultural  organization  and 
economy  like  the  western  manors  (see  Helen  G.  Preston,  Rural  Conditions  in  the 
Kingdom  of  Jertisalem  during  the  Twelfth  and  Thirteenth  Centuries y  fassim). 


END  OF  REIGN  OF  BALDWIN  I 


495 

cohorts  of  the  foe  and  instructed  them  how  to  destroy  us.  This  they 
were  well  able  to  do,  inasmuch  as  they  possessed  full  information  about 
our  situation.  ^^For  there  is  no  more  deadly  and  effective  pest  than  an 
enemy  within  one’s  own  doors.” 

Thus  the  foe,  guided  by  these  people  and  rendered  more  efficient 
by  their  help,  continued  to  go  about  among  the  towns  and  fortresses, 
carrying  off  booty  and  slaves.  In  short,  they  reduced  the  whole  realm 
to  such  a  state  of  terror  that  no  one  dared  to  venture  outside  the  forti¬ 
fications. 


20.  The  feofle  of  Ascalon  assault  J erusalem.  Their  strength 
ts  at  last  broken^  and  they  return  to  their  own  land^ 

One  circumstance  put  the  finishing  touch  to  the  terror  and  woes  of  our 
people.  The  Ascalonites  were  well  aware  that  the  king  was  still  de¬ 
tained  in  the  land  of  Tiberias  with  all  the  available  forces  of  the  king¬ 
dom  and  that  the  enemy  was  in  possession  of  practically  the  entire 
country.  Accordingly,  like  ever-gnawing  worms,  they  set  forth  with 
a  great  host  for  the  hill  country  to  besiege  Jerusalem,  which  was  now 
entirely  without  military  defenders.  Anyone  found  outside  the  city 
was  either  slain  or  taken  prisoner.  The  ripe  grain  which  the  farmers 
had  gathered  upon  the  threshing  floors  was  consigned  to  the  flames. 
The  infidels  remained  before  Jerusalem  for  several  days,  but  all  the 
people  cautiously  kept  within  the  walls.  Fearing  that  the  king  would 
return,  the  invaders  finally  went  back  to  their  own  land. 

Summer  was  now  rapidly  verging  toward  autumn,  the  season  when 
ships  bringing  pilgrims  customarily  began  to  arrive.  Those  who  came 
learned  of  the  great  difficulties  under  which  the  king  and  his  people 
were  struggling,  and  with  all  speed  both  knights  and  foot  soldiers 
eagerly  hastened  to  the  army.  Consequently,  from  day  to  day  a  great 
increase  in  the  numbers  of  our  forces  became  apparent.  This  was  soon 
observed  by  the  commanders  of  the  infidel  army,  who  became  anxious 
lest  with  these  large  reinforcements  the  Christians  might  be  preparing 
to  avenge  the  wrongs  which  they  had  suffered.  They  therefore  retired 
into  the  territory  of  Damascus.  The  Christian  forces  also  separated  and 
returned  home. 

When  the  commander  in  chief  of  the  hostile  armies,  who  had  so 
greatly  afflicted  the  kingdom,  reached  Damascus,  he  was  slain  by  assas- 


END  OF  REIGN  OF  BALDWIN  I 


496 

sins.  It  is  said  that  this  was  not  done  without  the  knowledge  and  consent 
of  King  Doldequinus  [Tughtigin].  For  rumor  declared  that  the  king 
distrusted  the  power  of  that  leader  and  feared  that  he  might  deprive 
him  of  the  kingdom.'^® 

21.  The  countess  of  Sicily  lands  at  Acre  to  become  the  wife  of 
the  king. 

After  the  Christian  army  had  separated  and  all  had  returned  home, 
a  messenger  arrived  who  announced  to  the  king  that  the  countess  of 
Sicily  had  arrived  at  the  port  of  Acre.  This  noble  lady  was  the  widow 
of  Roger,  surnamed  Bursa,  a  brother  of  Robert  Guiscard.'^'^  She  was 
a  wealthy  woman  of  great  influence.  In  the  year  just  passed,  the  king 
had  sent  some  of  his  nobles  to  invite  her  most  earnestly  to  marry  him. 
She  communicated  this  message  to  her  son  Roger,  who  was  later  king 
of  Sicily,  and  consulted  with  him  over  the  matter.’^®  It  seemed  good  to 
both  that  they  should  accede  to  the  king^s  request,  provided  that  he 
would  agree  to  certain  definite  conditions.  The  stipulation  was  as  fol¬ 
lows:  that  if  the  king  should  have  offspring  by  the  countess,  the  realm 
should  descend  to  that  child  on  the  king^s  death,  without  contradiction 
or  trouble  j  but  if  he  should  die  without  an  heir  by  that  union.  Count 
Roger,  her  son,  should  be  the  heir  and  should  succeed  him  in  the  realm 
as  king,  without  trouble  or  gainsaying.  But  the  king  had  already  in¬ 
structed  the  envoys  when  they  left  that  they  should  agree  to  any  con¬ 
ditions  and  should  endeavor  by  every  possible  means  to  bring  the 
countess  back  with  them.  For  he  had  heard,  as  was  true,  that  the 
countess  was  rich  and  possessed  everything  in  great  abundance,  since 
she  was  in  good  favor  with  her  son.  Baldwin,  on  the  contrary,  was  poor 
and  needy,  so  that  his  means  scarcely  sufficed  for  his  daily  needs  and 
the  payment  of  his  knights.  Hence,  he  longed  to  supplement  his  scanty 
resources  from  her  superabundance. 

The  envoys  gladly  agreed  to  the  terms  made.  They  took  oath,  as 

The  murder  of  Mawdud,  October  2,  1113,  is  recounted  in  detail  by  Qalanisi, 
a  resident  of  Damascus.  William’s  g^uess  as  to  the  motive  is  probably  correct  (see 
Gibb,  Chronicle^  pp.  139—42). 

Adelaide,  niece  of  Boniface,  marquis  of  Montferrat,  was  the  second  wife  of 
Roger  I  of  Sicily,  whom  she  had  married  in  1089.  At  his  death,  iioi,  she  acted  as 
regent  for  her  son,  Roger  11,  who  took  over  the  rule  in  1112,  when  he  was  seven¬ 
teen.  William  has  toned  down  Albert’s  extravagant  account  of  her  arrival  in 
Palestine. 

Roger  became  king  of  Sicily  in  1130. 


END  OF  REIGN  OF  BALDWIN  I 


497 

required,  that  the  king  and  his  chief  nobles,  in  good  faith,  without 
deceit  or  fraud,  would  ratify  the  agreements.  So  the  countess  prepared 
for  the  journey,  her  son  providing  everything  that  was  necessary.  The 
ships  were  loaded  with  grain,  wine,  oil,  and  salt  meat,  and  equipped 
with  armed  men  and  splendidly  mounted  knights.  The  countess  carried 
with  her  an  immense  sum  of  money  and,  followed  by  all  her  belong¬ 
ings,  arrived  in  our  land,  as  has  been  related.  But  this  was  a  scheme  art¬ 
fully  contrived  by  the  patriarch  Arnulf,  as  has  already  been  explained, 
to  deceive  this  noble  and  honorable  lady.  For  it  is  impossible  to  deny 
that  she  was  misled,  since,  in  the  simplicity  of  her  character,  she  sup¬ 
posed  that  the  king  was  in  a  position  to  marry  her  legally.  But  this 
was  far  from  the  fact,  for  the  wife  whom  he  had  legitimately  married 
at  Edessa  was  still  living.  After  the  countess  had  landed,  the  promises 
and  oaths  were  renewed,  in  the  same  form  as  had  previously  been  em¬ 
ployed  in  Sicily,  in  the  presence  of  the  king,  the  patriarch,  and  the 
principal  men  of  the  realm.  But  because  this  alliance  had  been  entered 
into  with  an  evil  intent  and  not  with  a  pure  heart,  God  considered  its 
purpose.  He  did  not  grant  the  woman,  innocent  though  she  was,  the 
usual  blessing  of  fecundity  in  the  realm,  and,  finally,  sorrow  took  the 
place  of  joy,  as  will  be  related  in  the  following  pages.  ‘Tor  things  that 
have  a  bad  beginning  rarely  end  well.”  Yet,  temporarily,  her  arrival 
brought  so  many  great  advantages  to  the  kingdom  that  the  least  might 
justly  say:  “And  of  his  fulness  have  all  we  received,  and  grace  for 
grace.” 

22.  A  terrible  famine  arises  in  the  land  of  Edessa,  Count  Bald¬ 
win  seizes  his  kinsman  Joscelin  and  comfels  him  by  force  to 
leave  the  entire  region. 

Now  it  happened  in  those  days  that  a  terrible  famine  arose  in  the  land 
of  Edessa.  This  was  partly  on  account  of  the  inclement  weather,  which 
affected  the  crops,  and  partly  because  that  country  lay  in  the  midst  of 
the  enemy  and  was  surrounded  on  all  sides  by  foes.  Consequently,  fear 
of  hostilities  prevented  the  dwellers  on  the  land  from  devoting  their 
attention  freely  to  agriculture.  The  result  was  that  the  people  in  the 
city  and  the  surrounding  country  were  driven  to  the  necessity  of  eating- 
bread  made  of  barley,  and  even  that  at  times  was  mixed  with  acorns. 

Jno.  I :  i6.  The  Douay  translation  here  brings  out  William’s  meaning  more  clearly 
than  the  King  James. 


498  END  OF  REIGN  OF  BALDWIN  I 

The  land  of  Lord  Joscelin,  however,  lay  in  safety  on  this  side  the  Eu- 

^  9  * 

phrates  and  had  plentiful  crops  and  an  abundant  supply  of  provisions. 
But  although  his  lands  were  filled  with  all  good  things,  Joscelin,  fool¬ 
ish  and  ungrateful,  offered  nothing  at  all  from  his  own  overflowing 
abundance  to  his  lord  and  blood  relation,  to  whom  he  owed  all  that  he 
possessed,  although  well  he  knew  that  the  count  and  his  people  were 
in  the  direst  need. 

Now  it  happened  that  Count  Baldwin  had  occasion  to  send  envoys 
on  certain  private  business  to  Roger,  son  of  Richard,  the  lord  of  Anti¬ 
och,  who  had  married  one  of  the  count^s  sisters.®® 

The  envoys  crossed  the  Euphrates  and,  both  in  going  and  returning, 
passed  through  the  land  of  Joscelin,  who  received  them  with  kindness 
and  hospitality. 

Some  of  Joscelin^s  retainers,  however,  began,  as  foolish  men  often 
do,  to  taunt  the  messengers  and  to  make  sneering  remarks  about  Bald¬ 
win’s  poverty.  At  the  same  time,  they  boasted  of  their  master’s  im¬ 
mense  wealth  j  the  superfluity  of  grain,  wine,  oil,  and  provisions  j  the 
immense  weights  of  gold  and  silver  j  the  numerous  knights  and  foot 
soldiers.  They  added  also,  “as  the  itching  tongue  is  ever  heedless,” 
that  the  count  was  not  fit  to  rule  over  the  land  3  he  would  be  wiser  to 
sell  his  county  to  Lord  Joscelin  for  a  vast  sum  of  money  and  return  to 
France. 

These  remarks  cut  the  messengers  to  the  heart,  although  they  made 
an  effort  to  conceal  their  feelings.  Although  the  statements  were  ut¬ 
tered  by  persons  of  no  consequence,  yet  they  seemed  to  reflect  the 
sentiments  of  the  master.  The  envoys  took  leave  and  returned  to  the 
count.  On  arriving,  they  gave  him  a  full  account  of  all  that  had  hap¬ 
pened  on  the  journey,  including  the  remarks  which  had  been  made  in 
the  house  of  Lord  Joscelin. 

The  count  was  deeply  stirred  by  their  report.  After  carefully  weigh¬ 
ing  in  his  heart  what  he  had  heard,  he  was  convinced  that  all  these  sen¬ 
timents  had  originated  with  Joscelin.  He  was  indignant  that  a  man  on 
whom  he  had  bestowed  such  great  wealth,  one  who  was  in  duty  bound 
to  relieve  the  necessities  of  his  benefactor  from  his  own  opulence, 
should  thus,  contrary  to  good  taste,  make  slurring  remarks  about  pov¬ 
erty  as  if  it  were  a  vice.  He  reflected  that  it  was  through  no  imprudence 

Her  name  has  not  been  preserved,  nor  has  the  date  of  the  marriage.  The  fact  of 
this  relationship  of  Roger  and  Baldwin  du  Bourg,  however,  is  fairly  well  established. 


END  OF  REIGN  OF  BALDWIN  I 


499 

on  his  own  part  that  these  straits  had  overtaken  him,  but  through  inevi¬ 
table  fate.  Furthermore,  the  very  wealth  of  which  Joscelin  was  now 
boasting  had  been  generously  withdrawn  from  his  own  possessions. 
Violent  rage  surged  within  his  heart. 

Accordingly,  he  feigned  illness  and,  lying  down  upon  his  bed,  di¬ 
rected  that  his  kinsman  be  summoned  without  delay.  Joscelin  at  once 
hastened  to  him.  He  feared  nothing  and  had  no  suspicion  of  evil  con¬ 
nected  with  the  journey.  On  arriving  at  Edessa,  he  found  the  count  in 
the  citadel  of  the  city  and  in  that  part  of  it  which  is  called  Rangulath. 
He  was  lying  in  an  inner  room.  Joscelin  entered  and,  after  making  the 
customary  salutation,  inquired  of  the  count  how  it  was  with  him.  Bald¬ 
win  answered,  ^^Much  better,  through  the  grace  of  God,  than  you 
would  wish.”  Then  continuing,  he  asked,  “Joscelin,  do  you  own  any¬ 
thing  which  I  did  not  give  you?”  Joscelin  replied,  “Nothing,  my  lord.” 
“Why  is  it  then  that  you,  in  the  enjoyment  of  the  prosperity  and  abun¬ 
dance  which  you  owe  to  me,  are  ungrateful  and  regardless  of  the  favors 
which  I  have  bestowed  upon  you?  Why  do  you  not  sympathize  with 
me,  your  benefactor,  in  my  need,  incurred  not  through  imprudence 
but  from  causes  which  no  one,  however  wise  or  skilled,  could  avoid 
(for  this  did  not  happen  against  the  will  of  God)?  Why  do  you  not 
return  a  portion  of  all  that  which  I  gave  you?  Moreover,  you  taunt 
and  reproach  me  with  the  poverty  which  has  been  sent  upon  me  from 
above  as  if  it  were  a  fault  and  a  crime.  Am  I  so  helpless  that  I  must  sell 
to  you  what  the  Lord  has  granted  to  me  and  flee,  as  you  demand? 
Surrender  the  possessions  that  I  have  given  you  and  return  everything 
which  I  have  conferred  upon  you,  for  you  have  acted  unworthily.” 

With  these  words,  the  count  ordered  that  Joscelin  be  cast  into  prison. 
There,  in  a  mqst  astonishing  and  pitiable  manner,  he  was  subjected  to 
all  sorts  of  questionings  and  tortures  until  he  should  give  up  the  entire 
country  and  resign  everything  which  he  had  received  as  a  gift  from 
the  count.  Finally,  despoiled  of  all  his  possessions,  he  left  Edessa.  He 
repaired  first  to  King  Baldwin  of  Jerusalem,  to  whom  he  gave  a  full 
account  of  all  that  had  happened  and  announced  his  intention  of  re¬ 
turning  to  his  own  land.®^ 

After  listening  to  his  story,  the  king  granted  him  the  city  of  Tiberias 

William  is  the  only  one  to  offer  an  adequate  explanation  for  the  quarrel  between 
Baldwin  and  Joscelin.  There  probably  were  additional  reasons  also.  The  quarrel  and 
the  dismissal  are  sufficiently  corroborated  by  Arabic  as  well  as  Latin  chroniclers.  The 
dismissal  occurred  in  1113  (see  H^F,,  p.  477)  note  6). 


500  END  OF  REIGN  OF  BALDWIN  I 

with  its  territories,  to  be  held  in  perpetual  right.  For  he  realized  that 
Joscelin  would  be  of  great  service  to  the  kingdom  and  desired  to  be 
strengthened  by  the  assistance  of  such  a  great  man. 

Joscelin  is  said  to  have  ruled  this  city  and  its  dependencies  with 
energy  and  wisdom  as  long  as  he  remained  there  and  to  have  enlarged 
its  possessions  in  a  remarkable  manner.  The  city  of  Tyre  was  still  in  the 
power  of  the  infidels,  and  Joscelin,  following  the  example  of  his  prede¬ 
cessors,  is  said  to  have  harassed  its  citizens  greatly. 

And  although  he  was  somewhat  remote  from  them,  since  the  moun¬ 
tains  lay  between,  yet  he  often  made  raids  into  their  territories  and 
inflicted  much  loss  upon  them. 

23.  A  great  earthquake  shakes  the  land  of  Antioch,  Bursuq^  a 
very  fowerful  Turkish  satrafy  ravishes  that  land. 

In  the  year  of  the  Incarnation  of  our  Lord  1114,  a  great  earthquake 
shook  the  whole  land  of  Syria  and  utterly  destroyed  many  cities  and 
fortresses.  It  was  most  destructive  in  Cilicia,  Isauria,  and  Coelesyria.®^ 

In  Cilicia,  it  overwhelmed  Mamistra,  with  many  other  fortified 
places.  It  also  destroyed  the  city  of  Marash  with  the  outlying  districts 
so  that  only  vestiges  of  some  remained.  Towers  and  fortifications  were 
shattered,  and  the  falling  of  large  buildings  brought  destruction  to  a 
great  many  people.  The  largest  cities  became  mere  heaps  of  stones, 
burial  mounds  for  those  who  had  been  killed,  sepulchres  for  the  people 
crushed  in  their  fall.  The  populace  fled  in  consternation  from  their 
dwellings  in  the  cities,  dreading  the  downfall  of  the  houses.  They  hoped 
to  find  rest  under  the  open  sky,  but  their  slumbers  were  broken  by 
fear,  for  in  dreams  they  lived  through  the  fate  which  in  their  waking 
hours  they  had  dreaded. 

This  overwhelming  catastrophe  was  not  confined  to  one  district 
alone.  It  extended  far  and  wide,  even  to  the  remotest  regions  of  the 
Orient. 

In  the  following  year,  Bursequinus  [Bursuq]  the  powerful  Turk¬ 
ish  satrap,  according  to  his  usual  custom,  gathered  a  great  host  of  his 

Earthquakes  were  of  frequent  occurrence.  There  had  been  quakes  in  Palestine 
in  the  previous  year.  This  more  destructive  quake  had  repercussions  throughout 
northern  Syria  during  the  last  two  weeks  of  November,  1114. 

Bursuq  was  a  son  of  the  first  Bursuq,  who  had  participated  in  the  Saljuq  con¬ 
quest  of  Syria.  He  himself  was  a  warrior  of  note,  though  overshadowed  both  by  his 
father  and  by  his  mamluk  who  adopted  his  name. 


END  OF  REIGN  OF  BALDWIN  I 


501 


people  and  entered  the  Antioch  region  with  hostile  intent.  After  trav¬ 
ersing  that  entire  provinccj  he  encamped  between  Aleppo  and  Damas¬ 
cus  to  await  an  opportunity  to  make  raids  here  and  there  upon  our 
lands.  Tughtigin,®^  king  of  Damascus,  was  greatly  disturbed  over  this 
campaign.  He  greatly  feared  that  it  had  been  undertaken  to  cause  trou¬ 
ble  for  him  and  his  kingdom,  rather  than  against  the  Christians,  whose 
strength  the  Turks  had  so  often  tested.  For  the  death  of  the  noble 
Mawdud,  who  had  been  assassinated  at  Damascus,  was  laid  at  his  door, 
and  it  was  believed  that  he  had  been  fully  aware  of,  and  in  accord  with, 
the  deed. 

Consequently,  when  he  learned  that  the  Turks  had  arrived,  Tugh- 
tigin,  fully  aware  of  their  purpose,  sent  messengers  to  the  king  and  to 
the  prince  of  Antioch  with  splendid  gifts.  He  implored  them  to  grant 
him  a  temporary  peace.  He  offered  hostages  and  promised  under  oath 
that  for  the  entire  time  of  the  truce  he  would  faithfully  observe  the 
alliance  with  the  Christians,  both  of  the  realm  and  the  principality. 

Meanwhile  the  prince  of  Antioch  had  appealed  to  the  king  for  assist¬ 
ance.  For  he  knew  that  the  Turks  were  very  near  his  territory  and  had 
received  many  reports  that  they  were  trying  to  raid  his  lands.  He  in¬ 
vited  Tughtigin  also,  who  was  bound  by  the  treaty  with  him,  to  come 
with  his  forces. 

The  king  was  exceedingly  anxious  about  the  welfare  of  the  country. 
Without  loss  of  time,  he  gathered  his  forces,  and,  accompanied  by 
Pons,  count  of  Tripoli,  and  followed  by  a  numerous  company  of 
knights,  marched  thither.  Within  a  few  days  they  reached  the  place 
where  the  prince  had  concentrated  his  troops.  Tughtigin,  who  was 
nearer,  had  arrived  before  the  king  and  his  army  and,  as  an  ally,  had 
joined  the  camp  of  the  Christians. 

The  various  contingents  were  then  united  into  one  body,  and  the 
march  was  directed  toward  the  city  of  Shayzar,  where  the  hostile  army 
was  said  to  be  assembled.  But  when  the  Turks  learned  of  this  move¬ 
ment,  they  realized  that  they  could  not  oppose  our  forces  without  seri¬ 
ous  danger.  They  therefore  pretended  to  retreat  as  if  with  no  intent 
of  returning.  Consequently,  the  Christians  also  disbanded  their  forces 
and  returned  home.®^ 

84  Tughtigin,  whom  William  calls  Doldequinus,  had  been  appointed  as  atabek  for 
Duqaq.  He  married  the  mother  of  Duqaq  and,  when  the  latter  died  in  H04,  he 
became  the  actual  ruler  of  Damascus,  though  nominally  he  continued  as  atabek  for 

Duqaq’s  son. 

This  campaign  occurred  in  the  late  spring  and  the  summer  of  1115. 


502 


END  OF  REIGN  OF  BALDWIN  I 


24.  The  feofle  of  Ascalon  besiege  Jaffa,  The  aff roach  of  the 
king  alarms  themy  however y  and  they  return  home  without 
accomflishtng  their  furfose. 

While  the  king  was  occupied  thus  in  the  land  of  Antioch,  the  people 
of  Ascalon  seized  the  opportunity,  afforded  by  his  absence  with  most 
of  his  troops,  to  besiege  Jaffa.  Shortly  before  this,  a  fleet  of  seventy 
ships  had  come  to  their  aid  from  Egypt.  These  were  sent  on  ahead  to 
seize  the  shore  near  Jaffa.  The  land  army,  numbering  many  thousands, 
followed  with  banners  displayed  and  suddenly  appeared  before  the 
city. 

As  soon  as  the  people  in  the  fleet  knew  that  the  land  forces  had  ar¬ 
rived,  they  eagerly  leaped  from  the  ships,  ready  to  attack  at  close  quar¬ 
ters.  The  city  was  surrounded  on  every  side,  and,  at  the  given  signal, 
the  troops  made  a  fierce  assault  at  all  points.  But  the  citizens  of  Jaffa 
put  up  a  vigorous  defense.  Although  few  in  numbers  and  far  unequal 
to  their  foes  in  strength,  they  were  fighting  for  their  wives  and  chil¬ 
dren,  for  liberty  and  for  country — for  everything,  in  fact,  on  behalf 
of  which  man  deems  it  noble  to  die.  They  fortified  the  towers  and 
walls  as  strongly  as  possible  5  with  their  bows  and  ballistae,  and  with 
missiles  hurled  from  the  engines,  they  drove  the  enemy  far  back  and 
did  not  allow  them  to  approach  the  walls.  The  hopes  of  the  Ascalon- 
ites  were  frustrated.  They  had  expected  to  find  the  city  without  de¬ 
fenders  j  they  had  made  scaling  ladders  sufficient  both  in  height  and 
numbers,  as  they  confidently  thought,  to  storm  the  ramparts  at  once 
without  trouble.  But  so  valiant  was  the  resistance  that  there  was  no 
opportunity  to  apply  them  to  the  walls.  Indeed,  they  were  scarcely 
allowed  to  hurl  missiles  of  any  kind  against  the  defenders  in  the  towers. 
For  God  had  looked  with  such  favor  on  the  citizens  that  they,  confident 
in  divine  assistance,  felt  no  fear  of  the  enemy  who  encompassed  them. 

The  gates  of  the  city  were  of  wood,  entirely  without  covering  of 
brass  or  iron.  By  skilfully  hurling  fire  the  assailants  partly  burned 
them,  but  not  enough  to  injure  the  townspeople  greatly  or  to  make 
their  position  untenable. 

Finally,  after  several  days,  the  Ascalonites  perceived  that  their  ef¬ 
forts  were  not  meeting  with  success.  Fearing  that  the  people  of  the  vi¬ 
cinity  might  come  to  the  aid  of  the  beleaguered  city,  they  raised  the 


END  OF  REIGN  OF  BALDWIN  I 


503 

siege  and  returned  home.  The  fleet  took  advantage  of  favoring  winds 
and  retired  into  the  port  of  Tyre. 

Ten  days  later,  however,  desirous  to  learn  whether  they  could  sur¬ 
prise  the  people  of  Jaffa  off  guard,  they  mustered  a  great  host  of  their 
people  and  stealthily  left  Ascalon.  Suddenly  and  silently  they  again 
appeared  before  Jaffa.  But  the  citizens,  accustomed  to  such  tactics,  were 
on  the  alert.  They  kept  constant  watch  by  night  in  successive  relays,  so 
that  they  might  never  be  found  unprepared.  Consequently,  when  they 
saw  that  the  enemy’s  legions  had  returned  and  were  preparing  to 
renew  war,  they  valiantly  mounted  the  towers  and  ramparts.  Their 
courage  increased  greatly  as  they  perceived  that  the  enemy’s  strength 
was  less  and  that  their  numbers  had  diminished.  For  the  fleet,  which 
had  been  the  source  of  much  danger  to  them  before,  had  now  sailed 
away  and  could  not  easily  return.  Their  confidence  was  strengthened 
also  by  the  news  that  the  king  would  soon  arrive.  Rendered  bolder  by 
this  intelligence,  they  fought  with  more  confidence,  and  through  vary¬ 
ing  turns  of  fortune  they  persevered  and  killed  many  of  the  enemy. 
The  assault  continued  for  about  seven  hours  without  intermission. 
Then  the  infidels,  realizing  that  their  efforts  were  in  vain,  recalled  their 
men  and  returned  to  Ascalon.®® 

25.  Bursuq  again  harries  the  land  of  Antioch,  Prince  Roger  ad¬ 
vances  against  him  with  his  allies y  breaks  uf  his  ranks y  and 
forces  him  to  flee. 

This,  then,  was  the  situation  in  the  kingdom  at  this  time.  On  the  ap¬ 
proach  of  the  king  and  the  other  nobles,  Bursuq  had  pretended  to  flee 
from  the  land  of  Antioch.  But  when  the  king  and  the  prince  of  Antioch, 
and  Tughtigin  as  well,  separated  and  each  returned  to  his  land  to 
attend  to  his  own  affairs,  he  realized  that  it  would  not  be  easy  for 
them  to  reassemble  their  forces  against  him.  Accordingly,  he  returned 
to  Antioch  and  began  to  overrun  the  whole  country.  He  burned  farms 
and  outlying  places  and  surrendered  to  the  troops  as  plunder  and  booty 
everything  found  outside  the  fortified  places.  He  divided  his  forces 
into  bands  and  sent  them  out  in  different  directions  to  carry  on  the 
work  of  slaughter  everywhere.  Any  unwary  straggler  who  was  en¬ 
countered  in  the  fields  or  along  the  highways  was.  either  carried  off 

'  86  This  attack  upon  Jaffa  occurred  on  August  22,  1115. 


END  OF  REIGN  OF  BALDWIN  I 


504 

captive  or  put  to  the  sword.  It  was  not  alone  places  unprotected  by 
walls  which  suffered;  even  fortified  cities  were  seized  by  force.  Maara 
and  Cafarda  [Kafartab]  were  destroyed  to  their  very  foundations,  and 
all  the  inhabitants  were  either  slain  by  the  sword  or  thrown  into  chains. 
In  short,  the  infidels  seized  the  entire  region  and  daily  carried  off 
booty  and  led  Christians  away  as  slaves. 

When  the  prince  of  Antioch  learned  of  these  conditions,  he  called 
to  his  aid  the  count  of  Edessa.  He  himself  set  forth  from  Antioch  on 
September  12,  and  without  loss  of  time  arrived  at  Rugia  with  his  forces. 
Scouts  were  at  once  sent  out  to  ascertain  the  condition  and  plans  of  the 
enemy.  Meanwhile  the  prince  drew  up  the  line  of  battle,  arranged  his 
forces,  and  valiantly  prepared  for  the  encounter.  While,  loyally  aided 
by  the  count,  he  was  thus  zealously  engaged,  according  to  the  rules  of 
military  science,  a  messenger  arrived  in  great  haste,  who  announced 
that  the  enemy  had  already  established  a  camp  in  the  valley  of  Sar- 
matus.  The  entire  army  rejoiced  over  this  news  as  if  the  victory  had 
already  been  won. 

On  being  informed  of  our  approach,  Bursuq  also  ordered  his  troops 
to  arm  and  form  in  battle  array.  He  exhorted  his  fellow  soldiers  to 
conduct  themselves  valiantly.  Before  the  Christians  approached,  how¬ 
ever,  in  order  to  provide  for  his  own  safety  he,  with  his  brother  and 
some  of  his  friends,  took  possession  of  a  neighboring  mountain  called 
Danim.  From  this  elevation  he  could  watch  his  men  as  they  fought  and 
give  the  necessary  instructions  for  carrying  on  battle.  While  he  was 
thus  engaged,  the  Christians’  battalions,  with  standards  raised,  began 
to  advance. 

Baldwin,  count  of  Edessa,  was  in  the  van  with  his  division.  As  soon 
as  he  caught  sight  of  the  foe,  unappalled  by  their  great  numbers,  he 
dashed  upon  them  with  a  furious  onslaught  which  shook  their  entire 
army.  The  other  battalions,  following  his  example,  threw  themselves 
with  equal  spirit  against  the  center  of  the  enemy’s  forces.  They  fought 
with  swords  in  a  hand-to-hand  fight,  determined  to  avenge  the  wrongs 
which  had  been  inflicted  with  such  license  upon  the  villeins  and  the 
poor.  At  first,  the  infidels,  strong  in  the  hope  of  resistance,  endeavored 
most  valiantly  to  repulse  the  Christians;  but,  finally,  in  consternation 
at  the  strength,  the  onrush,  and  the  marvellous  perseverance  of  the 
foe,  they  turned  and  fled  in  utter  disorder. 

From  the  top  of  the  mountain,  Bursuq  witnessed  the  failing  strength 


END  OF  REIGN  OF  BALDWIN  I 


505 

of  his  forces  and  the  increasing  success  of  the  Christians.  Followed  by 
his  brother  and  the  friends  whom  he  had  taken  with  him  Into  the 
mountain,  he  deserted  his  standard  and  his  camp  with  all  the  baggage 
and  took  measures  to  save  his  life  by  flight. 

Our  forces  vigorously  pursued  the  disorganized  troops  for  about 
two  miles.  They  wrought  great  havoc  among  the  fugitives  with  their 
swords  and  killed  a  large  number.  The  prince  remained  for  two  days 
on  the  field  of  victory  with  some  of  his  forces,  waiting  for  the  return  of 
his  men  who  had  followed  the  foe  in  various  directions.  When  they 
returned,  he  ordered  all  the  spoils  to  be  brought  before  him  and  as¬ 
signed  fitting  portions  to  those  who  had  been  participants  in  the  victory. 
For  the  infidels  had  abandoned  their  camp  and  fled,  utterly  regardless 
of  the  quantities  of  provisions  and  the  vast  riches  which  it  contained. 
Consequently,  the  Christians  not  only  gained  possession  of  the  plunder 
and  spoils  which  had  been  carried  off  from  all  over,  but  they  recovered 
also  their  own  people  who  had  been  captured  and  thrown  into  chains. 
These  were  sent  back  to  their  homes  rejoicing,  together  with  their 
wives  and  children  and  their  animals.  It  is  said  that  in  this  engagement 
the  enemy  lost  more  than  three  thousand  men. 

When  all  these  things  had  been  accomplished,  the  prince  sent  on 
ahead  a  great  number  of  horses,  mules,  and  captives,  as  well  as  abun¬ 
dant  riches  of  every  kind.  He  himself  then  entered  Antioch  as  victor, 
amid  the  joyous  acclamations  of  the  people.®^ 

26.  Arnuljy  the  fatriarchy  is  accused  of  many  misdeeds.  He  goes 
to  Home,  The  king  builds  a  fortress  in  Syria  Sobal  beyond 
the  Jordan  and  calls  it  Montreal, 

About  this  time,  the  venerable  bishop  of  Orange,  a  man  highly  es¬ 
teemed  because  of  his  religious  life,  was  sent  to  Syria  as  papal  legate, 
for  the  outrageous  conduct  of  the  Patriarch  Arnulf  and  the  facts  of 
the  dissolute  life  which  he  was  leading  had  been  reported  to  the  pope. 
When  the  legate  arrived  in  our  locality,  he  at  once  called  a  council  of 
all  the  bishops  of  the  region  and  ordered  Arnulf  to  appear  before  him. 
Finally,  by  authority  of  the  apostolic  see,  Arnulf  was  deposed  from  the 
pontifical  office,  as  he  richly  deserved.®®  Then,  still  with  full  confi- 

The  glorious  victory  of  Roger  of  Antioch  over  Bursuq  occurred  September  14, 
1115.  Fulcher  observed  with  pious  satisfaction  that  the  previous  alliance  with 
Damascus  against  Bursuq  had  accomplished  nothing  (H.F.,  pp.  588-90). 

Berengar,  bishop  of  Orange  and  legate  of  Pope  Paschal  II,  presided  over  the 


5o6  end  of  reign  OF  BALDWIN  I 

dence  in  his  own  subtle  devices  by  means  of  which  he  had  corrupted 
the  minds  of  all,  he  was  obliged  to  cross  the  sea  and  go  to  the  church  at 
Rome.  There,  by  his  bland  words  and  a  free  use  of  gifts,  he  overcame 
the  scruples  of  the  pope  and  the  whole  church  and  returned  to  his  own 
land  in  high  favor  with  the  apostolic  see.  He  was  permitted  to  retain 
the  patriarchal  chair  at  Jerusalem,  where  he  at  once  resumed  and  con¬ 
tinued  to  maintain  the  same  licentious  mode  of  life  which  had  caused 
his  deposition.^® 

At  this  time,  the  Christians  had  no  fortress  in  the  country  beyond 
the  river  Jordan.  Accordingly,  the  king,  desiring  to  extend  the  bounda¬ 
ries  of  the  realm  in  that  locality,  proposed  with  the  help  of  God  to 
build  a  fortress  in  Arabia  Tertia,  which  is  also  called  Syria  Sobal.  The 
garrison  in  this  place  would  be  able  to  protect  the  fields  lying  below  it, 
which  were  tributary  to  the  kingdom,  from  the  inroads  of  the  enemy. 
In  pursuance  of  his  plan,  he  levied  the  forces  of  his  kingdom  and  led 
them  across  the  Dead  sea.  He  passed  through  Arabia  Secunda,  whose 
metropolis  is  Petra,  and  came  to  Arabia  Tertia.  There,  in  an  elevated 
spot  well  suited  to  his  purpose,  he  built  a  fortress  strongly  defended 
both  by  its  natural  site  and  by  artificial  means.  When  the  work  was  fin¬ 
ished,  he  placed  a  garrison  of  both  cavalry  and  infantry  forces  there 
and  granted  them  extensive  possessions.  The  place  was  fortified  with 
walls,  towers,  forewalls,  and  a  moat  and  was  well  equipped  with  arms, 
food,  and  machines.  Since  a  king  was  its  founder,  he  gave  it  a  name 
derived  from  the  royal  prestige  and  called  it  Montreal.®®  The  spot  has 
the  advantage  of  fertile  soil,  which  produces  abundant  supplies  of 


synod  which  deposed  Arnulf.  It  is  significant  of  the  deep-seated  party  division  among 
the  clergy  of  Palestine  that  ArnulPs  opponents  were  able  to  make  out  so  strong  a 
case  against  him  despite  the  support  of  the  king.  The  issue,  however,  was  a  funda¬ 
mental  one,  whether  Jerusalem  should  be  under  patriarchal  or  royal  control.  Arnulf, 
though  a  churchman,  was  the  vigorous  champion  of  the  latter  view  and  thus  incurred 
the  undying  enmity  of  local  churchmen  who  held  the  opposite  view. 

The  letter  of  Paschal  II  written  July  19,  iii6,  contains  a  review  of  the  whole 
case  against  Arnulf,  who  had  appeared  at  Rome  accompanied  by  several  leading 
clergy  to  appeal  from  the  decision  of  the  council  at  Jerusalem.  The  pope  reinstated 
Arnulf,  accepting  the  refutation  of  the  charges  of  licentious  conduct  and  undue  royal 
influence  in  his  election  and  magnanimously  according  him  dispensation  from  the 
charge  of  priestly  birth  (E.  de  Roziere,  Cartulatre  de  PegUse  du  Saint  Sefulchre  de 
Jerusalem^  pp.  n-13).  William^s  animosity  toward  Arnulf  was  too  great  for  him  to 
share  the  pope’s  magnanimity.  There  is  no  evidence  to  support  his  further  charges. 

Montreal,  a  fortress  which  was  to  play  such  a  romantic  part  in  the  decades 
which  followed,  was  first  established  as  a  crusaders’  fortress  in  the  fall  of  1115  but 
greatly  improved  later. 


END  OF  REIGN  OF  BALDWIN  I 


507 

grain,  wine,  and  oil.  Moreover,  it  is  especially  noted  for  its  healthful 
and  delightful  location.  This  fortress  dominated  the  entire  district  ad¬ 
jacent  to  it. 

* 

27*  Observing  the  lack  o\  inhabitants  in  the  Holy  Cityy  the  king 
introduces  the  Syrian  Christians  from  Arabia.  He  gives  them 
dwelling  f laces  and  makes  them  inhabitants  of  the  city. 

At  this  time,  the  king  realized  with  great  concern  that  the  Holy  City, 
beloved  of  God,  was  almost  destitute  of  inhabitants.  There  were  not 
enough  people  to  carry  on  the  necessary  undertakings  of  the  realm. 
Indeed  there  were  scarcely  enough  to  protect  the  entrances  to  the  city 
and  to  defend  the  walls  and  towers  against  sudden  hostile  attacks.  Ac¬ 
cordingly,  he  gave  much  anxious  thought  to  the  problem,  turning  the 
question  over  in  his  own  mind  and  talking  with  others  concerning  plans 
for  filling  it  with  faithful  people,  worshippers  of  the  true  God.  The 
Gentiles  who  were  living  there  at  the  time  the  city  was  taken  by  force 
had  perished  by  the  sword,  almost  to  a  man;  and  if  any  had  by  chance 
escaped  they  were  not  permitted  to  remain  in  the  city.  For  to  allow  any¬ 
one  not  belonging  to  the  Christian  faith  to  live  in  so  venerated  a  place 
seemed  like  sacrilege  to  the  chiefs  in  their  devotion  to  God.  The  people 
of  our  country  were  so  few  in  number  and  so  needy  that  they  scarcely 
filled  one  street,  while  the  Syrians  who  had  originally  been  citizens  of 
the  city  had  been  so  reduced  through  the  many  tribulations  and  trials 
endured  in  the  time  of  hostilities  that  their  number  was  as  nothing. 
From  the  time  that  the  Latins  came  into  Syria,  and  particularly  when 
the  army  began  to  march  toward  Jerusalem  after  the  capture  of  An¬ 
tioch,  their  infidel  fellow  citizens  began  to  abuse  these  servants  of  God 
greatly.  Many  were  slain  for  the  most  trivial  remarks,  and  neither  age 
nor  condition  was  spared.  The  Gentiles  distrusted  them  intensely,  for 
they  believed  that  it  was  these  people  who,  through  their  messengers 
and  letters,  had  summoned  the  princes  of  the  West  who,  it  was  said, 
were  coming  to  destroy  the  infidels. 

The  king  felt  that  the  responsibility  for  relieving  the  desolation  of 
the  city  rested  upon  him.  Accordingly,  he  made  careful  investigations 
in  regard  to  some  source  whence  he  might  obtain  citizens.  Finally  he 
learned  that  beyond  the  Jordan  in  Arabia  there  were  many  Christians 
living  in  villages  under  hard  conditions  of  servitude  and  forced  tribute. 
He  sent  for  these  people  and  promised  them  improved  conditions. 


5o8  end  of  reign  OF  BALDWIN  I 

Within  a  short  time,  he  had  the  satisfaction  of  receiving  them  with 
their  wives  and  children,  flocks  and  herds,  and  all  their  households. 
They  were  attracted  thither  not  only  by  reverence  for  the  place  but  also 
by  affection  for  our  people  and  the  love  of  liberty.  Many,  even  without 
being  invited,  cast  off  the  harsh  yoke  of  servitude  and  came  that  they 
might  dwell  in  the  city  worthy  of  God,  To  these  the  king  granted  those 
sections  of  the  city  which  seemed  to  need  this  assistance  most  and  filled 
the  houses  with  them,®^ 

28.  At  the  suggestion  of  the  clergy y  the  king  demands  from  the 
fofe  that  all  the  cities  which  he  has  conquered  be  subject  to 
the  church  at  J erusalem.  Rescrifts  of  several  letters  are 
given. 

Meanwhile,  the  king  determined  (perhaps  at  the  suggestion  of  the 
clergy)  to  send  envoys  to  Rome  to  offer  certain  petitions  to  the  pope. 
The  general  tenor  of  these  was  as  follows:  that  all  cities  and  provinces 
which,  God  willing,  he  might  be  able  to  win  through  his  prowess  as  a 
warrior  and  his  royal  solicitude,  and  in  this  way  to  rescue  from  the 
power  of  the  enemy  by  force  of  arms,  might  be  under  the  authority  and 
rule  of  the  church  at  Jerusalem.  In  reference  to  this  matter  he  obtained 
a  bull  from  the  apostolic  see,  the  contents  of  which  we  have  deemed 
worthy  of  inserting  in  the  present  narrative. 

“Paschal,  servant  of  the  servants  of  God,  to  the  glorious  King  Bald¬ 
win  of  Jerusalem,  greeting  and  the  apostolic  benediction. 

“The  infidePs  long  period  of  possession  and  tyrannical  rule  has 
brought  about  confusion  in  regard  to  the  boundaries  of  the  holdings  of 
churches  which  have  been  and  still  are  in  your  parts.  Since,  after  due 

The  problem  of  insuring  an  adequate  supply  of  laborers  for  the  city  of  Jeru¬ 
salem  continued  to  trouble  the  rulers  throughout  the  period  of  Latin  control. 

The  insertion  of  these  documents  relating  to  church  organization  at  this  point 
is  somewhat  puzzling.  The  problem  with  which  they  are  concerned  naturally  in¬ 
terested  William  greatly,  both  as  archbishop  of  Tyre  and  as  prospective  patriarch. 
He  had  investigated  it  thoroughly  during  the  period  1175  to  1178,  if  not  also  earlier. 
Such  material,  however,  did  not  seem  very  appropriate  to  a  royal  chronicle,  as  he  him¬ 
self  confesses.  The  best  explanation  thus  far  advanced  for  its  inclusion  is  that  William 
lacked  sufficient  material  for  the  reign  of  Fulk  and  the  last  years  of  Baldwin  II.  He 
could  fill  that  space  by  the  insertion  of  such  material  from  the  archives.  Having  made 
the  decision,  he  was  compelled  to  include  here  these  documents  relating  to  the 
beginning  of  the  problem.  This  explanation  receives  further  support  from  the  fact 
that  these  documents  are  inserted  at  this  point,  near  the  end  of  Baldwin’s  reign,  in¬ 
stead  of  in  their  proper  place  some  five  and  six  years  earlier. 


END  OF  REIGN  OF  BALDWIN  I 


509 

deliberation,  we  are  unable  to  assign  definite  limits  thereto,  we  have 
deemed  it  not  unjust  to  agree  to  your  petition.  And  since  on  behalf 
of  the  exaltation  of  the  church  at  Jerusalem  you  have  devotedly  ex¬ 
posed  your  own  life  to  extreme  dangers,  I  grant  that  whatever  cities 
of  the  infidel  you  have  taken  or  shall  take  hereafter  shall  be  under  the 
rule  and  authority  of  that  church.  Furthermore,  I  direct  that  bishops 
of  these  cities  be  careful  to  show  obedience  to  the  patriarch  as  to  their 
own  metropolitan,  so  that  he,  strengthened  by  their  assistance,  and 
they,  in  turn,  quickened  by  that  very  harmony,  may  together  ac¬ 
complish  great  things  for  the  exaltation  of  the  church  at  Jerusalem  and 
that  thus  omnipotent  God  may  be  glorified  by  the  expeditions  of  the 
[crusaders] . 

Given  at  the  Lateran  the  fifth  day  before  the  Ides  of  July.” 

Likewise  at  the  petition  of  King  Baldwin  and  under  the  same  arti¬ 
cle,  Pope  Paschal  granted  a  privilege  to  the  Patriarch  Gibelin  and  his 
successors  forever,  a  rescript  of  which  we  have  inserted  in  the  present 
narrative.  The  text  is  as  follows. 

^Taschal,  bishop,  servant  of  the  servants  of  God,  to  his  most  rever¬ 
end  brother,  Gibelin,  patriarch  of  Jerusalem,  and  to  his  successors 
following  him  according  to  canonical  law, 

^^The  kingdoms  of  the  world  change  in  accordance  with  the  changes 
of  time  and  conditions  j  hence  it  seems  wise  that  the  boundaries  of 
ecclesiastical  parishes  in  many  districts  be  also  changed  and  transferred. 
The  boundaries  of  the  churches  of  Asia  were  defined  in  early  times,  but 
these  divisions  have  been  disturbed  by  the  influx  of  various  races  of  dif¬ 
fering  faiths.  But  in  our  times,  thanks  be  to  God,  the  cities  of  Jerusalem 
and  Antioch,  with  their  suburbs  and  the  adjacent  regions,  have  been 
restored  to  the  rule  of  Christian  princes.  We  must,  therefore,  put  our 
hand  to  change  and  transference  ordained  from  on  high  and,  in  accord¬ 
ance  with  the  movement  of  the  times,  we  must  rearrange  that  which 
needs  to  be  rearranged.  Accordingly,  we  grant  to  the  church  at  Jerusa¬ 
lem  those  cities  and  provinces  which  have  been  acquired,  by  the  grace 
of  God,  through  the  blood  of  the  glorious  King  Baldwin  and  the  armies 
following  him. 

^^Thus  to  you,  beloved  brother  and  co-bishop  Gibelin,  and  to  your 
successors,  and  through  you  to  the  holy  church  at  Jerusalem,  either 

Rohricht  has  corrected  this  date  to  June  8,  ini  (i?. 


510  END  OF  REIGN  OF  BALDWIN  I 

with  patriarchal  or  metropolitan  right,  we  grant,  by  the  words  of  this 
present  decree,  the  ruling  and  disposing  of  all  the  cities  and  provinces 
which  divine  grace  has  already  restored  to  the  sovereignty  of  the  said 
king,  or  shall  deign  to  restore  in  the  future.  For  it  is  fitting  that  the 
church  of  the  Sepulchre  of  the  Lord  should  obtain  the  honor  it  deserves 
according  to  the  wishes  of  its  devoted  soldiers  j  that,  freed  from  the 
yoke  of  Turks  and  Saracens,  it  should  be  exalted  more  abundantly  in 
the  hand  of  the  Christians.” 

Bernard,  patriarch  of  Antioch,  a  man  of  revered  life,  waxed  very  in¬ 
dignant  over  this  decree,  for  it  seemed  to  redound  to  the  injury  of  his 
own  church.  He  at  once  sent  envoys  to  the  church  at  Rome  to  make 
serious  complaint  of  this  act  and  of  the  manifest  injury  done  to  him 
and  his  church.  He  also  sent  letters  in  which  he  accused  the  pope  and 
the  whole  church  of  wrongdoing  in  respect  to  this  matter.  The  pope, 
desiring  to  soften  his  wrath,  wrote  in  response  as  follows. 

^Taschal,  bishop,  servant  of  the  servants  of  God,  to  his  venerable 
brother  Bernard,  patriarch  of  Antioch,  greeting  and  the  apostolic  bene¬ 
diction. 

“Although  among  other  apostolic  sees  that  one  stands  forth  preemi¬ 
nent  which  divine  grace  made  illustrious  by  the  death  of  St.  Peter 
in  the  body,  yet  so  strong  an  affection  has  heretofore  existed  between 
the  bishops  of  Rome  and  Antioch  that  there  seemed  to  be  no  diversity 
between  them,  for  the  same  Peter  made  both  illustrious. 

“Many  things  have  changed  during  the  interval  in  which  the  domi¬ 
nation  of  the  infidel  has  interfered  with  this  unity  between  these  two 
presiding  heads  of  the  church.  Thanks  be  to  God  that  in  our  times  He 
has  restored  the  rule  of  the  Christians  in  the  city  of  Antioch. 

“Therefore,  dearest  brother,  that  same  firm  unity  and  love  ought  to 
continue  among  us.  Nor  should  you  allow  any  feeling  that  we  desire 
to  abase  or  dishonor  the  church  of  Antioch  to  enter  your  mind.  If  we 
have  unwittingly  written  either  to  the  church  at  Antioch  or  to  that  at 
Jerusalem  anything  concerning  the  boundaries  of  the  parishes  to  which 
exception  may  be  taken,  it  should  not  be  ascribed  either  to  malice  or 
levity,  neither  ought  strife  to  be  aroused  among  us  on  this  account. 
The  remote  location  of  places  and  the  changes  which  have  taken  place 
in  the  ancient  names  of  cities  and  provinces  has  occasioned  us  great 
doubt  and  uncertainty.  Moreover  it  has  always  been  our  supreme  desire 


END  OF  REIGN  OF  BALDWIN  I 


511 

— a  desire  which  is  still  close  to  our  heart — ^to  encourage  among  brethren 
conditions  of  peace  rather  than  of  strife,  and  to  preserve  for  each  church 
its  own  right  and  honor. 

Given  at  the  Lateran,  on  the  seventh 
day  before  the  Ides  of  August.” 

In  order  that  his  feelings  in  the  matter  be  understood,  as  well  as  his 
purpose  in  granting  to  the  king  and  the  church  at  Jerusalem  the  con¬ 
cession  contained  in  his  bulls,  the  pope  also  wrote  as  follows  to  the  pa¬ 
triarch  Bernard : 

“Paschal,  bishop,  servant  of  the  servants  of  God,  to  his  fellow  bishop, 
the  patriarch  of  Antioch,  greeting  and  the  apostolic  benediction. 

“As  we  have  written  in  another  letter  to  your  brotherhood,  we  re¬ 
gard  you  and  the  church  committed  to  your  care  with  sincere  affection ; 
nor  do  we  wish  in  any  way  to  lessen  the  honor  of  your  high  position.  On 
the  contrary,  it  is  our  desire  that  the  preeminence  of  the  patriarchate  of 
Antioch,  which  has  been  maintained  in  past  times,  may  be  kept  ever 
intact,  according  to  the  will  of  God.  The  grant  which  we  have  made  to 
our  son  Baldwin,  king  of  Jerusalem,  at  the  request  of  his  envoys, 
should  not  disturb  your  affection  in  the  least,  if  you  will  carefully  ex¬ 
amine  the  inmost  meaning  of  my  letter.  For  thus  it  is  written  therein: 
‘The  infidePs  long  period  of  possession  and  tyrannical  rule  has  brought 
about  confusion  in  regard  to  the  boundaries  of  the  holdings  of  churches 
which  have  been  and  still  are  in  your  parts.  Therefore,  since  after  due 
deliberation,  we  are  unable  to  assign  definite  limits  thereto,  we  have 
deemed  it  not  unjust  to  agree  to  your  petition.  And  since  on  behalf  of 
the  exaltation  of  the  church  at  Jerusalem  you  have  devotedly  exposed 
your  own  life  to  extreme  dangers,  I  grant  that  whatever  cities  of  the 
infidel  you  have  taken  or  shall  take  hereafter  shall  be  under  the  rule 
and  authority  of  that  church.’ 

“In  the  same  spirit  of  understanding  should  be  received  the  words 
which  we  have  written  to  Gibelin,  patriarch  of  Jerusalem  of  happy 
memory,  concerning  the  cities  and  provinces  which,  through  the  grace 
of  God,  have  been  acquired  by  the  foresight  of  King  Baldwin  and  the 
blood  of  the  armies  following  him.  But  those  churches  to  which  definite 
territories  can  still  be.  assigned,  those  whose  limits  and  holdings  have 
not  been  confused  by  the  long  possession  and  tyranny  of  the  infidel  and 

Rohricht  has  corrected  this  date  to  August  8,  1 1 12  (R.  R^S'y  66). 


512  END  OF  REIGN  OF  BALDWIN  I 

the  cities  of  those  same  churches,  it  is  our  desire  to  make  subject  to  that 
church  to  which,  from  early  times,  they  are  known  rightly  to  pertain. 
For  we  do  not  wish  to  lessen  the  dignity  of  the  churches  in-order  to 
increase  the  power  of  princes,  nor  do  we  intend  to  injure  the  power  of 
princes  for  the  sake  of  exalting  ecclesiastical  dignity. 

Given  at  Beneventum,  the  fifteenth  Kalends  of  April.” 

He  wrote  to  King  Baldwin  also  in  the  same  strain,  explaining  what 
his  purpose  had  been  in  giving  assent  to  those  same  petitions  and  point¬ 
ing  out  that  the  church  at  Antioch  was  to  be  in  no  wise  unduly  bur¬ 
dened. 

^^Paschal,  bishop,  servant  of  the  servants  of  God,  to  his  well-beloved 
Baldwin,  illustrious  king  of  Jerusalem,  greeting  and  the  apostolic  bene¬ 
diction. 

^^The  concession  which  we  granted  at  your  petition — namely,  that 
whatever  cities  of  the  infidel  you  have  already  taken  or  shall  hereafter 
take  shall  be  subject  to  the  rule  and  dignity  of  the  church  at  Jerusa¬ 
lem — has  greatly  disturbed  our  brother,  the  Patriarch  Bernard,  and  the 
entire  church  at  Antioch,  Since  the  granting  of  that  concession  in  re¬ 
spect  to  those  churches  whose  boundaries  and  possessions  have  been 
confused  by  the  long  domination  of  the  infidel,  complaint  is  made  that 
the  patriarch  of  Jerusalem,  with  your  connivance,  has  attacked  the 
rights  of  those  churches  concerning  which  there  is  no  ambiguity — 
churches  which,  even  in  the  time  of  the  Turks  and  Saracens,  were  held 
by  the  see  of  Antioch.  For  the  bishops  of  those  churches,  even  when 
oppressed  by  the  tyrannical  rule  of  the  infidel,  showed  obedience  to  the 
patriarch  of  Antioch. 

“Therefore,  we  have  sent  letters  to  the  said  patriarch,  in  which  we 
have  decreed  that  the  preeminent  position  of  the  patriarchate  of  An¬ 
tioch  shall  be  preserved  intact  in  the  future  just  as  it  was  determined  in 
early  times  and  as  it  has  been  maintained  heretofore.  Accordingly  we 
admonish  you  earnestly — ^and  not  only  admonish  but  command — ^that 
invasions  of  this  kind  (where  the  truth  is  evident)  be  not  committed  by 
you,  but  that  each  church  enjoy  the  full  use  of  the  territories  belonging 
to  it  by  right.  For  we  cannot  go  contrary  to  the  manifestly  sacred  consti¬ 
tutions  of  our  fathers  j  nor  do  we  desire  in  the  least  either  to  lessen  the 
dignity  of  the  churches  in  order  to  increase  the  power  of  princes,  or  to 

Rohricht  has  indicated  the  date,  March  i8,  1113  (i?.  Reg.,  no.  73). 


END  OF  REIGN  OF  BALDWIN  I  513 

injure  the  power  of  princes  for  the  sake  of  exalting  ecclesiastical  dig¬ 
nity,  lest,  in  either  case,  the  peace  of  the  church  in  your  midst  be  dis¬ 
turbed,  which  God  grant  be  far  from  us. 

^^We  also  command  the  clergy  of  Jerusalem  through  the  medium  of 
this  present  document,  since,  as  it  appears,  they  have  left  ancestral  pos¬ 
sessions  and  native  lands  for  the  exaltation  of  the  church  and  the  ob¬ 
servance  of  religion,  that  they  be  content  with  the  rights  of  the  church 
at  Jerusalem  and  that  they  do  not  try  unrightfully  and  boldly  to  usurp 
those  possessions  which  are  known  definitely  to  pertain  to  the  right  of 
the  church  at  Antioch.  May  omnipotent  God  protect  you  in  all  things 
by  His  right  hand  and  grant  you  to  triumph  over  the  enemies  of  the 
church. 

Given  at  the  Lateran,  the  fifteenth  Kalends  of  April.’’ 

29.  The  king  goes  down  to  the  Red  sea  to  examine  that  region. 
Brought  low  by  illness y  he  sends  hack  to  her  own  land  the 
countess  of  Sicily y  whom  he  had  taken  as  his  wife. 

King  Baldwin  desired  to  gain  a  more  intimate  knowledge  of  the  ad¬ 
jacent  regions  and  to  investigate  the  condition  of  the  provinces.  In  the 
following  year,^^  therefore,  taking  with  him  experienced  guides  and  a 
retinue  which  seemed  to  him  sufficient  for  his  purpose,  he  crossed  the 
Jordan  and  traversed  Syria  Sobal.  Then  he  crossed  the  vast  desert  to 
the  Red  sea  and  came  to  the  ancient  city  of  Helim,  a  place  once  well 
known  to  the  people  of  Israel,  where,  as  we  read,  there  were  twelve 
springs  and  seventy  palm  trees.  When  the  king  arrived  at  this  place, 
he  found  that  the  inhabitants,  warned  betimes  of  his  approach,  had 
fled  to  the  sea  near  by  and  embarked  in  little  boats  to  escape  death. 
After  carefully  investigating  and  observing  these  places,  the  king  re¬ 
turned  over  the  route  so  lately  traversed  to  Montreal,  the  castle  which 
he  had  recently  built.  From  there  he  went  on  to  Jerusalem,  where  he 
was  seized  with  a  sudden  and  serious  illness  that  exhausted  him  beyond 
his  powers  of  endurance.  Fearing  that  he  was  about  to  die,  he  was 
pricked  in  conscience  because  he  had  wrongfully  cast  off  his  legitimate 
wife  and  married  another  woman.  Full  of  remorse  and  penitence,  he 
made  known  his  scruples  to  certain  religious  and  God-fearing  men. 

Here  again  Rohricht  indicates  the  date,  March  i8,  1113  (/?.  Reg.y  no.  73). 

The  events  which  follow  occurred  in  the  year  1 1 1 6.  William’s  reference  to 
^‘the  following  year”  would  suggest  that  the  preceding  material  had  been  inserted 
in  one  of  the  later  retouchings  of  his  manuscript. 


END  OF  REIGN  OF  BALDWIN  I 


514 

confessed  his  guilt,  and  promised  to  make  amends.  He  was  admonished 
to  send  away  the  wife  whom  he  had  married  and  to  restore  his  former 
wife  to  the  dignity  of  which  he  had  deprived  her.  This  he  agreed  to  do 
if  his  life  should  be  prolonged,  and  he  bound  himself  by  a  vow.^® 

He  then  called  the  queen  before  him  and  explained  the  matter  fully 
to  her.  She  had  already  received  some  intimations  of  his  purpose,  for 
many  had  spoken  of  it  to  her.  She  was  highly  indignant  that  she  should 
have  been  called  from  her  country  to  no  purpose,  after  being  deceived 
by  the  trickery  of  the  lords  of  the  realm  who  had  been  sent  to  summon 
her.  Sad  and  sorrowing  over  the  insult  offered  her  as  well  as  over  the 
futile  waste  of  her  wealth,  she  prepared  to  return  to  her  own  land  in 
the  third  year  after  her  arrival  in  Syria.  Her  son  was  angered  beyond 
measure,  because  she  had  been  sent  back.  He  conceived  a  mortal  hatred 
against  the  kingdom  and  its  people.  Other  Christian  princes  in  various 
parts  of  the  world,  either  by  coming  in  person  or  by  giving  liberal 
gifts,  have  amplified  and  promoted  our  infant  realm.  But  he  and  his 
heirs  to  the  present  time  have  never  become  reconciled  to  us  to  the 
extent  of  a  single  friendly  word.®®  Although  they  could  have  relieved 
our  necessities  by  counsel  and  aid  far  more  easily  than  any  other  prince, 
yet  they  have  always  remembered  their  wrongs  and  have  unjustly 
avenged*  upon  the  whole  people  the  fault  of  a  single  individual. 

30.  The  fortress  Alexandriuniy  called  in  common  farlance  Scan- 
daliumy  is  built  bejore  the  city  of  Tyre* 

Tyre  was  now  the  only  city  on  the  coast  which  still  remained  in  the 
possession  of  the  enemy,  and  the  king  was  most  eager  to  bring  it  under 
his  power.  Accordingly,  this  same  year,  after  he  had  recovered  from 
his  illness,  he  built  a  fortress  between  Acre  and  Tyre.  This  occupied  the 
very  site  where  once  Alexander  of  Macedon,  in  order  to  take  Tyre,  is 
said  to  have  erected  a  fortress  and  to  have  called  it  Alexandrium  from 
his  own  name. 

Alexandrium  lies  on  the  seashore  scarcely  five  miles  from  Tyre  and 

This  is  somewhat  inconsistent  with  William’s  earlier  statement  reg’arding  the 
fate  of  Baldwin’s  former  wife,  Arda  (see  Book  XI,  chap.  1). 

Sicily  contributed  a  naval  expedition  to  aid  in  the  conquest  of  Egypt  in  1174 
which  William  describes  at  some  length  (see  Book  XIX).  Prutz  has  concluded  from 
the  inconsistency  of  these  statements  that  William  had  written  this  portion  of  his 
work  before  1174  (see  Hans  Prutz,  “Studien  iiber  Wilhelm  von  Tyrus.”  Neues 
Archtv  der  Gesellschaft  fur  altere  deiUsche  Geschlchtskunde^  pp.  115—17). 


END  OF  REIGN  OF  BALDWIN  I 


515 

is  well  watered  by  springs.  The  king  rebuilt  it  with  the  idea  that  it 
might  be  a  thorn  in  the  side  of  the  people  of  Tyre  and  that  from 
it  injuries  might  ofte;n  be  inflicted  upon  them.  Today  the  people  incor¬ 
rectly  call  this  place  Scandalium.  For  in  Arabic,  Alexander  is  called 
Scandar,  and  Alexandrium,  Scandarium,  but  since  R  is  usually  changed 
to  Ly  it  is  commonly  known  as  Scandalium.^® ^ 

31.  The  king  goes  down  into  Egyft,  He  takes  Pharamia.  While 
on  this  journey  he  is  seized  with  a  serious  illness  from  the  ef¬ 
fects  of  which  he  dies.  He  is  buried  at  J erusalemy  near  his 
brother. 

In  the  following  year,  the  king  went  down  to  Egypt  with  a  large  force 
to  take  vengeance  on  the  Egyptians  for  the  wrongs  which  they  had  so 
often  brought  upon  him.  By  a  violent  assault  he  seized  the  very  ancient 
city  of  Pharamia  and  gave  over  the  supplies  found  therein  as  plunder 
to  his  comrades  in  arms. 

Pharamia,  as  we  have  said,  is  an  ancient  city  on  the  seacoast,  not 
far  from  one  of  the  mouths  of  the  Nile,  which  is  called  Carabeix.  On 
this  mouth  is  also  situated  another  very  ancient  city,  Tanis,  which  was 
witness  of  the  signs  which  the  Lord  worked  before  Pharaoh  through 
Moses,  his  servant.  After  the  city  was  taken,  the  king  went  out  to  visit 
this  mouth  of  the  Nile  and  marvelled  at  its  waters,  which  he  had  never 
seen  before.  It  was  of  special  interest  to  him  because  the  Nile,  a  portion 
of  which  is  carried  into  the  sea  by  that  arm,  is  said  and  believed  to  be 
one  of  the  four  rivers  of  Paradise.  From  this  bay  they  took  fish,  which 
are  very  abundant  there.  They  then  returned  to  the  conquered  city  and 
there  partook  of  a  breakfast  prepared  from  the  fish  they  had  caught. 
As  the  king  rose  from  the  meal,  he  began  to  experience  great  internal 
distress.  The  pain  in  his  old  wound  revived  also  and  caused  him  such 
suffering  that  he  despaired  of  life  in  his  peril.  The  order  to  depart  was 
at  once  proclaimed  by  the  voice  of  the  herald,  but  the  king’s  illness 
increased  and  he  became  so  weak  that  he  was  unable  to  ride.  A  litter 
was  therefore  brought,  and  he,  suffering  extremely,  was  placed  in  it. 
In  this  fashion  by  uninterrupted  journeys,  they  crossed  that  part  of  the 
wilderness  which  extends  between  Egypt  and  Syria  and  arrived  at 
Lares  [al-Arish] ,  an  ancient  coast  city  in  that  desert.  There  the  king  suc¬ 
cumbed  to  his  illness  and  yielded  to  fate.  The  sorrowing  legions,  almost 

100  This  fortress  was  erected  in  1117. 


5i6  end  of  reign  OF  BALDWIN  I 

overwhelmed  by  grief,  bore  his  body  thence  to  Jerusalem.  On  the  Sun¬ 
day  which  is  called  the  Day  of  Palm  Branches  he  was  borne  into  the  city 
through  the  valley  of  Jehoshaphat,  where,  according  to  custom,  the 
people  had  gathered  for  the  feast  day.  He  died  in  the  year  of  the 
Incarnation  of  our  Lord  iii8,  in  the  eighteenth  year  of  his  reign,  and 
was  buried  with  royal  splendor  next  to  his  brother  in  the  place  called 
Golgotha  below  Calvary.^®^ 

Palm  Sunday,  April  7,  1118.  Golgotha  was  the  name  o£  a  chapel  in  the  church 

of  the  Holy  Sepulchre. 

% 

HERE  ENDS  THE  ELEVENTH  BOOK 


THE  TWELFTH  BOOK  BEGINS 


BALDWIN  II:  TROUBLES  IN  NORTHERN 

SYRIA 

I*  Baldwin^  count  of  Edessa^  is  reused  to  the  throne.  Who  he 
was  and  of  what  Lineage  he  came  is  stated. 

The  second  Latin  king  of  Jerusalem  was  Baldwin  du  Bourg,  surnamed 
Aculeus.^  He  was  a  devout  and  God-fearing  man,  notable  for  his  loy¬ 
alty  and  for  his  great  experience  in  military  matters.  He  was  of  the 
Frankish  nation,  from  the  bishopric  of  Rheims,  the  son  of  Hugh, 
count  of  Rethel,  and  the  noble  countess  Melisend.  This  lady  is  said 
to  have  been  one  of  many  sisters,  of  whom  were  born  numerous  sons 
and  daughters.  The  actual  number  of  these  descendants  is  well  known 
to  those  who  make  a  careful  study  of  the  genealogies  of  princes.^  While 
his  father  was  still  living,  Baldwin,  in  company  with  other  nobles  who 
were  inspired  with  the  same  spirit  of  devotion,  undertook  the  pilgrim¬ 
age  to  Jerusalem,  in  the  retinue  of  Duke  Godfrey,  his  kinsman.  He 
was  the  oldest  of  the  family,  and  his  father  was  now  well  advanced  in 
years.  Two  brothers  and  two  sisters  were  left  at  home.  Of  these,  one 
brother,  Gervaise,  was  afterwards  elected  bishop  over  the  church  at 
Rheims^  the  other  brother  was  called  Manasses.  One  of  his  sisters, 
Matilda,  became  the  wife  of  the  castellan  of  Vitryj  the  other,  Ho- 
dierna,  married  Herbrand  of  Herges,  a  noble  and  powerful  lord.  Of 
this  latter  marriage  was  born  Manasses  of  Herges,  who  later,  in  the 
time  of  Queen  Melisend,  became  the  royal  constable.^ 

When  the  father  of  this  King  Baldwin  died,  his  son  Manasses 
succeeded  him,  for  Baldwin,  who  was  the  first  born,  was  occupied 
with  the  cares  of  the  kingdom  overseas.  Manasses  died  childless.  His 

^  Literally  sharp  or  pointed,  perhaps  thorn. 

^  This  statement  implies  a  profession  of  genealogists,  which  must  have  sprung  up 
since  the  time  of  the  First  Crusade.  Heraldry  was,  of  course,  involved  in  this,  and 
the  heraldic  devices  on  the  shields  of  the  nobles  were  becoming  complicated  by 
genealogical  indications.  This  development  is  symptomatic  of  the  great  social  change 
which  had  occurred  in  this  century.  The  wide  substitution  of  law  for  force  in  the 
ownership  and  transmission  of  fiefs  gave  added  importance  to  genealogical  lore. 

®  The  family  connections  of  Baldwin  du  Bourg  were  greatly  complicated  by  the 
number  of  his  immediate  relatives.  William  here  attempts  to  give  only  a  portion  of 
the  relationships. 


5i8  king  BALDWIN  II 

brother  Gervaise  then  renounced  the  office  of  archbishop  of  Rheims, 
married  a  wife — ^which  was  contrary  to  the  canons  of  the  Church — and 
held  the  county  [Rethel]  by  hereditary  right.'*  An  only  daughter, 
born  of  this  union,  he  married  to  a  certain  nobleman  of  Normandy. 
On  the  death  of  Gervaise,  Huitiers,  the  son  of  Matilda,  that  sister  who 
had  espoused  the  castellan  of  Vitry,  succeeded  to  the  county.  But 
enough  of  these  matters  for  the  present. 

2.  The  reason  for  Baldwin's  journey  to  Jerusalem^  where  he 
was  elected  king. 

On  the  death  of  Duke  Godfrey,  of  happy  and  illustrious  memory,  his 
brother  Baldwin  I  was  called  to  the  throne  of  Jerusalem  and  with  all 
due  ceremony  placed  in  charge  of  the  realm.  At  that  time,  he  appointed 
as  his  successor  over  the  county  of  Edessa  his  kinsman,  the  Baldwin 
of  whom  we  are  now  speaking.^  For  more  than  eighteen  years,  the  lat¬ 
ter  governed  the  county  with  energy  and  success.  At  length,  in  the 
eighteenth  year  of  his  rule,  as  conditions  in  his  own  land  were  in  an 
enviable  state  of  peace,  he  determined  to  visit  the  king  of  Jerusalem, 
his  overlord,  kinsman,  and  benefactor.  At  the  same  time  he  wished  to 
visit  the  holy  places  for  the  sake  of  prayer. 

The  necessary  preparations  for  the  journey  were  accordingly  made. 
He  entrusted  the  care  of  the  country  to  certain  of  his  faithful  servants 
in  whose  loyalty  and  vigilance  he  had  entire  confidence  and,  like  a 
wise  and  provident  man,  arranged  for  the  safety  of  the  towns.  Then, 
attended  by  a  noble  retinue,  he  set  forth  upon  the  journey  as  he  had 
planned. 

But  as  he  was  pursuing  his  way,  a  messenger  met  him.  He  brought 
the  news,  which  proved  to  be  true,  that  the  king  had  died  in  Egypt. 
Baldwin  was  greatly  concerned  over  the  news  of  the  death  of  his  lord 
and  kinsman,  as  was  not  strange.  He  did  not,  however,  give  up  the 
journey  on  which  he  had  set  out,  but  made  more  haste  toward  Jeru¬ 
salem.  He  arrived  there  on  the  day  called  the  feast  of  Palm  Branches. 
According  to  custom,  all  the  people  had  assembled  in  the  valley  of 
Jehoshaphat  for  the  solemn  religious  ceremonies  of  the  great  day.  By 

^  Such  instances  as  this  illustrate  the  loose  way  in  which  the  canons  had  been 
observed.  It  required  years  of  effort  by  the  church  during  the  later  eleventh  and 
early  twelfth  century  to  establish  a  fairly  consistent  observance  of  canon  law  in  the 
face  of  long-established  custom. 

®  See  Book  X,  chap,  i , 


KING  BALDWIN  II 


519 

a  strange  coincidence,  as  the  count  and  his  escort  entered  the  city  from 
one  direction,  the  bier  of  the  king  in  funeral  procession  was  borne  in 
from  the  opposite  side,  followed,  as  was  customary,  by  the  entire  body 
of  soldiers  that  had  gone  down  to  Egypt  with  him.*^ 

3.  'The  method  of  election  is  described.  The  memorable  action 
of  Count  Eustace  of  Boulogne  is  recounted , 

The  body  of  the  king  was  brought  into  the  Holy  City  and  buried  with 
honor  next  to  that  of  his  brother,  in  the  church  of  the  Sepulchre  of 
the  Lord  before  the  place  which  is  called  Golgotha,  at  the  foot  of  Mt. 
Calvary.  Then  the  great  men  of  the  kingdom  who  were  present  as¬ 
sembled  for  consultation — archbishops,  bishops,  and  other  prelates  of 
the  church.  The  Patriarch  Arnulf  and  some  lay  princes  were  also  there. 
Among  them  was  Joscelin,  lord  of  Tiberias,  whom  we  have  often  men¬ 
tioned  above.  He  was  a  man  of  great  energy,  powerful  both  in  word 
and  deed. 

In  the  conference  then  held  on  the  matter  in  hand  various  opinions 
were  advanced.  Some  thought  that  they  ought  to  wait  for  the  arrival  of 
Count  Eustace  and  not  interfere  with  the  ancient  law  of  hereditary 
succession."^  This  was  especially  so  because  his  brothers  of  happy  mem¬ 
ory  had  so  successfully  administered  the  kingdom.  Their  rule  had 
been  harmonious  and  satisfactory  to  all.  Others  said,  “The  affairs  of 
the  realm  and  the  exigencies  constantly  arising  do  not  permit  these 
delays  or  allow  us  to  indulge  in  interregnums  of  this  kind.  On  the  con¬ 
trary,  haste  is  imperative,  that  measures  for  the  good  of  the  land  may 
be  speedily  taken.  If  an  emergency  should  arise,  there  would  be  no 
one  to  lead  forth  or  withdraw  the  troops  or  to  attend  to  the  affairs  of 
the  realm.  Thus,  for  lack  of  a  leader  the  welfare  of  the  kingdom  would 
be  imperilled.”  ® 

®  William’s  allusion  to  ‘^customary”  practices  presents  some  difficulties.  Was  he 
thinking  of  customs  as  they  existed  in  his  own  day,  or  did  he  have  in  mind  certain 
antecedent  practices  which  the  early  crusaders  followed?  Technically  Baldwin  I  was 
the  first  king,  though  the  second  Latin  ruler  of  Jerusalem,  and  it  would  therefore 
seem  somewhat  early  to  speak  of  local  ‘‘customs”  governing  procedure  at  royal 
funerals. 

Reference  to  an  “ancient”  law  of  hereditary  succession  likewise  presents 
difficulties.  Doubtless  there  was  a  natural  tendency  to  accept  hereditary  succession, 
but  circumstances  had  already  interfered  and  were  to  interfere  again  in  any  easy 
acceptance  of  the  hereditary  principle  (see  J.  L.  La  Monte,  Feudal  Monarchy  in 
the  Latin  Kingdom  of  Jerusalem^  11 00—1291,  pp.  8—35  fassim). 

®  William  here  recognizes  the  potent  force  of  circumstances  in  the  modification  of 
legal  arrangements,  though  his  preference  is  that  of  a  lawyer,  for  the  law. 


KING  BALDWIN  II 


I  have  already  mentioned  that  Joscelin  was  a  man  of  very  great 
influence  in  the  kingdom.  He  had  already  sounded  the  mind  of  the 
patriarch  and  found  it  favorable  to  his  own  views.  He  therefore  put 
an  end  to  the  wavering  of  factions  and  the  hesitancy  about  voting  by 
siding  with  those  who  wished  a  king  to  be  appointed  at  once.  He  said, 
“The  count  of  Edessa  is  present.  He  is  a  just  man  and  greatly  revered 
— 3.  kinsman  of  the  king,  energetic,  valiant  in  battle,  and  estimable  in 
every  respect.  No  land  or  province  could  furnish  a  better  man.  It  is 
far  wiser  to  take  him  for  our  king  than  to  wait  for  dangerous  uncer¬ 
tainties.” 


There  were  many  who  believed  that  the  words  of  Lord  Joscelin 
were  spoken  with  sincere  honesty,  for  they  were  well  aware  of  the 
treatment  which  he  had  recently  endured  from  the  count,  a  matter 
which  has  already  been  described.  The  words  of  the  proverb,  ^^All 
praise  from  an  enemy  is  true,”  also  recurred  to  their  minds.  Accord¬ 
ingly,  not  knowing  that  his  real  purpose  was  far  different,  they  had 
confidence  in  his  words  and  agreed  with  him.  But,  as  has  been  said,  his 
action  was  taken  with  a  different  end  in  view.  For  it  was  with  the  hope 
that  he  himself  might  succeed  to  the  county  of  Edessa  in  the  future  that 
he  was  endeavoring  to  place  the  count  on  the  throne.^ 

Since  the  Patriarch  Arnulf  and  Lord  Joscelin  had  adopted  this  idea, 
the  rest  were  easily  led  to  take  the  same  view.  Baldwin  was  accordingly 
elected  king  by  the  wishes  and  unanimous  consent  of  all.  On  the  day 
of  the  Holy  Resurrection,  which  occurred  soon  after,  he  was  solemnly 
anointed  and  consecrated  according  to  custom.  The  royal  insignia  of 
the  diadem  was  then  bestowed  upon  him.^®  Whatever  may  have  been 
the  purpose  of  the  patriarch  or  of  Lord  Joscelin  in  this  matter,  God 


in  His  mercy  turned  the  result  into  good.  For  led  by  the  grace  of  God, 
Baldwin  showed  himself  a  just  man,  pious  and  God-fearing.  In  every¬ 
thing  that  he  undertook  he  was  successful. 

Nevertheless  his  introduction  to  the  kingship  seems  to  have  been 
somewhat  irregular,  and  it  is  a  fact  that  those  who  promoted  him 


fraudulently  excluded  the  legitimate  heir  to  the  realm  from  the  right¬ 
ful  succession.  For  on  the  death  of  the  king  some  of  the  great  nobles 
had  been  sent  to  offer  the  throne  by  a  common  edict  to  Eustace,  count 


®This  motive  was  doubtless  inferred  from  the  later  outcome.  This  is  an  early 
instance  of  William’s  interest  in  probing*  the  motives  of  men. 

The  impression  that  Baldwin  was  crowned  on  this  occasion  is  wrong.  The  coro¬ 
nation  was  solemnized  at  Bethlehem  more  than  a  year  later  (see  chap.  12). 


KING  BALDWIN  II 


521 

of  Boulogne,  brother  of  the  illustrious  Duke  Godfrey  and  of  King 
Baldwin.  Whether  this  was  done  in  accordance  with  the  king’s  last 
wish  or  by  the  general  advice  of  the  princes  of  the  realm  we  have  not 
been  able  to  ascertain  definitely.  The  envoys  visited  Eustace  and,  by 
bringing  forward  legitimate  reasons  why  it  was  his  duty  to  consent,  in¬ 
duced  him  to  go  with  them  as  far  as  Apulia.  This  he  did  most  reluc¬ 
tantly  and  unwillingly.  He  was  a  devout  and  God-fearing  man,  the 
true  brother  and  emulator  of  these  great  men  and  their  successor  in 
virtues  and  honorable  worth. 

On  reaching  Apulia,  this  venerable  man  learned  that,  in  the  interval, 
his  kinsman  Baldwin,  the  count  of  Edessa,  had  been  made  king  of 
Jerusalem.  The  envoys  who  had  been  sent  to  conduct  him  to  the  king¬ 
dom  insisted  that  he  should  nonetheless  proceed.  They  declared  that 
the  action  which  had  been  taken  was  contrary  to  law  both  human  and 
divine.  It  was  against  the  most  ancient  rule  of  hereditary  succession 
and  could  by  no  means  stand.  The  venerable  man  filled  with  the 
spirit  of  God  is  said  to  have  replied,  “Far  be  it  from  me  that  through 
any  action  of  mine  strife  should  enter  into  that  kingdom  of  the  Lord 
which  has  received  peace  through  the  blood  of  Christ,  that  kingdom 
for  whose  tranquillity  my  brothers,  those  noble  men  of  immortal 
memory,  rendered  up  their  splendid  lives  to  heaven.” 

So  the  baggage  was  rearranged  and  his  escort  assembled.  Then  not¬ 
withstanding  all  the  efforts  of  the  envoys  to  induce  him  to  go  to  the 
kingdom,  he  returned  to  his  own  land. 

4.  Concerning  the  affearance^  manners y  and  conversation  of 
this  king. 

[The  new  king]  is  said  to  have  been  tall  of  stature,  of  striking  appear¬ 
ance  and  agreeable  features,  His  thin  blond  hair  was  streaked  with 
white.  His  beard,  though  thin,  reached  to  his  breast  3  his  complexion 

The  story  of  the  embassy  to  Eustace  and  his  journey  to  Apulia  is  not  mentioned 
by  Fulcher.  Any  such  embassy  must  have  known  of  the  selection  of  Baldwin  du 
Bourg-  before  it  left  Jerusalem.  Hagenmeyer  believes,  however,  that  the  postponed 
coronation  of  Baldwin  II  indicates  that  the  arrangement  of  1118  was  considered 
temporary,  subject  to  the  decision  of  Eustace.  In  that  event  the  only  improbability 
of  William’s  account  would  be  the  journey  of  Eustace  to  Apulia.  (See  H.  Hagen¬ 
meyer,  ed.,  Fulcheri  Carnotensis  historia  Hierosolymitana^  p.  615,  note  8.) 

The  dependence  upon  hearsay  for  this  description  of  Baldwin  II  is  an  important 
item  in  confirming  the  date  of  William’s  birth  as  not  long  before  Baldwin’s  death, 
at  least  not  long  enough  before  that  time  to  have  permitted  him  a  personal  view  of 
this  king. 


522 


KING  BALDWIN  II 


was  vivid  and  ruddy  for  his  time  of  life.  He  was  an  expert  in  the  use 
of  arms  and  very  skilful  in  the  management  of  horses.  He  had  had 
much  experience  in  the  art  of  war  and  was  wise  in  governing  his  men 
and  successful  in  his  campaigns.  He  was  kind  and  merciful,  given  to 
benevolent  works — a  religious  and  God-fearing  man,  so  constant  in 
prayer  that  he  had  callouses  on  his  hands  and  knees  from  frequent  re¬ 
ligious  exercise  and  constant  kneeling.  Although  elderly,  he  was  inde¬ 
fatigable  when  the  affairs  of  the  kingdom  called  him. 

After  he  had  attained  the  throne,  he  was  troubled  about  the  county 
of  Edessa,  which  had  been  left  without  a  ruler.  He  called  his  relative, 
Joscelin,  for  he  desired  voluntarily  to  make  full  amends  for  the  wrong 
he  had  once  done  him,  and  gave  the  county  into  his  charge  as  to  one 
who  knew  the  country  well.  As  soon  as  Joscelin  had  taken  the  oath  of 
fealty  he  was  invested  with  the  standard  and  put  in  possession  of 
Edessa.^^ 

Baldwin  then  sent  for  his  wife  and  daughters  and  all  his  household 
from  Edessa.  Through  the  assiduous  care  of  Joscelin  they  soon  reached 
him  in  safety.  His  wife,  Morfia,  was  the  daughter  of  a  Greek  nobleman 
named  Gabriel,  of  whom  we  have  spoken  above.^^  He  had  married 
her  while  he  was  count  and  received  with  her  as  dowry  a  large  sum  of 
money.  She  had  borne  him  three  daughters:  Melisend,  Alice,  and 
Hodierna.  A  fourth  daughter  named  Iveta  was  born  after  he  became 

Baldwin  was  consecrated  and  crowned  king  in  the  year  of  the  Incar¬ 
nation  of  the  Lord  iii8,  on  the  second  day  of  the  month  of  April.^^ 
Pope  Gelasius  II  was  at  that  time  presiding  over  the  holy  Roman 
churchy  Bernard,  the  first  patriarch  of  the  Latins  in  Antioch,  was  rul¬ 
ing  there  3  and  over  the  holy  church  at  Jerusalem  was  Arnulf,  the 
fourth  Latin  patriarch  in  that  city. 

The  feudal  dependence  of  Edessa  upon  Jerusalem  is  thus  personal  rather  than 
organic.  It  is  not  clear  whether  the  grant  of  Edessa  to  Joscelin  occurred  in  iii8 
or  1119. 

See  Book  X,  chap.  24,  where  Gabriel  is  more  correctly  described  as  an  Armenian 
of  Greek  faith. 

This  date  of  Baldwin's  accession,  but  not  coronation,  is  given  by  Fulcher  as 
Easter  Day,  which  was  April  14,  1118,  not  April  2. 


KING  BALDWIN  II 


523 


5.  Alexius y  emferor  of  C onstantinofle y  dies.  Pofe  Paschal  and 
the  countess  of  Sicily y  who  had  once  been  the  queen  of  Jeru-- 
saleniy  also  defart  from  this  life. 

About  this  same  timcj  Alexius,  emperor  of  Constantinople,  the  worst 
persecutor  of  the  Latins,  was  removed  from  the  affairs  of  this  world. 
He  was  succeeded  by  his  son  John.  This  emperor  was  much  more 
humane  than  his  father  had  been,  and,  as  his  worth  deserved,  was  far 
more  acceptable  to  our  people.  His  attitude  toward  the  Latins  was  not 
entirely  sincere,  however,  as  the  following  pages  will  show.^® 

Paschal,  the  Roman  pope,  also  went  the  way  of  all  flesh,  in  the  six¬ 
teenth  year  of  his  pontificate.  He  was  succeeded  by  Gelasius,  also  called 
John  Gaetanus,  chancellor  of  the  holy  Roman  church. 

There  died  also  the  Lady  Adelaide,  countess  of  Sicily,  once  the  wife 
in  fact  though  not  in  law  of  the  above-mentioned  King  Baldwin. 


6.  The  Egyptian  army  with  both  land  and  naval  forces  enters 
the  kingdom.  The  king  marches  to  meet  it  with  his  troofsy 
but  no  engagement  results.  Arnulfy  'patriarch  of  J erusalemy 
dies.  Gormond  is  chosen  in  his  stead. 


In  the  summer  of  the  same  year,  the  prince  of  Egypt  then  reigning 
gathered  out  of  all  the  territories  of  Egypt  a  great  number  of  soldiers, 
both  cavalry  and  infantry.  He  proposed  to  enter  our  kingdom  by  force 
with  both  land  and  naval  armies.  For  he  thought  it  would  be  an  easy 
matter  either  to  destroy  by  the  sword  so  small  a  people  or  to  defeat 
them  and  drive  them  as  fugitives  from  the  entire  land  of  Syria.  So  with 
a  large  body  of  knights  and  a  countless  host  of  infantry  trained  to 
throw  the  javelin  he  crossed  the  great  desert  which  lies  between  us 
and  Egypt  and  encamped  before  Ascalon. 

Tughtigin,  king  of  Damascus,  had  already  learned  that  the  Egyp¬ 
tians  were  coming.^^  Either  on  his  own  initiative  or  at  their  invitation, 
he  too  had  assembled  a  large  army.  He  followed  unfrequented  routes, 
in  order  not  to  encounter  our  army,  crossed  the  Jordan,  and  joined  the 


Alexius  died  August  15,  iii8.  His  son  John  II,  1118—1143,  is  mentioned 
frequently,  especially  in  Books  XIV  and  XV. 

See  Book  XI,  chaps.  15,  21,  29. 

Al-Afdal  still  controlled  the  policies  of  Egypt. 


See  Book  XI,  note  84. 


KING  BALDWIN  II 


524 

camp  of  the  Egyptians.  By  reinforcing  their  strength  he  hoped  to  in¬ 
jure  us. 

Some  of  the  ships  anchored  at  Ascalon  and  others  went  to  Tyre,  for 
that  was  a  strongly  fortified  city  with  a  commodious  harbor.  There 
they  awaited  orders  as  to  the  pleasure  of  their  lord  and  the  will  of  the 
commander  of  the  fleet.  The  king  of  Jerusalem,  however,  had  long 
ago  foreseen  their  coming.  He  had  already  summoned  auxiliary  troops 
from  the  lands  of  Antioch  and  Tripoli  and  had  concentrated  his  own 
forces  at  a  place  in  the  plain  of  the  Philistines.  He  now  went  forth  to 
meet  the  enemy.  He  passed  the  place  which  was  formerly  called  Azot, 
where  one  of  the  five  cities  of  the  Philistines  is  known  to  have  been 
situated,  and  encamped  near  the  Egyptians.  The  two  armies  were  so 
close  together  that  each  could  watch  the  camp  of  its  foe  from  day  to 
day. 

A  delay  of  almost  three  months  followed  during  which  both  sides 
hesitated  to  attack.  The  Christians  feared  that  it  would  be  rash  to  rouse 
so  vast  an  army  against  them.  The  enemy,  on  the  other  hand,  dreaded 
the  reputed  daring  and  strength  of  our  soldiers  and  their  experience  in 
battle.  At  length,  the  Egyptian  leader  decided  that  it  would  be  wiser 
to  return  home  in  safety  rather  than  to  expose  himself  and  his  men  to 
the  uncertain  chances  of  battle.  The  expedition,  therefore,  returned  to 
Egypt,  and  since  there  was  no  reason  to  suspect  a  sudden  return,  our 
people  took  leave  of  the  king  and  gladly  returned  to  their  homes. 

About  this  time,  Arnulf,  patriarch  of  Jerusalem,  died.  He  was  a  man 
of  most  troublesome  disposition,  careless  of  the  sacred  responsibilities 
of  his  office.^®  In  his  stead  was  appointed  Gormond,  a  straightforward. 
God-fearing  man.  He  belonged  to  the  Frankish  nation  and  came  from 
the  town  of  Pecquigny,  in  the  bishopric  of  Amiens.  During  the  days 
of  this  man  and,  indeed,  through  his  merits,  as  most  people  believed, 
the  Lord  deigned  to  accomplish  many  splendid  works  for  the  conso¬ 
lation  and  increase  of  the  kingdom.  These  will  be  related  in  the  fol¬ 
lowing  chapters  of  the  present  work. 

7 .  The  rmlitary  order  0]  the  T emfle  is  established  at  J erusalem. 

In  this  same  year,  certain  pious  and  God-fearing  nobles  of  knightly 
rank,  devoted  to  the  Lord,  professed  the  wish  to  live  perpetually  in 
poverty,  chastity,  and  obedience.  In  the  hands  of  the  patriarch  they 

Arnulf  died  April  28,  1118.  William’s  condemnation  is  unrelenting. 


KING  BALDWIN  II 


525 

vowed  themselves  to  the  service  of  God  as  regular  canons.  Foremost 
and  most  distinguished  among  these  men  were  the  venerable  Hugh 
de  Payens  and  Godfrey  de  St.  Omer.  Since  they  had  neither  a  church 
nor  a  fixed  place  of  abode,  the  king  granted  them  a  temporary  dwell¬ 
ing  place  in  his  own  palace,  on  the  north  side  by  the  Temple  of  the 
Lord.  Under  certain  definite  conditions,  the  canons  of  the  Temple  of 
the  Lord  also  gave  them  a  square  belonging  to  the  canons  near  the 
same  palace  where  the  new  order  might  exercise  the  duties  of  its  re¬ 
ligion. 

The  king  and  his  nobles,  as  well  as  the  patriarch  and  the  prelates 
of  the  churches,  also  provided  from  their  own  holdings  certain  ben¬ 
efices,  the  income  of  which  was  to  provide  these  knights  with  food  and 
clothing.  Some  of  these  gifts  were  for  a  limited  time,  others  in  per¬ 
petuity.  The  main  duty  of  this  order — that  which  was  enjoined  upon 
them  by  the  patriarch  and  the  other  bishops  for  the  remission  of  sins — 
was,  “that,  as  far  as  their  strength  permitted,  they  should  keep  the 
roads  and  highways  safe  from  the  menace  of  robbers  and  highwaymen, 
with  especial  regard  for  the  protection  of  pilgrims.’’ 

Nine  years  after  the  founding  of  this  order  the  knights  were  still 
in  secular  garb.  They  wore  such  garments  as  the  people,  for  the  salva¬ 
tion  of  their  souls,  bestowed  upon  them.  During  this  ninth  year,  a  coun¬ 
cil  was  held  at  Troyes  in  France.  There  were  present  the  archbishops 
of  Rheims  and  Sens,  with  their  suffragans  5  the  bishop  of  Albano,  the 
pope’s  legate;  the  abbots  of  Citeaux,  Clairvaux,  Potigny;  and  many 
others.  At  this  council,  by  order  of  Pope  Honorius  and  of  Stephen, 
patriarch  of  Jerusalem,  a  rule  was  drawn  up  for  this  order  and  a  habit 
of  white  assigned  them.^^ 

Although  the  Templars  had  been  established  for  nine  years,  they 

This  essay  on  the  founding  of  the  Templars  is  William’s  own  and  not  derived 
from  any  earlier  chronicle.  As  this  history  has  already  abundantly  demonstrated, 
the  roads  from  Jaifa  to  Jerusalem  and  to  the  other  famous  shrines  used  by  the 
pilgrims  were  peculiarly  hazardous  during  the  years  of  Godfrey  and  Baldwin,  who 
had  scarcely  enough  troops  to  garrison  the  few  towns  held  by  the  Latins.  The  barren 
hills,  rocks,  caverns,  and  valleys  afforded  perfect  shelter  to  marauding  Arabs,  who 
pounced  upon  small  bands  of  pilgrims.  It  was  this  condition  which  the  small  band 
of  knights  sought  to  correct. 

The  real  importance  of  the  order,  which  was  too  insignificant  to  be  noticed 
even  by  Fulcher,  who  lived  in  Jerusalem  and  wrote  before  1127,  began  with  the 
council  of  Troyes  in  1128.  Here  they  were  given  an  authorized  rule  and  inter¬ 
national  approval.  Bernard  of  Clairvaux,  the  most  eloquent  man  of  the  time,  became 
their  peculiar  sponsor.  In  that  year  Hugh  de  Payens  and  Godfrey  de  St.  Omer  were 
able  to  recruit  many  knights  for  the  order,  some  temporarily,  others  permanently. 


KING  BALDWIN  II 


526 

were  as  yet  only  nine  in  number.  After  this  period,  however,  they  be¬ 
gan  to  increase,  and  their  possessions  multiplied.  It  was  in  the  time  of 
Pope  Eugenius,  it  is  said,  that  they  began  to  sew  on  their  mantles 
crosses  of  red  cloth,  that  they  might  be  distinguished  from  others.  Not 
only  the  knights,  but  also  the  inferior  brothers  called  sergeants,  wore 
this  sign.  The  Templars  prospered  so  greatly  that  today  there  are  in 
the  order  about  three  hundred  knights  who  wear  the  white  mantle 
and,  in  addition,  an  almost  countless  number  of  lesser  brothers.-^ 

They  are  said  to  have  vast  possessions,  both  on  this  side  of  the  sea 
and  beyond.  There  is  not  a  province  in  the  Christian  world  today 
which  does  not  bestow  some  part  of  its  possessions  upon  these  brethren, 
and  their  property  is  reported  to  be  equal  to  the  riches  of  kings.  They 
are  called  Brethren  of  the  Soldiery  of  the  Temple,  because,  as  we  have 
said,  they  had  their  residence  in  the  royal  palace  near  the  Temple  of 
the  Lord.-** 

For  a  long  time  they  kept  intact  their  noble  purpose  and  carried  out 
their  profession  wisely  enough.  At  length,  however,  they  began  to  neg¬ 
lect  “humility,  the  guardian  of  all  the  virtues,  which,  voluntarily  sit¬ 
ting  in  the  lowest  place,  runs  no  risk  of  a  fall.”  They  withdrew  from 
the  patriarch  of  Jerusalem,  from  whom  they  had  received  the  estab¬ 
lishment  of  their  order  and  their  first  privileges,  and  refused  him  the 
obedience  which  their  predecessors  had  shown  him.  To  the  churches  of 
God  also  they  became  very  troublesome,  for  they  drew  away  from 

The  white  robe  was  adopted  as  the  official  garb  of  the  Knights  Templars  not 
long  after  the  council  of  Troyes,  probably  determined  by  the  garb  of  the  Cistercians 
whose  leader,  Bernard  of  Clairvaux,  was  so  deeply  interested  in  the  order.  The  red 
cross  was  adopted  later  as  a  distinctive  sign.  The  order  soon  developed  a  number  of 
grades  of  membership.  Besides  the  knights  there  were  mounted  sergeants  and 
numerous  foot  soldiers.  The  order  acquired  the  right  to  have  its  own  chaplains.  The 
accumulation  of  properties  necessitated  business  managers  as  well  as  a  peasantry 
employed  by  them.  Many  nobles  sought  merit  by  serving  as  Templars  for  a  limited 
time.  Others  sought  affiliation  when  on  the  point  of  death.  Only  the  knights  were 
privileged  to  wear  both  the  white  mantle  and  the  red  cross.  The  cross,  however,  was 
worn  by  several  classes  of  its  members. 

Some  impression  of  the  rapid  spread  of  the  order  is  afforded  by  the  records  in 
England,  then  a  remote  region  (see  Beatrice  A.  Lees,  Records  of  the  Temflars  in 
England  in  the  Twelfth  Century ^  passim^.  Most  of  the  records  of  the  Templars 
were  lost  when  the  order  was  abolished  in  the  fourteenth  century.  There  is  no  recent 
comprehensive  scholarly  history  of  the  Templars  in  English.  The  two  works  by 
Prutz  still  remain  the  most  serviceable  (Hans  Prutz,  Entwicklung  und  Vntergang 
des  TempelherrenordenSy  passim^  and.  Die  geistlichen  Ritter  or  deni  Stellung  ztir 

kirchlichen^  politischeny  gesellschaftlichen  und  njoirtschaftlichen  Entnjoicklung  des 
MittelalterSy  passim). 


KING  BALDWIN  II 


527 

them  their  tithes  and  first  fruits  and  unjustly  disturbed  their  posses¬ 
sions.^® 


8.  Pofe  Gelastus  dies.  He  Is  succeeded  by  Cailxtus, 

In  the  following  year.  Pope  Gelasius,  also  called  John  Gaetanus,  died. 
He  was  a  learned  man,  the  successor  of  Pope  Paschal.“®  To  avoid  vio¬ 
lence,  Gelasius  had  fled  from  the  persecution  of  Emperor  Henry  and 
of  Burdinus,  the  antipope,  his  own  rival,  and  had  retired  to  the  king¬ 
dom  of  the  Franks.  There  he  ended  his  days  and  was  buried  at  Cluny. 
He  was  succeeded  by  Guido,  archbishop  of  Vienne,  a  nobleman  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  flesh.  After  Guido  assumed  the  dignity  of  pope  he  was 
called  Calixtus.  He  was  a  kinsman  of  Emperor  Henry  and  high  in  his 
favor.  Later,  relying  upon  the  emperor’s  countenance  and  aid,  Calixtus 
went  down  into  Italy  with  the  cardinals  and  all  his  court.  At  Sutrium, 
near  the  city  of  Rome,  he  laid  violent  hands  on  his  rival,  the  heresiarch 
Burdinus.^^  He  ordered  him  to  be  clad  in  a  bearskin,  placed  on  a  camel, 
and  conducted  ignominiously  to  a  monastery  at  Cani,  near  Salerno. 
There,  to  extreme  old  age,  he  was  forced  to  lead  the  monastic  life  in 
accordance  with  the  rule  of  that  place. 

And  thus  ended  the  schism  which  for  thirty  years  had  troubled  the 
church.  It  had  lasted  without  intermission  from  the  time  of  Greg¬ 
ory  VII  through  the  pontificates  of  Urban,  Paschal,  and  Gelasius,  the 
predecessors  of  Calixtus.  For  many  years  Emperor  Henry  had  been 
cut  off  from  the  company  of  the  faithful  by  the  sentence  of  excom¬ 
munication.  Now  he  was  restored  to  the  fold  of  the  church. 

It  is  uncertain  whether  William  included  this  final  paragraph  in  his  original 
sketch  or  added  it  later.  His  own  difficulties  with  the  Templars  came  to  a  head  at  the 
Lateran  Council  of  ii79>  where  he  led  the  attack  upon  their  special  privileges  with 
relation  to  the  secular  hierarchy.  Lundgreen,  who  has  examined  all  of  William’s 
references  to  the  Templars,  concludes  that  William  was  definitely  prejudiced  against 
them  because  of  their  extreme  independence  from  local  authority  (see  F.  Lundgreen, 
Wilhelm  von  Tyrns  und  der  Tem'plerorden^  'passim^. 

John  of  Gaeta,  probably  a  member  of  the  noble  family  of  the  Gaetani,  had 
been  chancellor  of  the  papal  court.  It  is  of  interest  to  note  that  William  accords  him 
unqualified  praise  for  his  learning,  a  compliment  which  he  uses  very  sparingly. 

Calixtus  II,  1 1 19— 1124,  was  the  son  of  William  of  Burgundy  and  therefore 
widely  related  to  the  ruling  families.  He  had  been  archbishop  of  Vienne.  Burdinus, 
archbishop  of  Braga,  had  lent  himself  to  the  purposes  of  Henry  V  and  accepted 
election  as  antipope  with  the  title  of  Gregory  VIII.  He  had  crowned  Henry  V  as 
emperor. 

William’s  knowledge  of  German  affairs  is  relatively  vague.  He  regularly 
confuses  Henry  IV  and  Henry  V  as  here.  The  Investiture  Struggle  may  be  said  to 


528 


KING  BALDWIN  II 


9*  Gaxiy  a  fowerful  Turkish  satrafy  invades  the  land  of  Antioch 
with  a  great  host.  He  devastates  the  country  far  and  wide. 

In  that  same  year,  Gazi  [li-Ghazi],-^  a  powerful  infidel  prince,  lord 
of  that  wretched  and  perfidious  race,  the  Turkomans,  and  a  ruler  greatly 
feared  among  his  own  people,  invaded  the  country  around  Antioch. 
With  a  large  host  of  his  subjects,  he  encamped  near  Aleppo.  With  him 
were  Tughtigin,  king  of  Damascus,  and  Dabais  [Dubais],  a  most 
powerful  Arabian  satrap,  who  with  their  numerous  forces  had  joined 
his  army. 

Roger,  prince  of  Antioch,  who  had  married  the  king’s  sister,  had 
been  forewarned  that  they  were  coming.  He  sent  word  of  the  danger 
which  threatened  him  to  the  neighboring  lords,  Joscelin,  count  of 
Edessa,  and  Pons,  count  of  Tripoli,  and  even  to  the  king  himself.  Most 
urgently  he  besought  them  that  they  would  not  delay  to  come  to  his 
assistance  in  this  pressing  emergency. 

The  king  straightway  assembled  from  his  kingdom  all  the  troops 
that  he  could  command  on  so  sudden  a  call  and  proceeded  by  forced 
marches  to  Tripoli.  There  he  found  the  count  equally  ready  to  set 
forth.  They  joined  forces  and  pursued  the  rest  of  the  march  together. 

In  the  meantime,  the  prince,  like  most  mortals,  chafed  under  delay. 
Ignorant  of  what  the  future  had  in  store,  he  had  already  left  Antioch 
and  encamped  before  the  stronghold  of  Artasium.  This  place  was 
fairly  well  adapted  for  supporting  an  army,  for  there  was  free  and 
easy  access  from  our  land  to  the  army.  Hence  there  was  a  great  abun¬ 
dance  of  all  necessities  on  this  campaign  as  well  as  the  many  desirable 
conveniences  which  are  usually  found  only  in  cities.  Here  the  prince 
remained  for  several  days,  to  await  the  arrival  of  the  king  and  the 
count.  Then,  notwithstanding  the  prohibition  of  the  patriarch  who  had 
followed  him  hither  and  the  reluctance  of  some  of  his  chiefs  also,  he 
ordered  the  army  to  advance.  He  declared  stoutly  that  he  would  wait 
no  longer.  He  was  urged  to  this  course  by  some  of  the  nobles  of  that 
region,  not  that  they  desired  to  improve  the  condition  of  the  army,  but 

have  begun  in  1075  and  continued  to  1122.  Henry  V  succeeded  his  father  in  1106. 
Neither  the  excommunication  of  the  kings  nor  the  maintenance  of  antipopes  was 
continuous  through  all  that  time.  The  most  convenient  brief  account  of  the  struggle 
is  that  of  E.  Emerton,  Mediaeval  Eurofe  {814—1^00')^  chap.  viii.  See  also  M.  Manitius, 
Deutsche  Geschichte  unter  den  sdchsischen  und  salischen  KaiserUy  ^11—112^, 

Il-Ghazi  (Gazi),  son  of  Ortuq,  had  been  joint  ruler  of  Jerusalem  with  his 
brother  Sukman  when  that  city  was  lost  to  the  Egyptians  in  1098.  Thereafter  he 
transferred  his  activities  to  northern  Syria.  He  became  ruler  of  Aleppo  in  1118. 


KING  BALDWIN  II  529 

that  its  presence  might  protect  their  own  lands,  which  lay  near  the 
enemy’s  camp. 

The  prince  followed  their  advice.  He  left  the  place  where  he  had 
first  encamped  and  plunged  himself  and  his  army  headlong  into  de¬ 
struction.  He  ordered  the  camp  to  be  made  in  a  place  called  the  Field  of 
Blood.  On  numbering  the  army  there,  it  was  found  that  he  had  seven 
hundred  knights  and  three  thousand  trained  infantry.  In  addition 
there  were  traders  who  were  following  the  army  to  buy  and  sell  their 
wares.^® 

When  the  enemy  perceived  that  the  prince  had  established  his  camp 
near  them,  they  broke  their  own  camp  and  pretended  to  lead  their 
forces  against  the  stronghold  of  Cerep.'^^  By  this  maneuver,  they 
thought  their  real  plan  might  more  easily  be  carried  into  effect.  They 
arrived  at  their  destination  and  encamped  near  by,  since  it  was  too  late 
to  accomplish  anything  that  night. 

In  the  morning  the  prince  sent  out  scouts.  He  wished  to  know 
whether  the  enemy  intended  to  attack  the  place  at  once  or  would  hasten 
to  the  camp  to  engage  our  forces.  He  drew  up  his  men  in  battle  ar¬ 
ray,  however,  in  anticipation  of  an  immediate  battle.  He  was  thus  en¬ 
gaged  when  the  scouts  came  flying  back  with  the  report  that  the  enemy 
in  three  divisions  of  twenty  thousand  each  was  approaching  our  army 
at  a  rapid  march. The  prince  immediately  arranged  his  forces  in  four 
divisions.  He  then  made  the  rounds  of  his  reorganized  lines  and,  as  he 
galloped  about,  cheered  his  men  with  encouraging  words.  He  was  still 
busily  engaged  in  this  manner  when  the  enemy’s  host  with  standards 
flying  advanced  very  near  to  our  troops.  The  battle  began  immediately. 
Both  sides  fought  valiantly,  but,  because  of  our  sins,  our  adversaries 
came  off  victorious. 

The  companies  commanded  by  the  noble  and  valiant  leaders,  Geof¬ 
frey  the  Monk  and  Guy  de  Fremelle,^^  were  ordered  to  advance  first 
against  the  foe.  They  marched  forward  in  good  order,  according  to 
military  discipline.  They  broke  up  the  larger  forces  of  the  foe  and  their 

The  most  complete  account  of  this  campaign  was  written  by  Walter,  chancellor 
of  Antioch.  William’s  account  is  chiefly  an  abbreviation  of  this,  though  he  likewise 
drew  upon  Fulcher  (see  H.  Hagenmeyer,  ed.  Galterii  Cancellarii  bella  Antiochena^ 
pp.  47,  78-115). 

Cerep,  Cerepum,  modern  Athsareb. 

32  These  numbers  of  the  foe  are  extravagant.  The  numbers  of  the  Christian  army, 
which  was  large,  are  more  accurate. 

33  Guy  has  been  identified  as  probably  from  la  Ferte-Fresuel  in  Normandy.  Little 
is  known  of  either  of  these  lieutenant  commanders  (see  H.  Galt,  pp.  193,  233). 


530 


KING  BALDWIN  II 


denser  formation  and  nearly  succeeded  in  putting  them  to  flight.  The 
next  division  was  led  by  Robert  of  St.  Lo.^^  This,  according  to  the  ex¬ 
ample  set  by  the  first  contingent,  should  have  followed  up  the  attack 
even  more  vigorously.  Most  shamefully,  however,  it  stopped  short  as 
the  enemy  regained  strength.  Then  in  headlong  flight  it  broke  through 
the  center  of  the  prince’s  company,  which  was  about  to  carry  aid  to  the 
other  divisions,  and  swept  along  with  it  a  part  of  that  force  in  such 
fashion  as  to  make  recall  impossible. 

An  event  worthy  of  mention  happened  during  this  battle.  In  the 
midst  of  the  combat,  while  both  sides  were  fighting  furiously,  a  ter¬ 
rible  whirlwind  came  forth  out  of  the  north.  Before  the  eyes  of  all,  it 
clung  to  the  ground  in  the  very  center  of  the  battleground.  As  it 
writhed  along,  it  swept  with  it  such  clouds  of  dust  that  the  men  of  both 
armies  were  blinded  and  could  not  fight.  Then  it  soared  aloft  in  cir¬ 
cles,  bearing  a  close  resemblance  to  a  huge  jar  ablaze  with  sulphurous 
flames.  Because  of  this  unlucky  occurrence  the  enemy  won  the  victory. 
The  Christians  were  defeated  and  nearly  all  of  our  soldiers  fell  by  the 
sword. 


10.  Prince  Roger  jails  in  battle.  Our  army  is  defeated. 

Meanwhile,  the  prince  was  vainly  striving  to  recall  his  forces.  He 
himself,  attended  by  a  few  of  his  retinue,  was  fighting  manfully,  like 
a  valiant  warrior,  in  the  midst  of  the  foe.  But  while  he  was  in  the  very 
act  of  launching  an  attack  against  the  superior  forces  of  the  foe,  he 
received  a  sword  thrust  which  killed  him.  The  rest  of  our  people  who 
had  been  left  with  the  baggage  and  impedimenta  had  fled  to  a  hill  near 
by.  The  fugitives  who  had  escaped  the  enemy’s  weapons  and  freed 
themselves  from  the  thick  of  the  fight  caught  sight  of  their  comrades 
huddled  together  on  the  top  of  this  hill  and  made  frantic  efforts  to 
reach  them.  They  hoped  that  this  band  might  be  strong  enough  to 
make  a  resistance  and  that,  in  their  company,  they  too  might  be  saved. 
Scarcely  had  they  reached  the  place,  however,  when  the  infidels,  hav¬ 
ing  completed  the  butchery  in  the  camp,  turned  their  attention  to  this 
company.  Their  cohorts  were  dispatched  thither,  and  within  an  hour 
all  had  been  slain. 

Rainald  Mansour  [Renaud  Masoier],^°  one  of  the  great  men  of 

Robert  of  St.  L6  had  been  prominent  in  the  affairs  of  Antioch  for  some  years 
and  was  noted  for  his  generosity  to  religious  establishments  (see  H.  Galt.  p.  234). 

This  Renaud  Masoier  was  probably  the  constable  of  Antioch  at  this  time. 


KING  BALDWIN  II  531 

that  region,  with  other  nobles  had  sought  safety  in  a  tower  belonging 
to  the  neighboring  city  of  Sarmata,  As  soon  as  Il-Ghazi  learned  this, 
he  hastened  thither  and  by  force  of  arms  compelled  the  nobles  gathered 
therein  to  surrender.  Thus,  because  of  our  sins,  scarcely  a  man  of  the 
many  thousands  who  had  followed  their  lord  that  day  escaped  to  tell 
the  story.  On  the  other  hand,  few  or  none  of  the  foe  were  slain. 

This  same  Prince  Roger  had  a  very  unsavory  reputation.  Rumor 
said  that  he  was  a  common  libertine  who  had  no  respect  for  the  mar¬ 
riage  tie.  He  was  parsimonious  also.  During  all  the  time  that  he  had 
held  possession  of  Antioch,  he  was  usurping  the  paternal  inheritance 
of  his  lord,  the  younger  Bohemond,  son  of  the  elder  Bohemond,  who 
was  then  living  with  his  mother  in  Apulia.  For  Tancred  of  happy 
memory,  when  on  his  deathbed,  had  entrusted  the  government  to 
Roger,  with  the  understanding  that,  at  the  demand  of  Bohemond  or 
his  heirs,  he  should  not  refuse  to  return  it.  It  is  said,  however,  that 
before  the  battle  in  which  he  died  by  the  sword,  he  confessed  his  sins 
before  God  with  a  humble  and  contrite  heart  to  the  venerable  Peter, 
archbishop  of  Apamea,  who  was  present  at  that  critical  time.  More¬ 
over,  ht  promised,  with  the  help  of  God,  to  bring  forth  fruit  worthy 
of  repentance.  And  thus,  truly  penitent,  he  entered  upon  the  chances 
of  battle.^® 

» 

II.  The  king  and  the  count  of  Tripoli  march  to  Antioch  to  resist 
Il-Ghazi. 

In  the  meantime,  the  king  and  the  count  of  Tripoli  had  arrived  at  the 
place  called  Mount  Nigra.  As  soon  as  Il-Ghazi  learned  this,  he  sent 
against  them  ten  thousand  picked  knights  to  hinder  their  advance.  This 
contingent  was  divided  into  three  bands.  The  first  proceeded  toward 
the  coast  to  the  Port  of  St.  Simeon.  The  other  two  advanced  against 
the  king  by  different  routes.  But  Baldwin  chanced  to  fall  in  with  one 
of  these  latter  bands.  Led  by  the  mercy  of  God,  he  attacked  it,  killed 
many,  took  some  prisoners,  and  put  the  rest  to  flight.  He  then  marched 
on  through  Latorres  and  Casabelle  and  came  to  Antioch,  where  he 
was  received  with  great  joy  by  the  patriarch,  the  clergy,  and  all  the 

These  accusations  are,  according  to  Hagenmeyer,  not  merely  conventional 
charges  to  account  for  the  disastrous  defeat  but  rest  upon  a  more  substantial  basis. 
William  has  added  the  account  of  Roger’s  final  repentance  which  Fulcher  omitted 
(see  HT.y  p.  623,  note  14).  The  date  of  Roger’s  death  was  June  28,  1119. 

These  places  have  not  been  clearly  identified.  Cassambella  is  mentioned  by 
Walter  the  Chancellor  (ff.  Galt.y  IX,  3)  and  is  regarded  by  Rey  as  identical  with  the 


KING  BALDWIN  II 


532 

people.  There  he  consulted  both  his  own  followers  and  the  survivors 
of  the  battles  just  described  as  to  the  best  course  to  adopt  in  so  imminent 
a  crisis. 

During  this  time,  Il-Ghazi  had  passed  by  the  towns  of  Ema  and 
Artasium  and  laid  siege  to  Cerep.^^  He  felt  greater  confidence  in  un¬ 
dertaking  this  project  because  it  was  rumored  that  Alan,  the  governor, 
with  his  knightly  following  had  been  called  to  Antioch  by  the  king.^^ 
This  proved  to  be  the  fact.  Il-Ghazi  approached  the  place  and  found 
it  unprepared.  Sappers  were  therefore  immediately  sent  in  from  dif¬ 
ferent  directions  to  undermine  the  hill  on  which  the  fortress  stood.  The 
supporting  beams  were  then  to  be  set  on  fire  and  when  the  mound  on 
which  the  walls  and  towers  rested  gave  way,  the  stronghold  would 
fall.  Terrified  lest  the  entire  citadel  might  collapse  when  the  hill  had 
been  undermined,  the  garrison  surrendered  on  condition  that  their 
lives  and  safety  be  assured  and  that  they  be  permitted  to  return  with¬ 
out  hindrance  to  their  own  people. 

Il-Ghazi  then  led  his  army  to  the  fortress  of  Sardona  and  com¬ 
menced  siege  operations  there.  Within  a  few  days,  it  too  was  surren¬ 
dered  by  the  inhabitants  on  the  same  terms.  The  prince  was  convinced 
that  no  one  could  resist  him;  therefore,  impatient  of  delay,  he  treated 
the  entire  region  according  to  his  own  pleasure.  Thus  the  people  of 
the  neighboring  places  lost  all  hope  of  escaping  the  yoke  of  so  powerful 
a  lord. 


12,  The  king  and  the  count  engage  in  battle  luith  Il-Ghazi,  The 
infidel  army  is  defeated  and  routed  with  great  slaughter. 

The  frincifality  is  f  ut  under  the  care  of  the  king. 

With  all  the  forces  that  could  be  mustered,  the  king  and  the  count  of 
Tripoli  set  out  from  Antioch.  They  directed  their  march  toward  Rugia, 
for  they  thought  to  find  the  enemy  near  Cerep.  They  passed  through 
Hab  and  encamped  on  a  hill  called  Danit.^^  As  soon  as  information  of 

modern  Kassab.  Latorres  or  Lator  is  regarded  as  a  fief  located  near  by  (see  E.  Rey, 
Les  Colonies  jranques  de  Syrie  aux  XI I  me  et  XI  lime  sieclesy  p.  343). 

Ema  has  not  been  identified.  It  obviously  is  not  identical  with  Emesa  or  Hims 
which  lay  far  to  the  south  (see  H,  Galt.y  p.  269,  note  27). 

Alan  was  governor  of  the  castle  of  Cerep.  The  king  apparently  assumed 
command  of  the  remaining  forces  in  the  principality  and  summoned  most  of  them  to 
join  him. 

Identified  as  modern  Tell  Danit^  memorable  as  the  scene  of  the  battle  which 
followed. 


KING  BALDWIN  II 


533 

this  reached  Il-Ghazi,  he  summoned  his  chiefs.  Under  threat  of  death, 
he  commanded  them  to  forego  sleep  and  to  devote  the  entire  night  to 
procuring  arms  and  horses.  After  the  most  careful  preparations,  they 
were  to  fall  upon  the  king’s  camp  at  daybreak  before  it  was  light  and 
thus  surprise  his  men  while  asleep.  All  must  be  put  to  the  sword.  Not 
a  single  man  must  be  allowed  to  escape. 

But  divine  mercy  had  ordained  far  otherwise.  The  king  and  his  men 
in  no  wise  relaxed  their  diligence  but  passed  a  sleepless  night,  busily 
engaged  in  arranging  the  necessary  details  for  the  coming  battle. 
Ebremar,  the  venerable  archbishop  of  Caesarea  who  had  followed  the 
king  into  those  parts  with  the  Cross  of  the  Lord,  preached  a  sermon 
of  admonition  and  encouragement  to  the  people.  Thus  armed  and  pre¬ 
pared  to  engage  in  battle  with  good  courage,  they  were  awaiting  the 
attack  of  the  foe  at  break  of  day. 

The  king  is  said  to  have  had  seven  hundred  knights  in  that  battle.*^^ 
By  his  order,  they  were  drawn  up  in  nine  battalions,  according  to  mili¬ 
tary  rule,  and  thus  stationed  in  their  proper  ranks,  they  waited  for  the 
mercy  of  the  Lord.  Three  battalions  were  sent  ahead  to  form  the  van¬ 
guard.  The  infantry  forces  were  placed  in  the  center,  while  the  count 
of  Tripoli  with  his  troops  held  the  right  wing  and  the  barons  of  An¬ 
tioch  the  left.  The  king  himself  with  four  battalions  brought  up  the 
rear.  This  division  was  to  act  as  a  support  to  the  rest. 

Even  as  they  stood  thus  in  battle  formation  awaiting  the  enemy’s 
approach,  the  foe  fell  upon  them.  With  loud  shouts,  with  blare  of 
trumpets  and  roll  of  drums,  the  infidels  rushed  forward  furiously 
upon  the  Christians.  Their  supreme  reliance  was  in  their  countless 
numbers  3  but  our  strength  was  in  the  presence  of  the  Ever-victorious 
Cross  and  in  the  confession  of  true  faith — a  far  more  reliable  and  un¬ 
failing  hope. 

Then  the  closely  serried  ranks  met  in  bitter  combat  and  a  hand-to- 
hand  battle  with  swords  ensued.  With  scornful  disregard  of  the  laws 
of  humanity,  with  burning  zeal  and  insatiable  hatred,  both  sides  fought 
as  if  against  wild  beasts.'*^ 

There  is  general  agreement  as  to  the  approximate  number  of  knights  in  the 
Christian  army,  but  William  seems  to  have  refused  to  accept  the  number  of  twenty 
thousand  for  the  enemy,  though  he  does  accept  four  thousand  as  the  number  of  the 

enemy  slain. 

Il“Ghazi  was  notoriously  cruel,  especially  in  his  treatment  of  prisoners,  whom 
he  sometimes,  with  drunken,  sadistic  delight,  caused  to  be  tortured  and  killed  before 

his  own  eyes. 


KING  BALDWIN  II 


534 

The  infidels  perceived  that  the  courageous  daring  of  our  infantry 
corps  threatened  great  danger  to  their  forces.  They  therefore  put  forth 
heroic  efforts  to  annihilate  them.  The  result  was  that  on  that  day,  God 
permitting,  large  numbers  of  our  foot  soldiers  perished  by  the  sword 
of  the  enemy. 

The  king  soon  observed  that  the  infantry  forces  were  being  tried 
beyond  their  strength  and  that  the  vanguard  also  needed  help.  He  at 
once  galloped  with  his  escort  in  close  attendance  straight  into  the  cen¬ 
ter  of  the  host.  Striking  fiercely  about  him  with  his  sword,  he  broke  up 
the  enemy’s  lines  where  they  were  most  closely  massed  together.  His 
comrades  in  the  ranks  followed  him  loyally.  Inspired  to  strength  and 
courage  by  his  words  and  example,  these  and  others  who  had  erstwhile 
lost  courage  fell  as  with  one  thought  upon  the  enemy.  They  cried  to 
heaven  for  aid,  and  divine  mercy  attended  them.  Great  was  the  slaugh¬ 
ter  wrought  upon  the  enemy,  while  the  survivors,  unable  to  resist,  were 
put  to  flight. 

About  seven  hundred  of  our  foot  soldiers  and  one  hundred  knights 
are  said  to  have  fallen  in  that  battle.  The  loss  of  the  enemy  was  about 
four  thousand,  in  addition  to  the  numbers  mortally  wounded  or  cap¬ 
tured.  Il-Ghazi  abandoned  his  troops  to  death  and  fled  with  Tughtigin, 
king  of  Damascus,  and  Dubais,  the  prince  of  the  Arabians.  The  Chris¬ 
tians  continued  the  pursuit  in  various  directions.  Baldwin  himself  with 
a  few  knights  remained  on  the  field  during  the  first  part  of  the  night, 
but  finally  he  was  forced  by  need  of  food  to  retire  to  the  neighboring 
castle  of  Hab,  for  the  purpose  of  taking  refreshment.  On  his  return 
to  the  field  in  the  morning,  he  dispatched  messengers  to  his  sister  and 
the  patriarch.  They  bore  the  king’s  own  ring  as  the  sure  token  of  vic¬ 
tory  and  were  bidden  to  announce  that,  by  divine  help,  the  blessing  of 
success  had  been  granted  to  him  from  on  high.'^^  Baldwin  did  not  leave 
the  field  that  day  until  midnight,  when  a  reliable  report  was  brought 
that  the  infidels  had  disbanded  their  forces  and  would  not  return.  He 
then  assembled  all  the  troops  possible  at  the  moment  and  marched  to 
Antioch,  bearing  the  palm  of  victory.  There  he  was  welcomed  by  the 
patriarch  with  all  the  clergy  and  the  people  of  the  city. 

This  victory  was  granted  to  the  Christians  by  divine  favor,  in  the 

The  use  of  the  ring  as  a  means  of  identification  is  frequently  mentioned,  though 
the  half  ring  so  common  in  the  romantic  literature  does  not  occur  in  William’s 
account.  His  sister  was  the  widow  of  Roger,  and  the  patriarch  here  indicated  is 
Bernard  of  Antioch. 


KING  BALDWIN  II 


535 

year  of  the  Incarnation  of  the  Lord  1120  and  the  second  year  of  the 
reign  of  King  Baldwin  IL  It  took  place  in  the  month  of  August,  on 
the  eve  of  the  assumption  of  the  blessed  Mary,  the  Mother  of  God.^^ 
The  king  sent  the  Life-giving  Cross  back  to  Jerusalem  in  charge  of 
the  archbishop  of  Caesarea  and  a  noble  escort,  that  upon  the  day  of  its 
exaltation,  it  might  be  honorably  welcomed  by  the  clergy  and  the  peo¬ 
ple,  to  the  accompaniment  of  hymns  and  spiritual  songs.^^  He  himself, 
because  of  the  urgent  needs  of  the  country,  was  obliged  to  remain  at 
Antioch. 

By  the  unanimous  wish  and  hearty  consent  of  all,  the  patriarch  and 
all  the  chief  men,  together  with  the  clergy  and  the  people,  committed 
to  the  king  the  care  of  the  principality  of  Antioch  with  unlimited 
power.  He  was  given  a  free  hand  there  just  as  in  the  kingdom  to  insti¬ 
tute  and  remove,  and  to  manage  everything  according  to  his  own 
will.^®  Accordingly,  he  bestowed  the  goods  of  those  who  had  fallen  in 
battle  upon  their  children  or  more  distant  blood  relations,  as  reason  or 
the  custom  of  the  land  demanded.  He  provided  widows  with  worthy 
husbands,  of  stations  equal  to  their  own.^*^  Wherever  it  seemed  neces¬ 
sary,  he  equipped  fortresses  with  men,  food,  and  arms.  He  then  took 
leave  of  them  for  a  time  and  returned  to  the  kingdom.  There,  upon 
the  solemn  birthday  of  the  Lord,  he  was  crowned  in  the  church  at 
Bethlehem  together  with  his  wife. 

13.  A  council  is  held  at  Nablus  in  Samaria, 

In  the  same  year,  1120  of  the  Incarnation  of  the  Lord,  the  king¬ 
dom  of  Jerusalem,  because  of  our  sins,  was  afflicted  with  many  troubles. 
In  addition  to  the  injury  caused  by  the  enemy,  swarms  of  locusts  fell 
upon  the  land,  and  a  scourge  of  devouring  mice,  for  four  successive 
years,  so  completely  destroyed  the  crops  that  it  seemed  as  if  the  whole 
world  would  lack  bread.  Consequently,  Gormond,  the  patriarch  of 
Jerusalem,  a  devout  and  religious  man,  went  to  Nablus,  a  city  of  Sa- 

The  date  of  the  battle  was  Aug^ust  14,  1119.  William  is  in  error  as  to  the  year. 

The  celebration  of  the  return  of  the  Cross,  commemorating  its  return  from 
Persia  in  629,  took  place  annually  at  Jerusalem  on  September  14. 

The  legal  terminology  here,  as  in  so  many  other  cases,  reflects  the  language  of 
Roman  law. 

It  must  have  been  difficult,  after  the  two  severe  battles  of  that  year,  to  find  men 
of  comparable  rank.  Fiefs  were  evidently  transmitted  through  the  wives,  but  fighting 
husbands  appear  to  have  been  essential.  Doubtless  men  of  lesser  rank  were  elevated 
by  marriage  with  such  heiresses. 


KING  BALDWIN  II 


536 

maria,  where  he  was  joined  by  King  Baldwin,  the  prelates  of  the 
church,  and  the  nobles  of  the  realm.  A  public  meeting  and  general  as¬ 
sembly  was  called  at  which  Gormond  preached  an  admonitory  sermon 
to  the  people.*^®  Since  it  was  evident  to  all  that  the  sins  of  the  people 
had  provoked  God  to  wrath,  it  was  decided  by  common  consent  that 
they  must  amend  their  wrongdoing  and  restrain  their  excesses.  When 
they  had  turned  thus  to  the  fruit  of  a  better  life  and  made  due  repara¬ 
tion  for  their  ill  deeds,  they  hoped  that  He  who  does  not  desire  the 
death  of  a  sinner,  but  rather  that  he  may  turn  again  and  live,  would 
become  reconciled  to  them.^® 

Thus,  terrified  by  threatening  signs  from  heaven,  by  earthquakes 
and  disasters,  and  at  the  same  time  hard  pressed  by  famine  and  ex¬ 
hausted  by  the  almost  daily  attacks  of  the  enemy,  they  sought  to  con¬ 
ciliate  God  by  works  of  piety.  To  raise  the  standard  of  morals  and 
maintain  discipline,  they  established,  by  common  consent,  twenty-five 
articles  with  the  force  of  law.  Any  one  who  desires  to  read  these  ar¬ 
ticles  may  easily  find  them  in  the  archives  of  many  churches. 

There  were  present  at  this  council:  Gormond,  patriarch  of  Jerusa¬ 
lem  j  Baldwin,  the  second  Latin  king  of  Jerusalem  j  Ebremar,  arch¬ 
bishop  of  Caesarea  5  Bernard,  bishop  of  Nazareth  3  Aschetinus,  bishop 
of  Bethlehem  3  Roger,  bishop  of  Lyddaj  Gilduin,  abbot-elect  of  St. 
Mary  in  the  Valley  of  Jehoshaphatj  Peter,  abbot  of  Mt.  Tabor  j 
Achard,  prior  of  the  Temple  j  Arnold,  prior  of  Mt.  Sionj  Gerard, 
prior  of  the  Sepulchre  of  the  Lordj  Payens,  the  king’s  chancellor  j 
Eustace  Grenier j  William  de  Buryj  Barison,  constable  of  Jaffa;  Bald¬ 
win  of  Ramlahj  and  many  others  of  both  orders,  whose  number  and 
names  we  do  not  possess. 

14.  Il-Ghaxi  makes  another  camfaign  and  again  invades  the 
land  of  Antioch,  The  king  marches  out  against  him,  Il- 
Ghaxi  is  stricken  with  afoflexy  and  dies. 

Il-Ghazi  was  a  determined  and  unwearied  persecutor  of  the  Chris¬ 
tian  faith  and  name.  Like  a  gnawing  worm  he  was  ever  seeking  whom 
he  might  injure.  In  the  following  year,  he  mustered  his  forces  and 
took  advantage  of  the  king’s  absence  to  besiege  some  of  our  fortresses. 

William  is  here  supplementing  his  sources  with  material  from  the  archives. 
The  plague  of  mice  was  mentioned  by  Fulcher  in  the  year  1117,  Locusts  were,  of 
course,  an  intermittent  affliction  of  the  region,  as  they  still  are  today. 

Ez.  33  :  II. 


KING  BALDWIN  II 


537 

When  this  became  known,  an  urgent  appeal  was  sent  to  the  king.  Al¬ 
ways  ready  to  respond,  Baldwin  took  the  Cross  of  the  Lord  and,  with 
a  noble  retinue  of  knights,  made  haste  thither.  He  summoned  Joscelin, 
count  of  Edessa,  and  the  two  lords,  associating  themselves  with  the 
chief  men  of  Antioch,  marched  against  the  strong  castle  just  men¬ 
tioned.®®  They  had  expected  to  engage  in  battle  immediately  on  ar¬ 
riving  at  their  destination.  But  it  happened  that  the  hand  of  God  had 
touched  Il-Ghazi  with  apoplexy,  and  the  leaders  of  his  army,  deprived 
of  the  assistance  of  their  chief,  with  sane  judgment  prudently  declined 
an  engagement.  Bearing  their  nearly  lifeless  lord  upon  a  litter,  they 
hurried  to  Aleppo.  But  Il-Ghazi,  doomed  to  suffer  the  eternal  fires, 
is  said  to  have  breathed  forth  his  wretched  spirit  before  they  reached 
that  place. 

The  king  remained  for  a  time  at  Antioch  to  attend  to  necessary  mat¬ 
ters.  Then,  by  the  will  of  God,  he  returned  in  safety  to  the  kingdom. 
He  was  beloved  by  all  and  acceptable  both  to  the  realm  and  the  prin¬ 
cipality.  Faithfully  and  devotedly  he  administered  the  affairs  of  both 
kingdom  and  principality,  although  the  two  were  a  long  distance  apart. 
Nor  could  it  easily  be  discerned  for  which  land  he  felt  the  greater 
solicitude,  although  the  kingdom  was  his  own  possession  which  he 
could  legally  hand  down  to  his  successors  and  the  principality  was 
merely  entrusted  to  his  care.  He  seemed,  in  fact,  to  show  more  concern 
for  the  affairs  of  Antioch.  In  the  care  of  this  country  he  continued 
loyally  until  the  arrival  of  the  younger  Bohemond,  as  will  be  related 
in  the  following  pages.® ^ 

15.  The  kmg  grants  full  liberty  to  the  citizens  of  Jerusalem  and 
confirms  it  by  his  own  charter. 

While  the  king  was  in  Jerusalem  at  this  time,  he  granted  to  the  citi¬ 
zens  of  that  place  a  valuable  privilege.  With  pious  and  princely  gener¬ 
osity,  he  commanded  that  they  should  have  freedom  from  the  imposts 
which  were  formerly  demanded  from  citizens  who  exported  or  im¬ 
ported  merchandise.  This  edict  he  ordered  confirmed  by  a  document 
sealed  with  the  royal  seal,  that  it  might  be  valid  forever.  Thereafter, 

This  castle  was  Sardona.  William  appears  to  have  been  working  hastily  here, 
omitting  too  much  of  the  account  of  Walter  the  Chancellor.  The  date  of  Il-Ghazi’s 
death  was  November  3,  1122.  The  impression  given  by  William  that  it  occurred  in 
1121  is  wrong. 

See  Book  XIII,  chap.  21. 


538 


KING  BALDWIN  II 


no  Latin  who  entered  or  left  the  city,  whether  he  brought  in  or  car¬ 
ried  out  goods,  should  be  compelled  to  pay  anything  under  any  pre¬ 
text  whatever,  but  was  to  have  the  privilege  of  buying  and  selling 
without  tax.  Moreover,  to  the  Syrians,  Greeks,  Armenians,  and  all 
men  of  whatever  nation,  even  to  the  Saracens,  he  gave  the  free  privi¬ 
lege  of  carrying  into  the  Holy  City  without  tax  wheat,  barley,  and  any 
kind  of  pulse.  He  even  remitted  the  customary  tax  on  weights  and 
measures.  By  this  action,  he  conciliated  the  people  and  gained  the  good 
will  of  the  populace.  For  in  kingly  fashion  and  with  praiseworthy  af¬ 
fection,  he  seems  to  have  provided  for  the  good  of  the  citizens  in  two 
respects.  First,  he  caused  the  city  to  be  more  bountifully  supplied  with 
provisions  by  arranging  that  they  could  be  brought  in  from  outside 
without  tax;  secondly,  following  the  example  of  his  predecessor,  he 
made  every  effort  to  increase  the  population  of  the  city  beloved  of 

God."2 

1 6.  Tughtigifiy  king  of  DamascuSy  lays  waste  the  land  of  Ti¬ 
berias,  The  king  marches  against  him  and  destroys  the  city  of 
Geras  a. 

In  the  following  year,  Tughtigin,  the  treacherous  and  wicked  king  of 
the  Damascenes,  entered  into  an  alliance  with  a  chieftain  of  the  Arabs, 
whose  forces  he  joined  with  his  own.^^  Tughtigin  had  observed  that 
the  king  was  bearing  a  responsibility  far  beyond  his  strength  in  the 
care  of  both  countries.  Accordingly,  he  took  advantage  of  this  preoccu¬ 
pation  and  sent  troops  into  our  lands  in  the  vicinity  of  Tiberias.  These 
lands  he  began  to  devastate  in  hostile  fashion. 

When  the  king  heard  of  this  outrage,  he  mustered  troops  from  all 
parts  of  his  kingdom  and,  in  his  usual  vigorous  fashion,  hastened 
thither.  Tughtigin,  however,  had  been  forewarned  of  Baldwin's  ap¬ 
proach  and  had  withdrawn  to  a  distant  part  of  his  own  realm.  For  he 
realized  that  if  the  king  were  at  hand  he  himself  could  accomplish 
nothing,  nor  did  he  think  it  safe  to  risk  an  engagement. 

Meanwhile,  the  king  had  led  his  forces  southward  and  had  reached 
Gerasa,  one  of  the  noblest  cities  of  the  province  of  Decapolis.  It  lay 
in  the  tribe  of  Manassas,  near  Mt.  Galaad,  only  a  few  miles  distant 

See  Book  XI,  chap.  27. 

Who  this  Arab  chieftain  was  is  not  indicated  by  any  of  the  sources. 


KING  BALDWIN  II  539 

from  the  Jordan.^^  The  city  had  long  lain  desolate  through  fear  of 
war,  but,  in  the  year  just  past,  Tughtigin  at  great  expense  had  caused 
a  fortress  of  immense  hewn  stones  to  be  erected  in  the  better-fortified 
part  of  this  place.  This  he  supplied  with  provisions  and  weapons  and 
put  it  in  charge  of  some  of  his  own  trusty  people. 

Immediately  on  his  arrival,  the  king  attacked  the  place  with  great 
fury.  It  surrendered  on  condition  that  the  forty  soldiers  who  had  been 
left  there  to  guard  it  be  allowed  to  depart  uninjured  to  their  own  peo¬ 
ple.  This  demand  was  granted.  Baldwin  then  conferred  with  his  ad¬ 
visers  as  to  whether  the  fortress  should  be  destroyed  from  the  very 
foundations  or  kept  for  the  use  of  the  Christians.  The  opinion  was 
unanimous  that  it  should  be  completely  razed,  for  it  seemed  imprac¬ 
ticable  to  maintain  it  for  our  use  without  great  expense  and  constant 
hardships.  Moreover,  no  one  could  reach  it  without  incurring  extreme 
danger. 

17.  Balaky  a  fowerjul  Turkish  frincey  invades  the  land  of  An¬ 
tioch,  Count  Josceltn  is  caftured.  The  king  also  is  taken  fris- 
oner  and  falls  into  Balak^s  fower. 

Thus,  by  the  grace  of  God,  the  affairs  of  the  kingdom  were  progress¬ 
ing  in  a  satisfactory  manner.  Meanwhile,  the  enemy  of  peace  and  lover 
of  discord  was  endeavoring  to  stir  up  trouble.  At  the  instigation  of 
someone.  Pons,  the  second  count  of  Tripoli,  refused  to  render  homage 
to  the  king  of  Jerusalem  and  impudently  declined  to  give  the  service 
which  by  his  oath  of  fidelity  he  was  bound  to  pay.^^  The  king  found  it 
impossible  to  brook  such  an  injury.  Accordingly,  he  assembled  knights 
and  foot  soldiers  from  the  entire  kingdom  and  proceeded  thither  to 
seek  revenge  for  the  wrong  done  him.  Before  either  party  had  suf¬ 
fered  loss,  however,  honorable  men,  beloved  of  God,  intervened,  and  a 
suitable  peace  was  again  established  between  the  two. 

Gerasa,  modern  Jarash,  had  been  famous  in  ancient  times.  The  archaeological 
information  was  derived  by  Fulcher  from  the  Ononiasticon  of  Jerome  and  is  here 
repeated  by  William  (see  H.F.y  pp.  644—46).  This  campaign  occurred  in  July,  1121. 

Perhaps  this  campaign  represented  an  effort  by  Baldwin  II  to  extend  his  authority 
over  Tripoli  and  to  make  himself  real  ruler  of  all  the  Latin  states  in  Syria.  His 
regency  of  Antioch  together  with  the  personal  dependence  of  Joscelin  of  Edessa  upon 
him  created  a  favorable  opportunity  for  such  a  move.  The  basis  of  his  demand  upon 
Pons  was  the  homage  which  Bertram  had  shown  to  Baldwin  I  in  1109  (see  LaMonte, 
Feudal  Monarchy ,  pp.  187  ff.).. 


540 


KING  BALDWIN  II 


The  king  then  went  on  to  Antioch.  The  people  there  had  again 
fallen  into  difficulties  and  had  called  on  him  for  help.  Balak,  a  mag¬ 
nificent  and  powerful  Turkish  prince,  was  harassing  the  entire  region 
by  making  frequent  incursions  into  that  country.  He  did  this  with  all 
the  more  assurance,  because,  not  long  before  this  time,  by  a  sudden  at¬ 
tack,  he  had  captured  Joscelin,  count  of  Edessa,  and  Galeran,  his  kins¬ 
man,  and  thrown  them  into  prison. When  he  learned  that  the  king 
himself  had  arrived,  however,  he  began  to  show  somewhat  less  ac¬ 
tivity  in  his  attacks,  for  he  did  not  desire  an  encounter  with  Baldwin. 
The  king  had  the  reputation  of  being  very  successful  in  battle,  and 
Balak  knew  that  it  would  be  difficult  for  anyone  to  defeat  him.  Never¬ 
theless,  he  roamed  about  at  a  distance  with  his  light-armed  knights,  so 
that  if  an  opportunity  offered,  he  might  accomplish  his  desire  to  injure 
our  troops. 

So  the  king  with  the  force  which  he  had  brought  with  him  proceeded 
into  the  land  of  the  count  of  Edessa.  He  hoped  to  be  of  some  assistance 
to  this  people  who  had  been  deprived  of  a  leader,  and,  as  he  rode  about 
over  the  country,  he  investigated  conditions  with  great  care.  He  noted 
whether  the  fortresses  were  well  defended,  whether  there  was  a  suffi¬ 
cient  force  of  both  cavalry  and  infantry  and  abundant  supplies  of  arms 
and  provisions.  As  in  duty  bound,  he  saw  to  it  that  all  deficiencies  were 
remedied. 

After  passing  the  fortress  of  Turbessel,  he  hastened  on  the  way 
toward  Edessa,  earnestly  engaged  in  the  same  task.  For  he  desired  to 
ascertain  with  equal  care  the  condition  of  the  region  beyond  the  Eu¬ 
phrates  and,  as  far  as  possible,  to  improve  it  in  all  respects.  One  night 
while  on  the  way,  he  started  out  with  his  own  private  following.  Nearly 
all  were  somewhat  sleepy.  With  no  thought  of  danger,  they  were 
marching  along  rather  incautiously  in  straggling  lines,  when  suddenly 
Balak  attacked  them.  He  had  received  intelligence  of  the  march  and 
had  laid  an  ambush.  The  king’s  escort  was  unprepared  and  heavy  with 
sleep.  Thus  it  chanced  that  Baldwin  himself  fell  into  Balak’s  hands 
and  was  led  away  captive.  Meanwhile,  the  escort,  both  in  the  vanguard 
and  in  the  rear,  fled  in  different  directions,  ignorant  of  the  disaster  that 
had  befallen  their  lord.  This  Balak,  so  often  mentioned,  caused  the 
captured  king  to  be  bound  and  cast  into  the  fortress  of  Quartapiert 

Joscelin  was  captured  September  13,  1122.  This  Balak  was  one  of  the  Ortuqid 
dynasty,  a  nephew  of  Il-Ghazi  (see  note  29). 


KING  BALDWIN  II 


541 

[Kharpart]  beyond  the  Euphrates  river.  It  was  here  that  Count  Josce- 
lin  and  Galeran  were  also  imprisoned,  as  has  been  related  above. 

When  news  of  the  king^s  terrible  misfortune  reached  our  leaders  in 
the  kingdom,  great  concern  for  the  welfare  of  the  realm  overwhelmed 
them.  As  one  man,  they  assembled  in  conference  with  the  patriarch  and 
the  prelates  of  the  church  at  the  city  of  Acre.  Here,  by  unanimous  con¬ 
sent,  Eustace  Grenier,  a  wise  and  prudent  man,  with  great  experience 
in  military  matters,  was  appointed  as  ruler  over  them.^*^  This  man,  be¬ 
cause  of  his  great  worth,  held  by  hereditary  right  two  cities  in  the  king¬ 
dom,  namely  Sidon  and  Caesarea,  with  all  their  dependencies.  To  his 
care,  therefore,  was  entrusted  the  responsibility  and  general  adminis¬ 
tration  of  the  kingdom,  until  the  Dayspring  from  on.  High  should  visit 
the  king  and  restore  him  to  liberty.  When  this  happened,  he  would 
be  able  once  more  to  preside  over  the  affairs  of  the  realm. 

But  now  let  us  turn  back  and  resume  the  account  of  the  king’s  mis¬ 
hap. 

18.  Certain  Armenians  exfose  themselves  to  great  danger  in  an 
effort  to  helf  the  king.  T hey  seize  the  fortress  in  which  the 
'prisoners  are  detamed.  Count  Joscelin  is  freed. 

After  the  king  and  the  count  had  been  bound  and  cast  into  the  above- 
named  fortress,  certain  Armenians  heard  that  these  great  chiefs  of  the 
Christian  faith  were  being  held  in  captivity  there.^®  They  resolved  to 
attempt  a'  rescue.  Giving  no  thought  to  their  own  danger  if  their  plans 
should  not  prove  successful,  they  adopted  a  novel  scheme.  Another  story 
is,  however,  that  they  came  at  the  call  of  Count  Joscelin  and  were  in¬ 
duced  by  the  hope  of  a  very  liberal  reward  to  expose  themselves  to  this 
danger. 

These  fifty  men,  strong  and  hardy,  entered  into  a  loyal  compact 

Baldwin  was  captured  April  18,  1123.  It  was  circumstances  such  as  this  which 
kept  the  nobles  of  Jerusalem  reminded  of  their  responsibilities  and  privileges  in  the 
conduct  of  affairs  and  prevented  both  the  development  of  absolute  power  by  the  king 
or  hereditary  succession.  Perhaps  the  fact  that  the  queen  was  an  Armenian  kept  the 
nobles  from  consulting  her  wishes  in  the  matter  (see  La  Monte,  Feudal  Monarchy, 
pp.  8-9).  Eustace  Grenier,  who  is  claimed  as  a  native  of  Therouanne  in  Belgium,  may 
have  come  with  Godfrey’s  army,  though  he  did  not  bcome  prominent  until  1102.  He 
was  constable  of  the  kingdom  at  this  time  (see  H.F.,  p.  660,  note  7). 

This  incident,  which  has  all  the  appearance  of  legend,  is  supported  by  Armenian 
and  Arab  as  well  as  Latin  accounts.  The  Armenian  historian  of  the  period,  Matthew 
of  Edessa,  gives  the  number  of  the  Armenians  as  fifteen,  rather  than  fifty  (see  Isken- 

derian,  Die  Kreuzfahrer,  p.  100). 


542 


KING  BALDWIN  II 


and  bound  themselves  together  by  an  oath.  Their  plan  was  to  go  to  the 
castle  and  try  to  liberate  those  distinguished  men,  at  whatever  risk  to 
themselves.  Disguised  in  the  habit  of  monks,  but  carrying  daggers  un¬ 
der  their  loose  robes,  they  journeyed  to  that  fortress  as  though  to  at¬ 
tend  to  some  business  for  the  monasteries.  By  words  and  sighs  and 
mournful  looks,  they  made  it  appear  that  they  had  suffered  injury  and 
violence  from  certain  individuals.  They  declared  with  tears  that  they 
desired  to  protest  to  the  governor  of  the  place  about  the  treatment  they 
had  received,  for  on  him  devolved  the  duty  of  maintaining  good  order 
so  that  no  outrage  might  occur  in  that  vicinity.  Still  another  story  is 
that  they  gained  admittance  into  the  fortress  as  merchants  selling  cheap 
wares. 

When  they  were  finally  permitted  to  enter  the  place,  they  drew 
their  swords  and  cut  down  all  who  opposed  them.  Is  it  necessary  to  add 
more?  They  gained  possession  of  the  citadel,  released  the  king  and 
the  count,  and  fortified  the  place  as  well  as  they  could.  The  king  then 
resolved  to  send  Count  Joscelin  to  bring  aid  as  quickly  as  possible  for 
the  rescue  of  himself  and  those  companions  by  whose  efforts  they  had 
apparently  been  freed. 

When  the  Turks  who  lived  in  the  places  round  about  discovered  the 
trick  by  which  the  king  and  his  comrades  had  gained  control  of  the 
citadel,  they  seized  their  arms  and  hurried  thither.  They  were  deter¬ 
mined  that  at  least  until  the  arrival  of  Balak  their  lord,  no  one  should 
enter  or  leave  the  place.  In  spite  of  this,  however,  and  at  the  risk  of 
exposing  himself  to  the  ambuscades  of  the  enemy,  Count  Joscelin  set 
out  immediately.  He  took  with  him  three  companions,  two  of  whom 
were  to  accompany  him  on  the  journey.  If  the  attempt  succeeded,  the 
third  was  to  be  sent  back  to  inform  the  king  of  the  fact.  Thus,  unknown 
to  those  who  were  blockading  the  citadel  he  and  his  two  companions, 
protected  by  the  mercy  of  God,  started  out  as  had  been  arranged.  The 
third  man  was  sent  back  to  the  citadel.  He  bore  Joscelin^s  own  ring  in 
proof  that  the  enemy’s  lines  had  been  successfully  passed.  During 
Joscelin’s  absence,  the  king  and  the  men  by  whose  aid  he  had  been  freed 
applied  themselves  to  strengthening  the  citadel  in  every  possible  way, 
for  they  hoped  to  be  able  to  hold  out  until  the  arrival  of  aid.  This  they 
trusted  would  not  be  long  delayed. 


KING  BALDWIN  II 


543 


19*  Balak  retakes  the  citadel  by  force  and  futs  the  Armenians  to 
the  sword. 

That  same  night,  Balak  was  disturbed  by  a  terrible  vision.  In  a  dream 
he  seemed  to  see  Count  Joscelin  blinding  him  with  his  own  hands. 
Panic-stricken,  he  dispatched  emissaries  at  daybreak  to  the  fortress  to 
cut  off  Joscelin’s  head  without  delay. As  these  men  approached  the 
citadel,  however,  they  perceived  that  it  had  already  fallen  into  the 
hands  of  the  enemy.  They  retraced  their  steps,  therefore,  with  all 
possible  speed  and  informed  their  lord  accurately  of  all  that  had  taken 
place  there.  The  prince  at  once  summoned  troops  from  every  part 
and  without  delay  hurried  thither.  He  stationed  his  forces  around  the 
place  and  blockaded  the  refugees  in  the  stronghold.  He  then  com¬ 
municated  with  the  king  through  intermediaries  and  solemnly  prom¬ 
ised  that,  if  the  citadel  were  restored  to  him  without  trouble,  he  would 
allow  Baldwin  and  all  with  him  to  depart  without  hindrance  and  would 
assure  them  safe  conduct  to  Edessa. 

The  king,  however,  felt  confidence  in  the  strength  of  the  citadel 
and  hoped  that,  with  the  assistance  of  those  who  had  joined  him  there, 
he  might  be  able  to  hold  the  place  by  force  until  aid  arrived.  He  there¬ 
fore  rejected  the  offered  terms  and  continued  to  defend  the  fortress 
vigorously.  The  rejection  of  his  terms  greatly  angered  Balak.  He  at 
once  summoned  workmen  and  ordered  them  to  prepare  the  many 
kinds  of  machines  which  are  wont  to  be  used  in  attacking  an  enemy’s 
citadel.  With  great  vigor  he  pressed  on  the  work  and  made  skilful  use 
of  every  ingenious  scheme  by  which  he  might  injure  the  besieged. 

The  citadel  was  built  on  a  hill,  the  cretaceous  nature  of  which  ren¬ 
dered  it  easily  penetrable.  Balak  perceived  that  it  would  be  an  easy 
matter  to  destroy  the  place  by  undermining  it.  Accordingly,  he  set  sap¬ 
pers  to  work.  Their  orders  were  to  dig  great  tunnels  in  the  interior  of 
the  hill  and  shore  them  up  with  beams  and  other  material.  As  soon  as 
the  workmen  finished  digging,  fire  was  applied  to  combustible  material 
which  had  been  placed  inside  the  tunnels.  Then  when  the  supports  had 
burned  away,  the  hill  caved  in,  and  a  tower  which  had  rested  upon  it 
fell  with  a  great  crash.  Thereupon  the  king  at  once  surrendered  to 
Balak  without  conditions,  for  he  feared  that  the  entire  citadel  might 

This  story  of  Balak’s  vision  was  circulated  very  early,  for  Fulcher,  who  ceased 
writing  in  1128,  includes  it  in  his  own  account  of  the  death  of  Balak  (see  H.F.,  p.  727). 


544 


KING  BALDWIN  II 


fall  in  a  similar  manner.  Satisfied  at  having  obtained  the  fortress, 
Balak  granted  life  to  the  king  and  his  nephew  and  also  to  Galeran.  He 
ordered  them  to  be  bound  and  carried  off  to  Haran,  a  city  near  Edessa, 
there  to  be  kept  under  close  guard.  But  the  valiant  and  faithful  Arme¬ 
nians  who  had  exposed  themselves  to  such  dangers  in  order  to  release 
the  king  and  their  own  lord  from  captivity  were  delivered  over  to 
tortures  of  various  kinds.  Some  were  flayed  alive  j  others  sawn  asunder  j 
and  still  others  buried  alive.  Others  Balak  handed  over  to  his  men  to 
serve  as  targets  in  archery  practice.  Yet,  though  they  suffered  torture 
in  this  world,  these  men  had  a  sure  hope  of  immortal  lifej  though 
they  were  tried  in  a  few  things,  yet,  from  another  point  of  view,  their 
reward  was  great.®^ 

20.  C  ount  J  os  celtn  collects  a  large  jorce  for  the  rellej  of  the  king. 
Alarmed  at  the  untoward  disaster  which  had  befallen  Bald- 
winy  however y  he  disbands  his  forces  and  sends  them  back  to 
their  ozun  land. 

In  constant  fear  Count  Joscelin  and  his  travelling  companions  pro¬ 
ceeded  on  their  way  with  great  caution.  They  had  only  a  moderate 
supply  of  food  and  two  skins  [of  wine]  which  they  had  by  chance 
brought  with  them.  They  came  at  last  to  the  great  river  Euphrates. 
Here  Joscelin  consulted  with  the  companions  of  his  perils  as  to  how 
he  might  most  easily  cross.  It  was  finally  decided  that  the  skins  should 
be  filled  with  air  and  fastened  to  him  by  ropes.^^  In  this  manner,  guided 
by  an  experienced  swimmer  on  each  side,  by  the  will  of  God,  he  reached 
the  farther  bank  safe  and  sound.  Thence  with  no  less  danger  he  con¬ 
tinued  his  journey,  barefoot.  He  was  suffering  from  his  unusual  exer¬ 
tions  and  exhausted  by  hunger,  thirst,  and  weariness  j  finally,  however, 
by  the  mercy  of  God,  he  reached  the  famous  castle  of  Turbessel.  Bur¬ 
dened  by  anxiety  over  the  task  entrusted  to  him,  he  proceeded  thence 
to  Antioch,  accompanied  by  a  temporary  escort,  which  was  necessary 
for  him  in  view  of  the  exigency.  Then,  by  the  advice  of  the  Patriarch 
Bernard,  he  went  on  to  Jerusalem.  There  he  explained  to  the  patriarch 
and  the  princes  of  the  realm  the  circumstances  of  the  disaster  which 
had  befallen  the  king  and  related  all  the  details  of  the  matter.  He 

Balak’s  cruel  treatment  of  the  Armenians  in  Kharpart  is  confirmed  by  other  sources. 

This  device  of  using  inflated  goatskins  in  crossing  the  Euphrates  was  a  more  or 
less  regular  practice  of  the  region  and  is  still  used. 


KING  BALDWIN  II 


545 

begged  them  to  send  relief  at  once,  for  the  king’s  precarious  situation 
admitted  of  no  delay.  Speedy  counsel  and  assistance  were  needed  and 
that  without  delay.^^ 

As  the  result  of  his  entreaties,  the  people  of  the  entire  kingdom  as¬ 
sembled  as  one  man.  Taking  the  Cross  of  the  Lord  upon  them,  they 
set  forth  at  once.  From  the  cities  through  which  they  passed,  they 
gathered  reinforcements  to  swell  their  numbers  until  they  reached 
Antioch.  Here  they  were  joined  by  the  fathers  and  people  of  that  city 
also,  and,  under  the  leadership  of  the  count,  they  marched  on  as  one 
body  to  Turbessel.  At  this  place  they  received  accurate  information  of 
all  that  had  happened  to  the  king  during  the  interval.  Since  it  was  ap¬ 
parent  that  to  proceed  farther  would  be  useless,  it  was  decided  by 
unanimous  consent  that  each  and  all  should  return  home.  But  that  the 
campaign  might  not  seem  to  have  been  wholly  in  vain,  it  was  agreed 
that  as  the  contingents  passed  by  Aleppo,  some  injury  should,  if  pos¬ 
sible,  be  wrought  upon  the  enemy.  All  happened  according  to  their 
plan,  for,  as  they  were  passing  by  that  city,  the  citizens  issued  forth 
with  the  intention  of  fighting.  By  force  of  arms,  however,  the  Chris¬ 
tians  compelled  them  to  retreat  to  the  city,  and  for  four  successive  days, 
notwithstanding  the  efforts  of  the  townspeople,  our  forces  remained 
before  that  city. 

On  the  return  march,  the  people  from  the  kingdom  separated  from 
the  others  and  proceeded  on  their  way  alone.  After  crossing  the  Jordan 
they  made  a  sudden  foray  into  the  enemy’s  country  near  Scythopolis. 
Since  the  people  there  were  entirely  unprepared,  the  Christians  fell 
upon  them  at  once.  As  a  result,  many  were  killed  by  the  sword,  and  a 
large  number  of  prisoners,  both  men  and  women,  were  taken.  Then, 
laden  with  a  vast  amount  of  booty  and  the  best  of  spoils,  the  Christians 
returned  in  joy  and  exultation  to  their  own  country. 

21.  The  Egyftians  with  immense  forces  again  enter  the  king¬ 
dom,  The  Christians  meet  them  with  a  strong  army  and  de¬ 
feat  them  in  wondrous  wise. 

The  prince  of  Egypt  had  good  reason  to  distrust  the  kingdom  of 
Jerusalem.  At  this  time,  because  of  the  king’s  captivity,  a  favorable  op- 

Joscelin’s  entreaties  might  well  have  been  treated  as  commands,  for  he  was  in 
a  sense  the  ranking  official  of  the  region. 


KING  BALDWIN  II 


546 

portunity  to  invade  that  realm  seemed  to  present  itself.®^  He  accord¬ 
ingly  ordered  auxiliary  troops  to  be  summoned  from  all  parts  of  Egypt 
and  also  directed  the  prefects  of  the  coast  cities,  whose  special  duty  this 
was,  to  make  ready  the  galleys  and  arm  the  fleet.  All  else  necessary  for 
naval  warfare  was  to  be  made  ready  without  delay. 

As  soon  as  the  seventy  galleys  were  ready,  the  prince  crossed  the 
desert  with  an  immense  land  army  and  encamped  near  Ascalon.  Here 
he  remained  with  his  legions  while  the  fleet  sailed  on  to  Jaifa  and 
anchored  before  the  city.  The  naval  forces  were  landed  in  large  num¬ 
bers  and  at  once  began  to  surround  the  city  on  all  sides.  These  kept  up 
a  constant  succession  of  skirmishes  in  hostile  fashion  for  the  purpose 
of  annoying  the  enemy.  Since  the  number  of  defenders  was  but  small, 
the  besiegers  could  safely  approach  near  enough  to  undermine  and 
weaken  the  wall  in  many  places.  If  they  could  have  continued  the  as¬ 
sault  on  the  following  day  as  well,  the  walls  would  without  question 
have  been  battered  down,  and,  as  there  were  but  few  to  resist,  the  city 
would  have  been  taken  by  storm. 

Meanwhile,  the  patriarch,  Eustace  Grenier,  the  royal  constable,  and 
other  great  men  of  the  realm  had  concentrated  all  the  available  troops 
in  the  plain  of  Caesarea  at  a  place  called  Caco.  Here  the  legions  were 
arranged  in  battle  formation  and  sent  on  toward  Jaffa.  When  the  news 
of  their  advance  reached  the  besieging  force  before  the  city,  the  men 
hastily  retreated  to  the  ships,  for  they  feared  the  coming  of  our  troops. 
There  they  rested  on  their  oars  ready  for  action,  while  they  waited  to 
see  what  would  happen  to  their  land  forces,  which  they  knew  were 
near  the  enemy.  Meanwhile,  the  Christians  advanced,  led  by  the  Cross 
of  the  Lord.  Armed  with  faith  and  aided  by  the  favor  of  the  Lord, 
they  were  strong  in  the  hope  of  victory.  With  ordered  ranks  and  lines 
drawn  up  in  military  array,  they  encountered  the  enemy  near  a  place 
called  Ibelin.  The  infidels  came  on  with  well-arranged  cohorts,  ac¬ 
cording  to  their  custom,  as  if  without  question  they  intended  to  engage 
the  Christians.  But  when  they  saw  our  splendid  array  and  recognized 
the  sure  evidence  of  our  courage,  they  weakened.  Though  they  had 
advanced  like  lions,  now,  more  timid  than  hares,  they  wished  to  de¬ 
cline  battle,  or  rather,  regretted  that  they  had  undertaken  it  at  all. 

Al-Afdal  was  no  longer  responsible  for  Egyptian  policy.  He  had  been  murdered 
December  11,  1121,  according  to  Qalanisi^  who  attributed  the  assassination  to  the 
caliph,  Amir  (see  Gibb,  T/ie  Damascus  Chronicley  pp.  163— 64). 


KING  BALDWIN  II  547 

Our  forces  as  a  whole  and  including  all  sorts  of  common  people  were 
said  to  be  about  seven  thousand.  The  enemy  was  reported  to  have  six¬ 
teen  thousand  troops  equipped  for  battle,  in  addition  to  those  on  board 
the  ships  serving  in  the  fleet. Yet  the  Christians  were  intrepid  of 
spirit  and  contrite  in  heart.  In  the  fear  of  the  Lord,  they  invoked  aid 
from  on  high  and  made  a  furious  charge  on  the  foe  with  their  swords. 
Though  in  peril  of  death,  for  the  fighting  was  at  close  quarters,  they 
scarcely  gave  the  infidels  a  chance  to  breathe. 

The  Egyptians  were  amazed  at  the  strength  and  daring  of  the 
Christians.  They  now  witnessed  with  their  own  eyes  and  experienced 
by  the  blows  rained  upon  them  the  truth  of  the  reports  which  they  had 
heard  rumored.  Nevertheless  they  were  prepared.  Valiantly  they 
strove  to  resist  and  to  return  our  blows  with  like  vigor.  Both  in  cour¬ 
age  and  strength,  however,  they  were  wholly  unequal  to  us.  Their 
attempt  failed,  and  they  were  compelled  to  flee.  Their  camp,  which 
was  full  of  all  kinds  of  riches  and  comforts,  was  abandoned,  and  their 
only  thought  was  to  save  their  lives  by  flight. 

The  Christians  pursued  them  eagerly  as  far  as  they  could  and  cut 
down  many  with  the  sword  so  that  few  of  that  great  multitude  escaped 
either  death  or  captivity.  Seven  thousand  infidels  are  said  to  have  per¬ 
ished  that  day. 

Our  forces  then  turned  back  as  victors  to  the  enemy’s  camp.  There 
they  found  the  treasures  of  the  Egyptians,  immense  quantities  of  gold 
and  silver,  precious  utensils  of  various  kinds,  pavilions  and  tents, 
horses,  breastplates,  and  swords  in  great  abundance.  The  spoils  were 
divided  according  to  the  laws  of  war,  and  the  troops  returned  home 
rich  beyond  belief. 

When  the  news  of  the  disaster  to  the  land  army  reached  those  who 
were  with  the  fleet,  they  set  sail  for  Ascalon.  This  city  was  still  in  the 
power  of  the  Egyptians  and  would  provide  a  safe  harbor  for  them. 
Here  they  received  more  complete  details  of  the  army’s  defeat. 

About  this  time,  Eustace  Grenier  died.  He  was  a  wise  and  discreet 
man,  who  had  been  placed  in  charge  of  the  realm  during  the  king’s 
absence.  The  distinguished  William  de  Bury,  lord  of  Tiberias,  a  man 
worthy  of  praise  in  every  respect,  was  chosen  to  fill  his  place.®^ 

The  account  of  this  battle  is  derived  from  Fulcher,  whose  numbers  are  accepted, 
though  still  too  great.  The  date  of  the  battle  was  May  29,  1123. 

Eustace  Grenier  died  June  15,  1123.  William  de  Bury  had  been  given  the  fief 


548 


KING  BALDWIN  II 


22.  The  doge  of  Venice  sails  for  Syria  with  a  large  fleet. 

The  doge  of  Venice,  Dominicus  Michaelis  [Domenigo  Michieli],®^ 
had  learned  of  the  straits  in  which  the  kingdom  of  the  East  was  placed 
and  had  ordered  a  fleet  to  be  made  ready.  With  forty  galleys,  twenty- 
eight  chatz,  and  four  larger  ships  suitable  for  carrying  baggage,  he  set 
sail  at  this  very  time  for  Syria.  Some  of  the  great  lords  of  his  province 
accompanied  him.  On  arriving  at  the  island  of  Cyprus,  they  learned 
that  the  Egyptian  fleet,  already  apprised  of  their  coming,  had  sailed 
to  the  coast  of  Jaffa  in  the  land  of  Syria.  It  was  still  there  and  was  re¬ 
garded  with  much  suspicion  by  the  maritime  cities.  This  information 
led  the  doge  to  order  an  immediate  departure,  and  with  his  fleet  in 
battle  formation  he  set  sail  in  haste  for  the  shore  near  Jaffa.  Later  news 
arrived  presently,  however,  to  the  effect  that  the  Egyptian  fleet  had 
left  Jaffa  and  retired  to  the  vicinity  of  Ascalon.  Sinister  reports  con¬ 
cerning  the  disaster  which  had  befallen  their  land  army  in  an  engage¬ 
ment  with  the  Christians  had  led  them  to  retreat  to  a  city  under  their 
own  control.  When  this  information  reached  the  Venetians  through 
their  emissaries,  the  course  of  the  fleet  at  once  turned  toward  Ascalon. 
For  in  case  the  Egyptian  fleet  was  still  there  they  eagerly  hoped  to  try 
an  engagement  with  it,  and  since  they  were  men  of  much  experience 
and  training  in  such  affairs,  they  arranged  their  ships  in  battle  forma¬ 
tion  in  the  best  possible  order. 

There  were  in  this  fleet  certain  beaked  vessels  larger  than  galleys, 
which  were  called  chatz.  Each  ship  was  equipped  with  an  hundred  oars, 
for  each  of  which  two  oarsmen  were  required.  In  addition,  there  were, 
as  we  have  said,  four  larger  boats  for  carrying  equipment,  machines, 
weapons,  and  the  necessary  provisions.  These,  together  with  the  chatZy 
were  placed  in  front  so  that  if  the  enemy  happened  to  catch  sight  of 
them  from  a  distance,  he  might  take  them  for  merchant  ships  rather 
than  an  enemy’s  fleet.  The  galleys  followed.  In  this  formation,  then, 

of  Tiberias  when  Joscelin  was  transferred  to  Edessa  in  1119.  Little  is  known  of  his 
earlier  career  (see  H.F.y  p.  675,  note  5). 

This  was  Domenig^o,  son  of  Michieli,  who  had  commanded  the  Venetian  fleet  of 
1099.  He  was  doge  of  Venice  from  1117  to  1128.  An  appeal  had  been  made  to  the 
Venetians  by  Pope  Calixtus  II  in  1121.  The  appeal  from  Baldwin  II  may  have  come 
somewhat  later.  Preparations  for  the  expedition  were  started  in  1 1 2 1 .  It  sailed  for 
Corfu  in  the  late  fall  and  spent  the  winter  there,  moving  to  Cyprus  in  the  early  spring 
of  1123.  The  importance  of  the  venture  for  Venice  is  indicated  by  the  fact  that  her 
ruler  and  many  of  the  magnates  went  with  the  fleet  while  the  government  at  home 
was  entrusted  to  lesser  men. 


KING  BALDWIN  II 


549 

the  naval  force  proceeded  toward  the  shore.  The  sea  was  very  calm, 
the  wind  was  in  their  favor,  and  the  enemy’s  fleet  was  near  at  hand. 
When  at  length  the  morning  light  began  to  appear  and  Aurora  am 
nounced  the  coming  of  the  day,  the  Egyptians  perceived  that  the  Chris¬ 
tian  fleet  was  coming  toward  them,  and  as  the  day  grew  brighter  and 
brighter,  they  saw  that  it  was  close  at  hand.  Dazed  with  terror  and 
astonishment,  they  seized  their  oars,  certain  that  an  engagement  was 
about  to  take  place.  With  cries  and  gestures  they  shouted  to  the  sailors 
to  cut  the  ropes  and  pull  up  the  anchors,  then  to  station  the  rowers  and 
snatch  up  their  weapons. 

23.  The  doge  finds  the  enemy^s  fleet  near  Jaffa,  He  attacks  it 
juriously.  The  enemy  is  forced  to  retreat.  Many  galleys  re^ 
main  in  the  hands  of  the  Christians, 

In  the  tumult  of  confusion  and  panic,  the  enemy’s  order  was  entirely 
broken  up.  At  this  crisis,  a  Venetian  galley  bearing  the  doge  sailed 
swiftly  ahead  of  the  others.  By  chance  this  vessel  struck  the  ship  which 
was  carrying  the  commander  of  the  Egyptian  fleet.  The  impact  was  so 
violent  that  the  enemy’s  ship  with  its  oarsmen  was  almost  entirely  en¬ 
gulfed  in  the  waves.  The  other  Venetian  galleys  followed  with  equal 
speed,  and  nearly  every  one  succeeded  in  overturning  one  of  the 
enemy’s  vessels.  A  desperate  battle  followed  in  which  each  side  fought 
with  bitter  fury.  Terrible  was  the  slaughter.  Although  it  is  scarcely 
credible,  those  who  took  part  in  this  conflict  insist  stoutly  that  the  vic¬ 
tors  were  completely  covered  with  the  blood  of  the  slain.  For  a  circuit 
of  two  miles  around,  the  adjacent  sea  became  blood  red  from  the  bodies 
thrown  therein  and  from  the  blood  of  the  slain  which  flowed  from  the 
ships.  The  shores  were  so  thickly  covered  with  corpses  thrown  up  by 
the  sea  that  the  air  was  tainted  and  the  surrounding  region  contracted 
a  plague  from  the  putrefying  bodies  of  the  dead. 

The  fight  was  carried  on  at  close  quarters,  for  the  one  side  fought 
with  burning  zeal  and  the  other  strove  with  equal  energy  to  resist. 
Finally,  however,  by  the  will  of  God,  the  Venetians  conquered.  The 
enemy  turned  and  fled.  Four  galleys  were  taken  with  as  many  chatz 
and  one  immense  ship,  the  commander  of  which  was  killed.  Thus  a 
victory  memorable  forever  was  won.^*^ 

The  description  of  the  fleet  and  this  battle  of  the  first  days  of  June,  as  well  as 
many  other  details  of  the  campaign  which  followed,  owe  much  to  William’s  use  of 


KING  BALDWIN  II 


550 

As  soon  as  this  triumph  had  been  granted  to  our  people  by  divine 
favor,  the  doge  gave  orders  to  proceed  without  loss  of  time  in  the 
direction  of  Egypt.  He  hoped  they  might  chance  to  meet  some  of  the 
enemy’s  fleet.  Accordingly,  they  sailed  along  the  shore  as  far  as 
al-Arish  (Rhinococura),  an  ancient  maritime  city  on  the  edge  of  the 
desert.  All  happened  exactly  as  they  wished,  and  just  as  if  some  relia¬ 
ble  messenger  had  informed  them  of  what  was  to  happen.  For  while 
they  were  toiling  at  the  oars  in  that  sea,  they  caught  sight  of  ten  enemy 
ships  not  far  away.  As  swiftly  as  possible  the  course  was  directed  thither 
and  the  ships  taken  by  force  at  the  first  encounter.  Part  of  those  on 
board  were  slain  and  the  rest  made  prisoners.  They  were  ships  laden 
with  merchandise  from  the  Orient,  namely,  spices  and  silken  stuffs. 
The  division  of  the  spoils,  according  to  their  custom,  made  the  Vene¬ 
tians  rich  indeed.  Towing  the  captured  vessels  with  them,  they  then 
directed  their  course  to  the  city  of  Acre,  where  they  landed.®® 

24.  The  agreement  made  between  the  doge  of  Venice  and  the 
barons  of  the  realm  in  the  matter  of  the  siege  of  Tyre, 

The  news  that  the  doge  of  Venice  had  landed  on  our  shores  with  a 
naval  force  and  had  gloriously  triumphed  over  the  enemy  soon  reached 
Jerusalem.  Accordingly,  Gormond,  the  patriarch  of  Jerusalem,  Wil¬ 
liam  de  Bury,  the  royal  constable  and  procurator  of  the  realm,  and 
Payens,  the  king’s  chancellor,  together  with  the  archbishops,  bishops, 
and  other  great  men  of  the  kingdom  sent  to  him  a  deputation  of  wise 
and  honorable  men.®®  The  envoys  carried  salutations  from  the  patri¬ 
arch,  the  barons,  and  the  people  to  the  doge  and  the  leading  men  of 
Venice  and  to  the  captains  of  the  army  as  well.  They  were  to  express 
the  joy  with  which  the  people  of  Jerusalem  looked  forward  to  the 
coming  of  the  Venetians  and  to  invite  them  to  make  use  of  all  that  the 
realm  could  offer  as  though  they  were  citizens  of  the  city.  All  were 
ready  and  eager  to  treat  them  with  full  hospitality  as  the  laws  of  hu- 


oral  sources  and  archives.  (For  a  detailed  account  of  ship  construction  and  types  of 
ships  at  this  time  see  Romola  and  R.  C.  Anderson,  T/ie  Sailing  Shif^  chap.  6  fassim.). 
The  importance  of  the  business  side  was  never  lost  to  sight  by  the  Italian  fleets, 
almost  none  of  the  expeditions  having  been  solely  military  in  purpose.  William’s 
sympathetic  appreciation  of  commerce  is  here  well  illustrated. 

The  ceremonial  here  described  is  such  as  might  grace  the  arrival  of  the  head  of  a 


state. 


KING  BALDWIN  II 


551 

manity  fittingly  demanded.  The  doge  desired  to  visit  the  holy  places, 
a  devout  wish  conceived  many  years  before ;  he  also  longed  to  converse 
with  the  princes  who  had  sent  him  so  cordial  an  invitation.  Accord¬ 
ingly,  he  left  wise  and  efficient  men  in  charge  of  the  fleet  and  repaired 
to  Jerusalem,  attended  by  his  principal  lords.  In  that  city  he  received 
a  cordial  welcome  and  was  treated  with  the  highest  honor  and  distinc¬ 
tion.  There  he  celebrated  the  natal  day  of  our  Lord.  The  princes  of  the 
realm  earnestly  besought  him  to  devote  himself  for  a  time  to  the  serv¬ 
ice  of  Christ  and  the  advancement  of  the  kingdom.  In  reply,  the  doge 
said  that  he  had  come  with  that  purpose  especially  in  view  and  in¬ 
tended  to  give  himself  entirely  to  that.  Since  the  patriarch  and  other 
great  lords  of  the  realm  were  present,  it  was  determined  by  common 
consent  to  attack  one  of  the  coast  cities,  under  a  definite  agreement.  It 
was  to  be  either  Tyre  or  Ascalon,  for  all  the  other  cities  from  the  river 
of  Egypt  as  far  as  Antioch  had  already,  by  the  grace  of  God,  come 
under  our  power. 

On  this  point,  however,  our  wishes  were  at  variance  and  the  matter 
came  near  resulting  in  a  dangerous  quarrel.  The  representatives  from 
Jerusalem,  Ramlah,  Jaffa,  Nablus,  and  the  environs  of  these  cities, 
strove  with  all  their  might  to  direct  the  campaign  against  Ascalon.  It 
was  nearer  and  seemed  to  demand  less  outlay  of  labor  and  money. 
Thd  people  from  Acre,  Nazareth,  Sidon,  Beirut,  Tiberias,  Jubail,  and 
other  cities  on  the  coast,  on  the  contrary,  urged  that  the  expedition 
should  be  led  against  Tyre.  They  said  that  since  this  was  a  noble  and 
well-fortified  city,  all  possible  efforts  should  be  put  forth  to  bring  it 
under  our  domination  lest,  otherwise,  the  enemy  might  have  access  to 
our  land  through  its  territory  and  thus  regain  the  region  and,  in  fact, 
the  entire  province. 

Thus  it  was,  therefore,  that  through  this  difference  of  opinion  the 
matter  came  near  being  fatally  delayed.  Finally,  however,  through 
the  efforts  of  certain  intermediaries  it  was  deemed  expedient  to  end 
this  controversy  by  lot.  Moreover,  the  method  of  determining  the  lot 
was  entirely  impartial.  Two  slips  of  parchment,  one  containing  the 
name  of  Tyre,  the  other  that  of  Ascalon,  were  placed  on  the  altar.  Then 
an  innocent  orphan  boy  was  brought  forward  and  allowed  to  choose 
between  the  two,  it  being  understood  that  the  army  should  proceed 
without  dispute  against  the  city  named  in  the  lot  drawn.  The  choice 
fell  upon  Tyre.  These  details  were  learned  from  certain  old  men  who 


552  KING  BALDWIN  II 

steadfastly  declare  that  they  were  present  at  all  the  events  just  re-* 
lated.*^^ 

After  the  ratification  of  this  plan,  the  lord  patriarch  and  the  prin¬ 
cipal  men  of  that  region  assembled  with  the  entire  body  of  people  at 
the  city  of  Acre,  where  the  Venetian  fleet  was  lying  at  safe  anchorage 
in  the  harbor.  Solemn  oaths  were  exchanged  by  which  both  parties 
agreed  to  keep  faithfully  to  the  terms  of  the  covenant  into  which  they 
had  entered.  All  the  preparations  necessary  for  an  expedition  of  this 
kind  were  made,  and  on  February  i6  they  laid  siege  both  by  land  and 
sea  to  the  city  of  Tyre.*^^ 

25.  A  copy  of  the  treaty  containing  the  agreement  made  between 
the  Venetians  and  the  frinces  of  the  kingdom  of  Jerusalem  m 
the  matter  of  the  siege  of  Tyre, 

That  no  document  bearing  on  events  that  happened  in  olden  times 
may  be  omitted,  there  should  be  inserted  here,  as  important  evidence 
of  what  was  done,  a  copy  of  the  privileges  containing  the  substance  of 
the  agreement  between  the  Venetians  and  the  chief  men  of  the  king¬ 
dom  of  Jerusalem.  This  is  as  follows. 

“In  the  name  of  the  holy  and  indivisible  Trinity,  Father,  Son,  and 
Holy  Ghost.  When  Pope  Calixtus  II  and  Henry  IV,'^^  the  august  em¬ 
peror  of  the  Romans,  were  ruling,  the  one  over  the  church  at  Rome, 
the  other  over  the  empire,  in  the  same  year  when,  at  a  council  held  at 
Rome,  peace  was  concluded,  by  the  will  of  God,  between  the  church 
and  state  in  the  controversy  over  the  ring  and  the  staff,  Domenigo  Mi- 
chieli,  doge  of  Venice,  of  Dalmatia  and  Croatia,  and  prince  of  the  em¬ 
pire,  accompanied  by  a  great  host  of  knights  and  a  mighty  fleet  of 
vessels,  came  as  a  conquerer  to  the  much-needed  defense  of  the  Chris¬ 
tians.  He  had  come  directly  from  his  victory  over  the  pagan  fleet  of 

William’s  account  is  greatly  enriched  by  such  investigations.  Though  Fulcher  has 
elaborated  the  story  of  the  campaign  leading  to  the  capture  of  Tyre,  his  account  is 
not  as  complete  as  that  of  William.  He  does,  however,  mention  one  item  which  might 
have  significance  as  to  the  choice  of  the  city  to  be  attacked.  This  was  the  election  of 
Odo  as  archbishop  of  Tyre  in  1122  {H.F,y  p.  647)  in  evident  anticipation  of  its  cap¬ 
ture  and  presumably  done  after  the  news  of  prospective  Venetian  aid  had  been  re¬ 
ceived.  Nevertheless  this  does  not  invalidate  the  story  of  the  drawing  of  lots,  for  the 
southern  towns  and  feudatories  would  still  be  hoping  to  divert  the  expedition  to 
Ascalon. 

February  16,  1124. 

Quarius  is  the  word  used  by  William,  but  the  ruler  was  Henry  V,  1106--1125. 


KING  BALDWIN  II 


553 

the  king  of  Babylon/^  upon  which  he  had  wrought  terrible  havoc  as 
it  lay  before  the  harborless  shores  of  Ascalon. 

^^Baldwin,  the  second  king  of  Jerusalem,  was  at  that  time,  because 
of  our  sins,  held  captive  with  many  others  in  the  toils  of  the  pagans, 
a  prisoner  of  Balak,  prince  of  the  Parthians."^^  Therefore,  we,  Gor- 
mond,  by  the  grace  of  God  patriarch  of  the  Holy  City  of  Jerusalem, 
being  assembled  at  the  city  of  Acre,  in  the  church  of  the  Holy  Cross, 
with  the  suffragan  brethren  of  our  church,  with  William  de  Bury, 
the  constable,  with  Payens,  the  chancellor,  and  in  conjunction  with 
the  allied  forces  of  the  whole  kingdom,  we,  I  say,  have  confirmed  the 
promises  of  the  said  King  Baldwin  according  to  the  propositions  made 
in  his  own  letters  and  messages  which  the  king  himself  had  previously 
sent  by  his  own  envoys  to  Venice  to  this  same  doge  of  the  Venetians.*^^ 
This  we  have  given  by  our  own  hand  and  by  the  hand  of  the  bishops 
and  the  chancellor,  with  the  kiss  of  peace  also,  as  our  rank  required. 
All  the  barons  also  whose  names  are  written  below  have  decreed  and 
confirmed  on  the  holy  scriptures  to  the  blessed  apostle  Mark,  to  the 
aforesaid  doge  and  his  successors,  and  to  the  people  of  Venice,  the  con¬ 
ditions  of  the  treaty  as  written  below  j  that,  without  any  contradiction, 
these  promises  just  as  they  are  written  below,  so  shall  they  remain  un¬ 
alterable  and  inviolate  in  the  future  to  him  and  his  people  forever. 

AMEN. 

^Tn  every  city  of  the  above-mentioned  king,  under  the  rule  of  his 
successors  also,  and  in  the  cities  of  all  his  barons,  the  Venetians  shall 
have  a  church  and  one  entire  street  of  their  ownj  also  a  square  and  a 
bath  and  an  oven  to  be  held  forever  by  hereditary  right,  free  from  all 
taxation  as  is  the  king’s  own  property. 

^Tn  the  square  at  Jerusalem,  however,  they  shall  have  for  their  own 
only  as  much  as  the  king  is  wont  to  have.  But  if  the  Venetians  desire  to 
set  up  at  Acre,  in  their  own  quarter,  an  oven,  a  mill,  a  bath,  scales, 
measures  and  bottles  for  measuring  wine,  oil,  and  honey,  it  shall  be 
permitted  freely  to  each  person  dwelling  there  without  contradiction 

Meaning  Egypt,  whose  ruler  at  this  time  was  the  caliph,  Amir. 

Balak  was  at  this  time  ruler  of  a  region  formerly  held  by  the  Armenians  and  was 
himself  of  Turkish  origin.  The  language  of  this  document  is  somewhat  stilted. 

This  direct  allusion  to  preliminary  negotiations  corrects  the  impression  of  a  more 
casual  adventure  by  the  Venetians  implied  by  William’s  earlier  statements.  The  appeal 
of  Calixtus  II  in  1121  and  the  election  of  Odo  as  archbishop  of  Tyre  in  1122  fit  in 
well  with  such  preliminary  agreements. 


KING  BALDWIN  II 


554 

to  cookj  mill,  or  bathe  just  as  it  is  freely  permitted  on  the  king^s  prop¬ 
erty.  They  may  use  the  measures,  the  scales,  and  the  measuring  bottles 
as  follows:  when  the  Venetians  trade  with  each  other,  they  must  use 
their  own  measures,  that  is  the  measures  of  Venice  3  and  when  the  Vene¬ 
tians  sell  their  wares  to  other  races,  they  must  sell  with  their  own  meas¬ 
ures,  that  is,  with  the  measures  of  Venice  3  but  when  the  Venetians 
purchase  and  receive  anything  in  trade  from  any  foreign  nation  other 
than  the  Venetians,  it  is  permitted  them  to  take  it  by  the  royal  measure 
and  at  a  given  price.  For  these  privileges  the  Venetians  need  pay  no 
tax  whatever,  whether  according  to  custom  or  for  any  reason  whatso¬ 
ever,  either  on  entering,  staying,  buying,  selling,  either  while  remain¬ 
ing  there  or  on  departing.  For  no  reason  whatever  need  they  pay  any 
tax  excepting  only  when  they  come  or  go,  carrying  pilgrims  with  their 
own  vessels.  Then  indeed,  according  to  the  king’s  custom,  they  must 
give  a  third  part  to  the  king  himself. 

“Wherefore,  the  king  of  Jerusalem  and  all  of  us  on  behalf  of  the 
king  agree  to  pay  the  doge  of  Venice,  from  the  revenues  of  Tyre,  on 
the  feast  day  of  the  apostles  Peter  and  Paul,  three  hundred  Saracen 
besants  yearly,  as  agreed  upon. 

“Moreover,  we  promise  you,  doge  of  Venice,  and  your  people  that 
we  will  take  nothing  more  from  those  nations  who  trade  with  you 
beyond  what  they  are  accustomed  to  give  and  as  much  as  we  receive 
from  those  who  trade  with  other  nations. 

“In  addition,  that  part  of  the  same  place  and  street  of  Acre  which 
has  at  one  end  the  house  of  Peter  Zanni  and  at  the  other  the  monastery 
of  St.  Dimitrius,  and  also  another  part  of  the  same  street  having  one 
wooden  house  and  two  of  stone,  which  were  formerly  reed  huts,  the 
same  which  King  Baldwin  of  Jerusalem  originally  gave  to  the  blessed 
Mark  and  to  Doge  Ordolafo  and  his  successors  in  consideration  of  the 
acquisition  of  Sidon3  these  places,  I  say,  we  confirm  to  St.  Mark  and 
to  you,  Domenigo  Michieli,  doge  of  Venice,  and  to  your  successors  by 
this  same  document.  To  you  we  give  the  power  in  perpetuity  of  hold¬ 
ing  and  possessing  it,  and  of  doing  with  it  whatever  you  please.  Over 
the  other  part  of  the  same  street  extending  in  a  straight  line  from  the 
house  of  Bernard  de  Neufchatel,  which  formerly  belonged  to  John 
Julian,  as  far  as  the  house  of  Gilbert  of  Jaffa,  of  the  family  of  St.  Lo, 
we  give  you  exactly  the  same  power  which  the  king  had.  In  addition, 
no  Venetian  in  the  whole  domain  of  the  king,  or  in  the  domains  of  his 


I 


KING  BALDWIN  II  555 

barons,  need  give  any  tribute  whether  in  entering,  or  staying  there,  or 
going  out  for  any  pretext  j  but  may  be  as  free  as  in  Venice  itself. 

^^But  if  a  Venetian  shall  have  a  lawsuit  or  any  litigation  over  any 
business  against  a  Venetian,  it  shall  be  decided  in  the  court  of  the 
Venetians.  Again,  if  anyone  feels  that  he  has  a  quarrel  or  lawsuit 
against  a  Venetian,  it  shall  be  determined  in  the  same  court  of  the 
Venetians.  But  if  a  Venetian  makes  complaint  against  any  other  than 
a  Venetian,  the  case  shall  be  decided  in  the  court  of  the  king.  Also 
when' a  Venetian  dies,  whether  testate  or  intestate  (which  we  call  with¬ 
out  a  tongue),  his  property  shall  accrue  to  the  control  of  the  Vene¬ 
tians.  If  any  Venetian  shall  be  shipwrecked,  he  shall  not  suffer  loss  of 
any  of  his  property.  If  he  dies  in  the  shipwreck,  the  property  which  he 
leaves  shall  be  sent  back  to  his  heirs  or  to  other  Venetians.  Moreover, 
the  Venetians  shall  have  the  same  powers  of  justice  and  the  same  rights 
over  the  burghers  of  any  people  dwelling  in  the  street  and  houses  of 
the  Venetians  as  the  king  has  over  his  own  people. 

^^Finally  the  Venetians  shall  have  a  third  part  of  the  two  cities  of 
Tyre  and  Ascalon,  with  their  appurtenances,  and  a  third  part  of  all  the 
lands  belonging  to  them  from  the  feast  day  of  St.  Peter.  This  applies 
only  to  lands  which  are  now  subject  to  the  Saracens  and  are  not  as  yet 
in  the  hands  of  the  Franks.  If,  through  the  aid  of  the  Venetians  or  by 
any  other  means,  the  Holy  Spirit  shall  give  either  of  these  cities  or, 
God  willing,  both  of  them  into  the  power  of  the  Christians,  a  third 
part  of  such  city  or  cities,  as  has  been  said,  freely  and  with  regal  powers 
the  Venetians  shall  hold  with  hereditary  right  forever,  without  let  or 
hindrance,  just  as  the  king  holds  two  parts. 

^^Therefore,  we,  Gormond,  patriarch  of  Jerusalem,  will  cause  the 
king  himself,  if  ever,  by  the  help  of  God,  he  shall  come  forth  out  of 
captivity,  to  confirm  the  above  agreement  in  its  entirety.  But  if  another 
shall  be  raised  into  the  place  of  king  over  the  kingdom  of  Jerusalem, 
we  will  cause  him  to  ratify  the  promises  set  forth  above,  before  he  is 
promoted,  as  has  been  said  before  j  otherwise  we  will  not  consent  in 
any  way  to  his  being  elevated  to  the  throne."^*^  The  successors  of  the 
barons,  likewise,  and  any  new  barons  in  the  future,  shall  ratify  the  same 
agreement  and  in  the  same  way. 

^^As  to  Antioch,  we  know  full  well  what  King  Baldwin  II  promised 

This  statement  constitutes  a  strong  refutation  of  the  notion  that  the  kingship  was 
already  hereditary. 


\ 


KING  BALDWIN  II 


556 

that  he  would  give  to  you  Venetians  in  the  principality  of  Antioch  un¬ 
der  the  same  treaty:  namely,  that  there  should  be  in  Antioch  the  same 
arrangement  as  in  the  rest  of  the  cities  belonging  to  the  king  if,  indeed, 
the  people  of  Antioch  should  be  willing  to  confirm  the  royal  agreement 
made  with  you.'^'^  We,  the  same  Gormond,  patriarch  of  Jerusalem, 
with  our  bishops,  clergy,  and  the  barons  and  people  of  Jerusalem,  give 
you  our  advice  and  aid  and  promise  to  carry  out  in  good  faith  all  that 
which  the  pope  shall  write  to  us  concerning  this,  and  to  observe  all  the 
above  matters  for  the  honor  of  the  Venetians^® 

I,  Gormond,  by  the  grace  of  God  patriarch  of  Jerusalem,  by  my  own 
hand,  confirm  the  things  above  written. 

I,  Ebremar,  archbishop  of  Caesarea,  likewise  confirm  these  same 
things. 

I,  Bernard,  bishop  of  Nazareth,  likewise  confirm  it. 

I,  Aschetinus,  bishop  of  Bethlehem,  likewise  confirm  it. 

I,  Roger  of  Lydda,  bishop  of  St.  George,  likewise  confirm  it. 

I,  Gilduin,  abbot  of  St.  Mary  in  the  Valley  of  Jehoshaphat,  like¬ 
wise  confirm  it. 

I,  Gerard,  prior  of  the  canons  of  the  Holy  Sepulchre,  likewise  con¬ 
firm  it. 

I,  Aicard,  prior  of  the  Temple  of  the  Lord,  likewise  affirm  it. 

I,  Arnold,  prior  of  Mt.  Sion,  likewise  affirm  it. 

I,  William  de  Bury,  constable  of  the  king,  likewise  affirm  it.*^^ 

Given  at  Acre,  by  the  hand  of  Payens,  chancellor  of  the 
king  of  Jerusalem,  in  the  year  1123,  in  the  second  indiction. 


The  position  of  Baldwin  II  in  1 121  as  regent  of  Antioch  justified  his  offer  of  such 
inducements  and  likewise  justified  the  elaborate  efforts  of  the  Venetians,  who  thus 
had  so  much  to  gain. 

This  whole  document  is  one  of  the  most  interesting  items  in  the  commercial  history 
of  western  Europe.  The  extreme  care  with  which  even  minute  details  of  the  Venetian 
privileges  are  stipulated  evidently  reflects  a  long  background  of  experience.  The  com¬ 
mercial  colonial  empires  of  the  Italian  city  states  had  already  begun.  It  is  also  of 
interest  to  note  the  importance  of  the  pope’s  position  as  a  guarantor  of  the  commercial 
and  political  privileges. 

It  is  of  interest  to  note  that  the  Venetians  are  apparently  content  to  have  only  the 
constable  and  chancellor  sign  for  the  secular  authority>  while  requiring  every  im¬ 
portant  prelate  of  the  church  to  sign.  Evidently  the  Venetians  regarded  Jerusalem  as 
a  state  of  the  church  and  doubtless  counted  upon  the  papacy  for  ultimate  security. 


HERE  ENDS  THE  TWELFTH  BOOK 


39 


107flR 
8R1 

03/95  02-013-01  bbc 


u4  History  of 

DEEDS  DONE  BEYOND 

THE  SEA 

» 

* 

By  WILLIAM 

Archbishop  of  Tyre 

0 

VOLUME  TWO 


Translated  and  Annotated  by 


EMILY  ATWATER  BABCOCK 


A.  C.  KREY 


NEW  YORK  :  MORNINGSIDE  HEIGHTS 

COLUMBIA  UNIVERSITY  PRESS 

1943 


t 


f  K  r 

i  a 


I 


Copyright  1943 

Columbia  University  Press,  New  York 

Foreign  agent:  oxford  university  press,  Humphrey  Milford, 
Amen  House,  London,  E,C.  4.,  England,  and  B,  I,  Building,  Nicol 

Road,  Bombay,  India 

MANUFACTURED  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES  OF  AMERICA 


f 


RECORDS  OF  CIVILIZATION 

SOURCES  AND  STUDIES 


EDITED  UNDER  THE  AUSPICES  OF  THE 
DEPARTMENT  OF  HISTORY,  COLUMBIA  UNIVERSITY 

E  ditor 

AUSTIN  P.  EVANS,  ph.d. 

Professor  of  History 


Advisory  Board 

DINO  BIGONGIARI,  Da  Ponte  Professor  of  Italian 

ROBERT  HERNDON  FIFE,  l.h.d.,  GebJiard  Professor  of  the 
Germanic  Languages  and  Literatures 

CARLTON  J.  H.  HAYES,  litt.d.,  Seth  Low  Professor  of  History 

ROGER  SHERMAN  LOOMIS,  b.l,itt..  Associate  Professor  of 
English 

ROBERT  MORRISON  MacIVER,  litt.d.,  Lieber  Professor  of 
Political  Philosophy  and  Sociology 

DAVID  S.  MUZZEY,  ph.d.,  Gouverneur  Morris  Professor  Emeritus 
of  History 

JAMES  T.  SHOTWELL,  LL.D.,  Bryce  Professor  Emeritus  of  the 

History  of  International  Relations;  Director  of  the  Division  of 
Economics  and  History,  Carnegie  Endowment  for  International 
Peace 


LYNN  THORNDIKE,  l.h.d.,  Professor  of  History 
WILLIAM  L.  WESTERMANN,  l.h.d..  Professor  of  Ancient  History 


CONTENTS 


Volume  Two 

Book  XIII.  Capture  of  Tyre;  Extension  of  Royal  Influence  to 

Other  Latin  States  i 

Book  XIV.  Fulk  of  Anjou  as  King  of  Jerusalem:  Troubles  in 

Northern  Syria  47 

Book  XV.  Emperor  John  Seeks  to  Extend  His  Influence  over 

the  Latin  States  94 

Book  XVI.  Joint  Rule  of  Baldwin  III  and  His  Mother  Meli- 

send:  The  Second  Crusade  136 

Book  XVII.  The  Capture  of  Ascalon  Offsets  the  Failure  of  the 

Second  Crusade  184 

Book  XVIII.  Latin  Jerusalem  at  Its  Height  under  Baldwin  III: 

The  Lure  of  Egypt  235 

Book  XIX.  Amaury  I:  The  Struggle  for  Egypt,  First  Stage  295 

Book  XX.  The  Struggle  for  Egypt:  Alliance  with  Emperor 

Manuel  344 

Book  XXL  Baldwin  IV,  the  Leper,  Forced  to  Assume  Rule  of 

Jerusalem  397 

Book  XXIL  Conflict  of  Interests  446 

Book  XXIII.  Could  Jerusalem  Be  Saved  by  Raymond  of  Tripoli?  505 

Abbreviations  512 

Bib  liog.raph  y  513 

Index  523 

Map 

The  Regions  of  William  of  Tyre  238 


THE  THIRTEENTH  BOOK  BEGINS 


CAPTURE  OF  TYRE;  EXTENSION  OF  ROYAL 
INFLUENCE  TO  OTHER  LATIN  STATES 

I.  The  antiquity  and  renown  oj  Tyre  is  described. 

The  city  of  Tyre  dates  from  very  remote  times,  according  to  the 
statement  of  Ulpian,  a  man  learned  in  the  law  who  was  born  there.  In 
the  Digest  under  the  heading  ‘^De  censibus/’  he  writes:  ^Tt  is  well 
known  that  certain  colonies  have  Italian  rights,  as,  for  example,  the 
magnificent  colony  of  Tyre,  in  Syria  of  Phoenicia,  my  birthplace.  This 
city,  with  its  commanding  position,  great  antiquity,  and  prowess  in 
arms,  held  tenaciously  to  the  treaty  which  she  had  made  with  the  Ro¬ 
mans.  The  divine  Severus,  our  emperor,  granted  Italian  rights  to  this 
city  as  a  reward  for  its  signal  loyalty  toward  the  republic  and  the  empire 
of  Rome.”  ^ 

To  this  city,  if  we  hark  back  to  ancient  stories,  belonged  King  Agenor 
and  his  children,  Europa,  Cadmus,  and  Phoenix.  It  is  from  the  latter, 
as  the  Phoenicians  claim,  that  the  whole  region  derives  its  name.  The 
other  son,  Cadmus,  founded  the  city  of  Thebes  and  was  also  the  in¬ 
ventor  of  the  Greek  alphabet.  Thus  he  bequeathed  a  distinguished 
name  as  an  inheritance  to  his  descendants.  The  remaining  child,  a 
daughter,  gave  her  name  to  the  third  part  of  the  globe,  which  is  called 
Europe.^ 

The  citizens  of  Tyre  were  noted  for  keenness  of  mind  and  vivacity 
of  disposition.  They  were  the  first  who  tried  to  designate  by  suitable 
characters  the  separate  elements  of  the  spoken  word.  They  also  claim 
the  distinction  of  being  the  first  of  mankind  to  build  treasure  houses 
for  the  memory  and  to  bequeath  to  posterity  through  the  visible  sym¬ 
bols  of  thought  a  knowledge  of  writing  and  speech.  This  fact  is  stated 
in  histories  of  ancient  times,  and  Lucan,  the  distinguished  historian  of 
the  civil  wars,  mentions  it  as  follows :  “The  Phoenicians  were  the  first, 

^  Corpus  juris  civilisj  Digest,  L.  xv.  i. 

^  These  statements  hark  back  to  the  Polyhistor  of  Solinus  and  to  the  Metamorphoses 
of  Ovid,  with  both  of  which  William  was  familiar. 


2 


CAPTURE  OF  TYRE 


if  report  may  be  trusted,  who  ventured  to  mark  the  length  of  tones 
by  rude  signs.”  ^ 

Tyre  was  also  the  first  to  make  known  the  wonderful  purple  color 
made  from  the  powdered  conch  and  the  precious  murex.  This  color, 
famous  there  even  today,  is  called  Tyrian  from  the  name  of  the  city 
itself. 

From  here  also  are  said  to  have  come  Sychaeus  and  his  wife,  Elisa 
Dido,  who  founded  in  the  diocese  of  Africa  that  wonderful  city  Car¬ 
thage,  the  rival  of  the  Roman  empire.  They  called  it  the  Punic  king¬ 
dom,  Phoenician  as  it  were,  in  remembrance  of  the  land  from  which 
they  had  come.  For  the  Carthaginians,  ever  mindful  of  their  origin, 
always  desired  to  be  called  Tyrians.  Thus,  in  the  first  book  of  Maro 
we  read,  ^^There  was  an  ancient  city  inhabited  by  colonists  from 
Tyre”j  1  and  also,  “Trojan  and  Tyrian  alike  shall  be  treated  by  me 
with  no  discrimination.”  ^ 

In  the  beginning,  Tyre  had  two  names:  Sor,®  in  Hebrew,  the  name 
more  generally  used  now,  and  Tyre.  The  latter  name  seems  to  be  of 
Greek  origin  (it  is,  being  interpreted,  Angustia,  or  straits).  This  was 
certainly  taken  from  the  name  of  the  founder,  for,  according  to  very 
ancient  traditions,  it  is  clear  that  Tyras,  the  seventh  son  of  Japhet,  the 
son  of  Noah,  founded  this  city  and  gave  it  his  own  name.  How  famous 
was  the  renown  of  this  city  in  early  times  may  be  readily  inferred  from 
the  words  of  Ezekiel,  to  whom  the  Lord  said:  “Now,  thou  son  of  man, 
take  up  a  lamentation  for  Tyrus;  and  say  unto  Tyrus,  O  thou  that 
art  situate  at  the  entry  of  the  sea,  which  art  a  merchant  of  the  people 
for  many  isles  .  .  .  O  Tyrus,  thou  hast  said,  I  am  of  perfect  beauty. 
Thy  borders  are  in  the  midst  of  the  seas,  thy  builders  have  perfected 
thy  beauty.  They  have  made  all  thy  ship  boards  of  fir  trees  of  Senir: 
they  have  taken  cedars  from  Lebanon  to  make  masts  for  thee.  Of  the 
oaks  of  Bashan  have  they  made  thine  oars  5  the  company  of  the 
Ashurites  have  made  thy  benches  of  ivory,  brought  out  of  the  isles 
of  Chittim.  Fine  linen  with  broidered  work  from  Egypt  was  that  which 
thou  spreadest  forth  to  be  thy  sailj  blue  and  purple  from  the  isles  of 
Elishah  was  that  which  covered  thee.” 

Isaiah  also  has  written  of  Tyre:  “Pass  ye  over  to  Tarshishj  howl, 

^  Lucan  Pharsalia  iii.  221.  ^  Virgil  Aeneid  l.  12.  ®  Virgil  Aeneid  I.  574. 

®  Or  “Sur,”  which  is  used  by  the  Arabs  in  our  own  time.  Much  of  this  antiquarian 
material  was  collected  by  Fulcher. 

"  Ez.  27 :  2—7. 


CAPTURE  OF  TYRE 


3 

ye  inhabitants  of  the  isle.  Is  this  your  joyous  city,  whose  antiquity  is  of 
ancient  days?  her  own  feet  shall  carry  her  afar  off  to  sojourn.  Who 
hath  taken  this  counsel  against  Tyre,  the  crowning  city,  whose  mer¬ 
chants  are  princes,  whose  traffickers  are  the  honorable  of  the  earth?’’  ® 

Hiram,  who  aided  Solomon  in  building  the  temple  of  the  Lord,  was 
king  of  Tyre,  as  was  also  Apollonius,  whose  deeds  are  of  widespread 
renown.  To  this  city  also  belonged  Abdimus,  son  of  Abdaemon.  He  it 
was  who  with  marvellous  subtlety  solved  the  sophistries  of  the  many 
riddles  and  parables  which  Solomon  used  to  send  to  Hiram,  king  of 
Tyre.  In  the  eighth  book  of  the  Antiquities  of  Josephus  one  may  read: 
“Menander,  who  translated  the  Antiquities  of  the  Tyrians  from  the 
Phoenician  into  the  Greek  tongue,  also  mentions  these  two  kings  as 
follows:  ^On  the  death  of  Abibalo  his  son  Hiram  succeeded  to  the 
throne.  He  lived  fifty-three  years  and  reigned  thirty-four.  At  that 
time  Abdimus,  son  of  Abdaemon,  was  in  prison,  he  who  used  to  solve 
the  riddles  which  the  king  of  Jerusalem  sent.’  And  again  farther  on 
we  read,  ^Moreover,  Solomon,  the  king  of  Jerusalem,  had  sent  to 
Hiram,  king  of  Tyre,  certain  riddles  which  he  begged  him  to  solve, 
with  the  understanding  that  if  Hiram  was  unable  to  do  so,  he  would 
pay  a  certain  sum  of  money  as  a  forfeit.  And  when  Hiram  acknowl¬ 
edged  that  he  could  not  solve  them  and  was  about  to  suffer  great 
pecuniary  loss,  the  riddles  which  had  been  propounded  were  solved  by 
a  certain  Abdimus,  a  Tyrian.  This  man  in  turn  proposed  other  riddles 
with  the  condition  that  if  Solomon  could  not  guess  them  he,  in  his 
turn,  must  pay  a  large  forfeit  to  King  Hiram.’  ”  ®  Possibly  this  is  the 
man  who  in  popular  and  fabulous  stories  is  called  Marcolfus,  of  whom 
it  is  said  that  he  used  to  solve  the  enigmas  of  Solomon  and  in  return 
propounded  others  of  equal  difficulty  for  the  king  to  guess. 

This  same  city  still  guards  the  body  of  Origen,  as  may  be  proved 
by  the  testimony  of  one’s  own  eyes.  Jerome,  writting  to  Pammachius 
and  Oceanus  in  the  letter  which  begins,  “The  schedules  which  you  have 
sent”  states  the  same  thing :  “It  is  now  about  a  hundred  and  fifty  years 
since  Origen  died  at  Tyre.” 

To  refer  to  scriptural  history  also,  this  is  the  native  city  of  that 
admirable  Canaanite  woman  whose  great  faith  when  she  pleaded  for 
her  daughter,  who  was  troubled  by  an  evil  spirit,  the  Saviour  com- 

®  Is.  23  :  6—8.  ^  Josephus  Ant.  vin.  5. 

Jerome  A d  Fammachium  et  Oceamim. 


4  CAPTURE  OF  TYRE 

mended,  saying,  woman,  great  is  thy  faith.”  She  left  a  memorial 
of  wondrous  faith  and  praiseworthy  patience  to  the  daughters  of  her 
fellow  citizens,  for  she  was  the  first  to  teach  them  to  pray  to  Christ  the 
Saviour  with  the  gifts  of  faith,  charity,  and  hope,  according  to  the 
words  of  the  prophet  who  said,  “and  the  daughter  of  Tyre  shall  be 
there  with  a  gift.” 

Tyre  is  the  metropolis  of  all  Phoenicia,  which  has  always  held  the 
first  rank  among  the  provinces  of  Syria,  both  because  it  is  rich  with 
blessings  of  every  description  and  also  because  of  its  large  population. 

2.  The  lands  and  extent  of  Syria. 

It  should  be  observed  that  the  name  Syria  is  used,  sometimes  in  a 
broad  sense  as  applying  to  the  whole  province,  and  again  in  a  more 
limited  way  to  designate  only  a  part  of  the  same.  At  times  also,  with  the 
help  of  an  additional  word,  it  denotes  some  particular  province.  Thus 
Greater  Syria  contains  many  provinces  within  its  boundaries.  Begin¬ 
ning  at  the  Tigris  river,  it  extends  as  far  as  Egypt  and  from  Cilicia 
to  the  Red  sea.  The  first  province  of  the  lower  part  between  the  Tigris 
and  the  Euphrates  is  Mesopotamia,  so  called  because  it  lies  between 
■two  rivers.  In  the  Greek  language  a  river  is  called  f  o tamos y  in  the 
Latin  fluvius.  And  because  this  is  a  part  of  Syria,  it  is  often  called  in  the 
scriptures  Mesopotamia  of  Syria. 

The  next  largest  province  of  this  same  Syria,  after  Mesopotamia, 
is  Coelesyria,  which  contains  the  noble  city  of  Antioch  with  all  its  de¬ 
pendent  cities.  The  two  Cilicias,  both  of  which  are  parts  of  Syria,  lie 
next  to  this  on  the  north.  To  the  south  it  borders  on  Phoenicia,  dis¬ 
tinguished  among  the  divisions  of  Syria.  This  country  was  for  many 
years  one  single  province,  but  now  it  is  divided  into  two  parts.  The 
first  of  these  is  Phoenicia  Maritima.  Its  metropolis  is  Tyre,  the  city  of 
which  we  are  now  speaking,  with  its  fourteen  dependent  cities.  It  ex¬ 
tends  from  the  river  of  Valenia  which  flows  by  the  castle  of  Margat, 
to  the  Pierced  Rock  now  known  as  Districtumy  near  the  very  old  city 
called  Ancient  Tyre.  The  cities  which  lie  within  this  province  are  as 
follows:  on  the  south,  the  first  is  Porphyrion,  also  called  Haifa,  and  in 
the  vernacular  Caifas.  The  second  is  Ptolemais,  also  known  as  Acre. 
The  third,  to  the  east,  is  Banyas,  which  is  Caesarea  Philippi.  The 


Mat.  1 5  :  28. 


Ps.  45 :  12. 


CAPTURE  OF  TYRE 


5 

fourth,  on  the  north,  is  Sarepta^  the  fifth  is  Sidonj  the  sixth  is  Beirut  3 
the  seventh,  Jubailj  the  eighth,  Botrium  [Botron]  j  the  ninth,  Tripoli; 
the  tenth,  Artusia;  the  eleventh,  Arka;  the  twelfth,  Arados;  the  thir¬ 
teenth,  Tortosa;  and  the  fourteenth,  Maraclea. 

The  other  Phoenicia  is  called  Phoenicia  Libanica.  The  capital  of  this 
is  Damascus.  It  is  sometimes  called  Syria  also,  as,  for  example,  ‘^the 
head  of  Syria  is  Damascus.”  This  Phoenicia  was  also  later  divided 
into  two  parts :  Phoenicia  of  Damascus  and  Phoenicia  of  Emisena. 

The  two  Arabias  are  also  parts  of  Syria.  The  capital  of  the  first  is 
Bostrum  and  that  of  the  second  is  Petra  of  the  Desert.  Syria  Sobal  with 
its  capital  Sobal  is  also  a  part  of  Greater  Syria. 

The  three  Palestines  likewise  form  a  part  of  Syria.  The  first,  prop¬ 
erly  called  Judea,  has  as  its  capital  the  city  of  Jerusalem;  the  capital  of 
the  second  is  maritime  Caesarea;  and  of  the  third,  Scythopolis,  also 
called  Bethsan.  The  site  of  this  latter  city  is  now  occupied  by  Nazareth. 

The  last  province  of  Greater  Syria,  toward  Egypt,  is  Idumea. 

3.  Describes  the  environs  of  Tyre  and  the  advantages  which 
it  ofers. 

Not  only  was  Tyre  extremely  well  fortified,  as  has  been  stated,  but 
in  addition  it  was  famous  for  its  unique  beauty  of  location  and  the  fer¬ 
tility  of  its  soil.  Although  lying  in  the  sea  itself,  entirely  surrounded 
by  the  waves  like  an  island,  yet  it  had  before  its  gates  extensive  arable 
fields,  excellent  in  every  respect,  while  a  level  plain  of  rich  and  pro¬ 
ductive  soil  stretched  out  from  the  city  itself  and  furnished  the  people 
of  Tyre  with  abundant  supplies. 

Although  this  area  may  seem  small  compared  with  that  of  other 
regions,  yet  its  great  productivity  compensates  for  its  limited  extent, 
and  its  exceeding  fertility  makes  it  equal  to  acres  of  boundless  extent. 
Nor  is  it,  in  fact,  contained  within  narrow  limits.  On  the  south  it  ex¬ 
tends  toward  Acre  to  the  place  now  called  the  District  of  the  Scan- 
dalium,  four  or  five  miles  distant  from  Tyre,  while  in  the  other  direc¬ 
tion  it  stretches  out  toward  Sarepta  and  Sidon  for  about  the  same 
distance.  At  its  narrowest  extent  it  is  about  two  miles  wide,  at  its 
widest  about  three.  There  are  many  springs  in  this  plain  from  which 
flow  clear  and  salubrious  streams,  whose  cooling  waters  afford  delight¬ 
ful  refreshment  in  hot  weather. 


Is.  7:8. 


6 


CAPTURE  OF  TYRE 

The  most  celebrated  of  these  and  the  one  best  known  to  the  world 
is  believed  to  be  the  one  of  which  Solomon  speaks  in  the  Song  of  Solo¬ 
mon:  fountain  of  gardens,  a  well  of  living  waters,  and  streams  from 

Lebanon.” 

These  waters  have  their  origin  in  the  lowest  part  of  the  plain  and 
do  not  rise  in  the  mountains  as  do  many  other  springs.  They  seem  in 
fact  to  gush  forth  as  from  the  very  depths  of  the  abyss.  Yet  they  have 
been  artificially  raised  into  the  upper  air  by  the  care  and  skill  of  man, 
so  that  they  water  abundantly  all  the  surrounding  region  and  in  their 
beneficent  course  render  the  plain  available  for  many  purposes.  By 
means  of  an  admirable  structure  of  stonework  rivalling  iron  in  its 
strength,  the  water  has  been  raised  and  conducted  aloft  to  the  height 
of  ten  feet.  Thus,  the  spring  which  in  its  natural  low  position  was  of 
little  use,  when  elevated  by  artificial  means  contrary  to  nature,  has  be¬ 
come  a  benefit  to  the  whole  surrounding  country  and  pours  forth  its 
waters  in  abundance  for  the  production  of  crops. 

As  one  draws  near  to  examine  this  remarkable  work,  the  outer  tower 
looms  up  prominently  but  no  water  is  visible.  On  reaching  the  top, 
however,  one  sees  that  a  great  reservoir  of  water  has  been  brought  to¬ 
gether  here  which  is  distributed  thence  to  the  adjacent  fields  by  means 
of  aqueducts  of  equal  height  and  massive  structure.  For  the  convenience 
of  those  who  wish  to  ascend  to  the  top  of  the  tower,  a  staircase  of  solid 
stone  is  provided,  the  incline  of  which  is  so  gradual  that  even  those  on 
horseback  can  ride  without  difficulty  to  the  top. 

All  the  country  round  about  derives  immense  benefits  from  these 
waters.  Not  only  do  they  supply  gardens  and  delightful  orchards 
planted  with  fruit  trees,  but  they  irrigate  the  sugar  cane  also.  From 
this  latter  crop  sugar  {zachara)  is  made,  a  most  precious  product,  very 
necessary  for  the  use  and  health  of  mankind,  which  is  carried  from  here 
by  merchants  to  the  most  remote  countries  of  the  world. 

A  very  fine  quality  of  glass,  also,  is  marvellously  manufactured  out 
of  sand  which  is  found  in  this  same  plain.  This  is  carried  to  far  distant 
places  and  easily  surpasses  all  products  of  the  kind.  It  offers  a  material 
suitable  for  making  most  beautiful  vases  which  are  famous  for  their 
transparency.  In  this  way,  also,  the  fame  of  the  city  is  spread  abroad 
among  foreign  peoples  and  the  profit  of  the  merchants  is  increased 
manifold. 


Ca.  4:15. 


CAPTURE  OF  TYRE  7 

Tyre  possessed  not  only  all  these  rich  resources,  but  in  addition,  it 
had  the  advantage  of  incomparable  fortifications,  which  will  be  spoken 
of  in  the  following  pages.  Because  of  its  many  advantages  and  its  strong 
defenses,  Tyre  was  most  precious  and  agreeable  to  the  prince  of  Egypt, 
who  was  practically  the  most  puissant  of  all  [Oriental  potentates] .  The 
entire  country  from  Laodicea  in  Syria  to  the  Libyan  desert  was  under 
his  absolute  control.  He  regarded  Tyre  as  the  bulwark  of  his  kingdom 
and  as  the  seat  of  his  empire.  He  had  therefore  carefully  provided  it 
with  food  and  arms  and  had  garrisoned  it  with  stalwart  warriors,  for 
he  believed  that  if  he  could  keep  the  head  uninjured,  all  the  other 
parts  of  the  body  would  remain  safe. 

4.  Relates  how  in  earlier  time  it  had  often  been  besieged. 

On  the  sixteenth  of  February,  therefore,  as  we  have  said  above,  our 
two  armies  arrived  before  the  city  of  Tyre  and  blockaded  it  as  far  as 
was  possible.  But,  in  the  words  of  the  prophet,  this  city  lay  “at  the  entry 
of  the  sea,”  and  was  surrounded  by  water  on  all  sides  except  for  a 
strip  of  land  equal  to  the  distance  that  an  arrow  could  be  shot.  Ancient 
writers  say  that  it  was  once  really  an  island  entirely  separated  from  the 
mainland.  They  state  that  when  Nebuchadnezzar,  the  powerful  As¬ 
syrian  prince,  was  besieging  it,  he  wished  to  connect  it  with  the  land 
but  did  not  finish  the  work.  The  prophet  Ezekiel  mentions  this  siege 
as  follows:  “Behold,  I  will  bring  upon  Tyrus  Nebuchadnezzar  king  of 
Babylon,  a  king  of  kings,  from  the  north,  with  horses,  and  with  chariots, 
and  with  horsemen,  and  companies,  and  much  people.  He  shall  slay 
with  the  sword  thy  daughters  in  the  field:  and  he  shall  make  a  fort 
against  thee,  and  cast  a  mount  against  thee,  and  lift  up  a  buckler  against 
thee,”  and  so  on.^® 

Josephus  also  mentions  this  siege  in  the  tenth  book  of  the  Antiquities y 
as  follows:  “Diodes  also  mentions  this  king  in  the  second  book  of  the 
Colonies;  and  Philostrates  has  said  in  his  histories  of  India  and  Phoe¬ 
nicia,  that  this  king  besieged  Tyre  for  three  years  and  ten  months  at 
the  time  when  Jotabel  was  ruling  over  Tyre.  After  this  man,  Alexander 
of  Macedon  connected  Tyre  with  the  land  and  then  seized  the  city  by 
force  of  arms.” 

Josephus  speaks  of  this  siege  in  the  eleventh  book  of  the  Antiquities 


Ez.  27 :  3. 


Ez.  26 :  7—8. 


Josephus  Ant.  x.  ii. 


8 


CAPTURE  OF  TYRE 


also,  saying:  “So  Alexander  came  to  Syria  and  took  Damascus,  and, 
after  subjugating  Sidon,  he  besieged  Tyre.”  And  further  on:  “Be¬ 
cause  he  persevered  vigorously  in  the  siege  he  took  that  city  and  after 
he  had  taken  it,  he  went  on  to  the  city  of  Gerasa.”  And  again:  “After 
besieging  Tyre  for  seven  months  and  Gerasa  for  two,  Sanballat  died.” 

Before  this  time,  Salmanassar  had  also  besieged  it  and  had  invaded 
the  whole  of  Phoenicia.  Of  him  also,  Josephus  speaks  in  the  ninth  book 
of  the  Antiquities  saying:  “For  he  made  an  expedition  against  Tyre  in 
the  reign  of  Eluleus.  Menander,  who  wrote  the  history  of  the  times 
and  translated  into  Greek  the  Antiquities  of  Tyre,  also  speaks  of  this, 
as  follows:  ‘Eluleus  reigned  thirty-six  years.  On  the  revolt  of  the 
Scythians  he  sailed  to  them  and  reduced  them  to  submission,  but  Sal¬ 
manassar,  king  of  the  Assyrians,  rose  against  them  a  second  time  and 
invaded  all  Phoenicia.  But  after  he  had  made  peace  with  all  of  them, 
he  retired.  Then  the  cities  of  Sidon  and  Arka  and  Ancient  Tyre  and 
many  others  deserted  Tyre  and  surrendered  to  the  same  king  of  the 
Assyrians.  And  since  Tyre  had  not  submitted,  the  king  again  proceeded 
against  her,  the  Phoenicians  furnishing  him  with  sixty  ships  and  eighty 
galleys  with  oars.  The  Tyrians  sailed  against  them  in  twelve  ships, 
and,  having  scattered  the  enemy’s  fleet,  they  took  five  hundred  pris¬ 


oners,  whereby  the  prestige  of  Tyre  was  greatly  increased.  But  the 
king  of  Assyria  returned.  He  placed  guards  over  the  river  and  the 
aqueducts  of  the  city  and  thus  prevented  the  Tyrians  from  obtaining 
water.  This  condition  of  affairs  lasted  five  years  during  which  time 
they  had  to  drink  from  wells  which  they  dug.  These  things  were  writ¬ 
ten  in  the  archives  of  Tyre  concerning  Salmanassar,  king  of  As¬ 


syria. 


y  yy  19 


5 .  The  city  is  described  and  the  status  and  condition  of  the  citi¬ 
zens  exflained. 

This  city,  as  we  have  said,  is  like  an  island,  for  it  is  surrounded  by  a 
stormy  sea,  dangerous  because  of  hidden  rocks  of  varying  height.  It 
is  hazardous,  therefore,  for  pilgrims  and  others  unacquainted  with  the 
locality  to  approach  Tyre  by  water.  For  unless  they  have  a  pilot  who 
is  familiar  with  the  surrounding  sea  they  cannot  reach  the  city  without 
danger  of  shipwreck. 


Josephus  Ant^  Xi.  8. 


Josephus  Ant.  ix.  14. 


CAPTURE  OF  TYRE  9 

On  the  sea  side,  Tyre  was  surrounded  by  a  double  wall  with  towers 
of  goodly  height  at  equal  distances  apart.  On  the  east,  where  the  ap¬ 
proach  by  land  lies,  it  has  a  triple  wall  with  enormously  high  and  mas¬ 
sive  towers  so  close  together  that  they  almost  touch  one  another.  There 
was  a  broad  mole  also,  through  which  the  citizens  could  easily  let  in 
the  sea  from  both  sides.  On  the  north,  its  entrance  guarded  by  two 
towers,  was  the  inside  harbor  which  lay  within  the  walls  of  the  city. 
The  outer  shore  of  the  island  received  the  first  violence  of  the  waves 
and  broke  the  force  of  the  raging  sea.  Thus  a  safe  harborage  for  vessels 
was  formed  between  the  island  and  the  land,  which  was  entirely  shel¬ 
tered  from  all  winds  except  that  from  the  north. 

Into  this  harbor  the  fleet  was  directed  and  stationed  in  a  sheltered 
place.  The  army  was  already  in  possession  of  the  orchards  near  the 
city  and  had  established  the  camp  in  a  circle  round  the  town.  This 
position  prevented  the  citizens  from  going  in  and  out  and  compelled 
them  to  remain  within  the  walls. 

The  city  was  subject  to  two  lords:  the  caliph  of  Egypt  held  two 
parts  of  it  as  overlord  and  had  granted  the  third  part  to  the  king  of 
Damascus,  because  he  was  near  at  hand.  He  trusted  that  the  latter 
would  not  molest  it  but  would,  on  the  contrary,  assist  the  citizens  in 
dangerous  crises. 

There  were  in  Tyre  many  noble  citizens  of  great  wealth.  Through 
their  constant  trading  voyages  to  most  of  the  provinces  along  the 
Mediterranean  sea,  these  merchants  had  brought  back  vast  riches  and 
a  great  amount  of  foreign  merchandise  to  swell  the  resources  of  the 
city.  Moreover,  rich  and  distinguished  citizens  from  Caesarea,  Acre, 
Sidon,  Jubail,  Tripoli,  and  other  coastal  cities  which  had  now  fallen 
under  our  power,  had  fled  to  Tyre  to  seek  the  protection  of  its  fortifica¬ 
tions.  These  people  had  bought  homes  for  themselves  in  the  city  at  a 
high  price.  For  it  seemed  inconceivable  that  a  city  so  strongly  fortified 
could,  under  any  circumstances,  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  Christians. 
Then,  as  now,  it  was  regarded  as  a  matchless  bulwark,  an  incomparable 
tower  of  strength,  without  an  equal  in  the  entire  region.^® 

It  is  difficult  to  appreciate  the  fact,  in  view  of  his  sympathetic  account,  that  Wil¬ 
liam  is  here  speaking*  of  Muslim  merchants.  The  description  of  Tyre  and  its  surround¬ 
ings  is  that  of  an  eyewitness,  and  the  account  of  the  siege  is  derived  largely  from 
eyewitnesses.  None  of  William’s  written  sources  is  nearly  so  full  or  vivid.  The  divi¬ 
sion  of  ownership  between  the  Egyptians  and  the  Damascenes  was  an  emergency  ar¬ 
rangement  to  procure  the  help  of  Damascus,  according  to  Qalanisi  (H.  A.  R,  Gibb, 
trans.,  The  Damascus  Chronicle^  p.  170),  and  had  been  made  just  before  the  siege. 


10 


CAPTURE  OF  TYRE 


6.  The  blockade  is  established  and  the  leaders  assigned  to  special 
'positions  therein.  The  city  is  besieged  in  hostile  manner. 

After  placing  the  baggage  in  order  and  making  all  other  arrange¬ 
ments  to  the  best  possible  advantage,  the  Christians  drew  up  all  their 
ships  on  dry  land  near  the  harbor,  with  the  exception  of  one  galley 
that  was  kept  ready  for  any  emergency  which  might  arise.  They  then 
dug  a  deep  ditch  from  the  sea  outside  to  that  within,  thus  enclosing 
and  protecting  the  entire  army.  From  the  large  stores  which  the  Vene¬ 
tians  had  brought  with  them,  suitable  material  for  building  engines 
was  brought,  and  workmen  were  summoned  to  build  machines  of 
various  kinds. 

The  patriarch  and  the  nobles  of  the  realm,  acting  in  the  place  of 
the  king,  called  together  carpenters  and  skilful  builders,  provided  the 
necessary  materials,  and  directed  them  to  build  a  tower  of  great  height. 
From  the  top  of  this,  the  fighters  could  engage  in  close  combat  with 
the  defenders  in  the  towers  on  the  walls  and  could  overlook  the  entire 
city.  Machines  capable  of  hurling  huge  stones  which  would  shatter 
the  walls  and  towers  and  carry  consternation  to  the  hearts  of  those 
within  the  city  were  also  ordered  built. 

The  doge  and  his  company,  in  emulation  of  the  king’s  party,  also 
built  similar  machines  and  set  them  up  in  strategic  positions.  They 
carried  on  the  work  with  the  utmost  diligence  and  pressed  on  without 
flagging.  Their  enthusiastic  efforts  gradually  hemmed  in  the  citizens 
more  and  more,  while  the  engines  never  ceased  to  work  havoc  upon 
the  place.  Constant  attacks  and  skirmishes  gave  the  defenders  no  chance 
to  rest.  The  latter,  however,  anxious  to  defend  themselves,  strove 
to  repulse  the  attacks  of  the  Christians  and,  in  turn,  to  inflict  injury 
on  their  adversaries.  They,  too,  built  machines  within  the  city  from 
which  they  launched  huge  rocks  that  fell  without  intermission  upon 
our  towers.  The  fear  inspired  by  these  flying  stones  enabled  the  foe 
to  become  masters  of  that  particular  section,  for  none  of  the  Christians 
dared  to  remain  in  that  vicinity.  Even  those  whose  lot  it  was  to  guard 
the  engines  ventured  to  approach  them  only  at  the  utmost  speed,  nor 
could  they  remain  within  except  at  extreme  peril.  From  their  stations  in 
the  high  towers,  the  enemy,  armed  with  bows  and  ballistae,  poured 
forth  showers  of  javelins  and  arrows  j  and  meanwhile  a  never-ceasing 


CAPTURE  OF  TYRE 


1 1 

torrent  of  huge  rocks  hurled  from  within  the  city  pressed  the  Christians 
so  hard  that  they  scarcely  dared  to  thrust  forth  a  hand. 

NeverthelesSj  our  people  in  the  siege  towers  returned  blow  for  blow 
with  equal  fury  and  repelled  force  by  force.  Thus  the  defenders  upon 
the  walls  and  in  the  towers  were  compelled  to  put  forth  such  intense 
efforts  that,  though  often  relieved  during  the  day,  they  were  unable 
to  endure  the  burden  of  the  conflict.  Meanwhile,  those  who  were  man¬ 
ning  the  machines,  instructed  by  experts  in  the  art  of  throwing  missiles, 
continued  to  hurl  great  stones  with  such  effect  that  the  towers  and 
walls  were  nearly  demolished  by  the  force  of  the  blows.  Dust  rose  in 
clouds  from  the  shattered  stones  and  loosened  mortar  and  formed  a 
screen  between  the  fighters,  so  that  it  was  imposible  for  the  defenders 
on  the  walls  and  towers  to  see  the  Christians.  Whatever  flying  missiles 
passed  beyond  the  ramparts  and  towers  crashed  with  force  into  the  city 
and  reduced  to  minute  fragments  great  buildings  and  their  inhabitants. 

In  the  country  outside,  both  cavalry  and  infantry  forces  fought  with 
manly  courage  in  almost  daily  skirmishes  against  the  enemy  who  sallied 
forth  from  the  city  to  engage  them.  Frequently  it  happened  that  our 
men  challenged  those  within  the  city  to  battle,  and  again  it  was  the 
citizens  who  took  the  initiative  in  attacking  the  besiegers. 

7.  TheD  amascenes  in  the  city  fight  with  fiery  courage y  hut  the 
citizens  themselves  are  somewhat  remiss. 

Thus  day  by  day  in  a  doubtful  contest  the  Christians  and  the  towns¬ 
people  continued  to  try  each  other’s  mettle,  now  by  attacks  from  the 
machines  and  now  by  fighting  around  the  gates,  for  each  side  was  exert¬ 
ing  itself  to  the  utmost  to  provoke  the  other.  At  this  juncture,  Pons, 
count  of  Tripoli,  who  had  been  summoned  by  the  princes  of  the  realm, 
arrived  with  a  noble  retinue.  His  coming  seemed  to  double  the  strength 
of  the  Christians  and  to  reanimate  their  courage.  To  the  enemy,  on 
the  other  hand,  it  brought  fear  and  a  sense  of  the  futility  of  resisting. 

There  were  in  the  city  seven  hundred  knights  of  Damascus,  whose 
example  inspired  the  citizens  with  courage  to  resist,  for  the  latter, 
though  noble,  were  weak  and  effeminate  in  character  and  not  at  all  ac¬ 
customed  to  warfare.  These  Damascenes,  by  their  example,  tried  to 
animate  the  townspeople  to  resistance  and  to  furnish  them  the  aid 
they  so  sorely  needed.  Nevertheless,  even  they  finally  lost  interest 


12 


CAPTURE  OF  TYRE 

and  wisely  declined  the  burden  which  they  could  not  carry  alone.  For 
they  saw  that  our  strength  was  daily  increasing  and  our  efforts  succeed¬ 
ing,  while  the  resources  of  the  besieged  were  gradually  lessening  and 
their  forces  were  daily  imperilled.  Although  they  did  not  advise  the 
citizens  to  surrender,  still  they  did  not  encourage  them  to  place  much 
reliance  on  their  strength. 

Then,  as  now,  there  was  but  one  entrance  to  the  city  and  a  single 
gate.  As  we  have  said  before,  the  entire  city  was  almost  an  island,  sur¬ 
rounded  by  water  on  all  sides,  except  at  a  certain  narrow  place  through 
which  was  the  approach  to  the  gate.  At  this  point,  various  engagements 
both  of  cavalry  and  infantry  were  continually  going  on,  as  is  usual 
under  such  circumstances. 

8.  The  feofle  of  Ascalon  march  to  Jerusalem  to  attack  the  city. 

But  on  the  return  they  meet  with  harsh  treatment  from  the 
citizens. 

This,  then,  was  the  situation  at  Tyre.  In  the  meantime,  the  people  of 
Ascalon  perceived  that  the  kingdom  was  stripped  of  its  troops  and 
that  the  entire  strength  of  the  land  was  fully  occupied  in  the  siege  of 
Tyre.  Accordingly  they  at  once  took  advantage  of  the  opportunity. 
Crossing  the  intervening  plain  with  all  their  forces,  they  hurried  toward 
the  mountains  on  which  Jerusalem  was  built.  They  expected  to  find 
the  Holy  City  almost  deserted  and  hoped  to  carry  off  as  prisoners  any 
of  the  inhabitants  who  might  incautiously  venture  forth.  Their  arrival 
was  entirely  unexpected,  and  they  killed  about  eight  of  the  townspeople 
who  were  taken  unaware  in  their  fields  and  vineyards. 

But  the  Christians,  though  few  in  number,  were  yet  glowing  with 
faith  and  afire  with  righteous  zeal  for  their  country,  their  wives,  and 
their  children.  They  seized  their  arms  and,  issuing  forth  from  the 
city,  rushed  as  with  one  mind  against  the  foe.  For  the  space  of  three 
hours  the  two  hostile  forces  gazed  upon  one  another.  The  Christians 
dared  not  attack  their  adversaries,  for  their  forces  were  foot  soldiers 
only,  while  the  Ascalonites,  for  their  part,  realized  that  it  was  impos¬ 
sible  without  great  danger  to  remain  long  in  that  position.  Nor  was  it 
safe  so  near  the  city  to  engage  a  courageous  and  obstinate  people  who 
were  determined  to  resist  to  the  utmost.  Accordingly  they  prepared 
to  beat  a  hasty  retreat.  The  Christians  followed  them  cautiously  for 
a  short  distance  and  succeeded  in  killing  forty-two  men,  besides  captur- 


CAPTURE  OF  TYRE 


13 


ing  four  knights  and  seventeen  horses.  Then,  having  successfully  ac¬ 
complished  their  purpose,  they  turned  back  to  Jersusalem  in  entire 

21 

9.  Tughtigtriy  king  of  the  Damascenes y  arrives  to  relieve  the 
siege.  The  Christians  march  against  him.  He  abandons  his 
furfose  in  terror. 

In  the  meantime,  the  Tyrians,  wearied  by  repeated  vigils,  constant 
skirmishes,  and  endless  hardships,  began  to  come  forth  to  fight  less 
often  and  performed  their  allotted  duties  less  vigorously.  They  were 
amazed  beyond  measure  that  a  city  to  which  crowds  of  people  flocked 
almost  daily  both  by  land  and  by  sea,  a  city  which  was  usually  filled 
to  repletion  with  all  sorts  of  merchandise  brought  thither  by  both  routes, 
should  be  reduced  to  such  straits  that  neither  citizens  nor  strangers 
could  enter  or  leave  it.  Moreover,  the  food  supply  was  giving  out,  and 
scarcely  any  provisions  now  remained.  After  taking  counsel  together, 
therefore,  they  wrote  to  the  caliph  of  Egypt  and  also  to  the  king  of 
Damascus  to  inform  them  of  the  desperate  situation  that  prevailed. 
Most  earnestly  they  begged  their  lords  to  hasten  to  their  aid,  for 
affairs  at  Tyre  were  now  almost  hopeless.  They  set  forth  the  persever¬ 
ance  of  the  enemy,  whose  strength  was  increasing  day  by  day;  they 
described  their  own  weakness,  the  lack  of  food  supplies,  and  their  in¬ 
tolerable  situation.  This  action  roused  their  spirits  somewhat,  and  while 
awaiting  the  hoped-for  aid  they  encouraged  each  other  to  keep  up  the 
usual  resistance.  Many  who  were  so  dangerously  wounded  that  they 
were  unable  to  fight  themselves  yet  urged  the  others  with  all  their 
might  to  resist. 

Word  was  presently  received  that  Tughtigin,  king  of  the  Damas¬ 
cenes,  moved  by  the  letters  and  messages  of  the  besieged,  had  left 
Damascus  with  an  innumerable  force  of  Turks  and  a  large  number  of 
knights.  He  was  now  encamped  in  the  vicinity  of  Tyre  on  the  banks 
of  a  river  about  four  miles  from  the  city.  It  was  furthermore  rumored 
that  an  Egyptian  fleet,  much  larger  than  usual  and  equipped  with  more 
than  the  ordinary  number  of  armed  soldiers,  would  arrive  within  three 
days  with  reinforcements  of  men  and  the  necessary  food  supplies  for 
the  Tyrians.  The  king  of  Damascus  was  said  to  be  expecting  still  more 

This  effort  to  distract  the  army  from  the  siege  of  Tyre  by  an  attack  on  Jerusalem 
is  told  by  Fulcher,  who  was  there  at  the  time,  and  is  copied  by  William. 


CAPTURE  OF  TYRE 


14 

reserves.  For  that  reason  he  had  prudently  deferred  crossing  the  river 
and  attacking  the  Christians  until  the  fleet  should  arrive,  in  order  that, 
while  he  was  fighting  with  us,  the  naval  force  might  have  free  and 
unhindered  entrance  to  the  city.^- 

When  this  news  reached  our  camp,  the  leaders  conferred  together 
and,  after  careful  deliberation,  decided  to  divide  the  entire  host  into 
three  sections.  The  entire  cavalry  forces  and  the  mercenary  infantry 
were  to  issue  forth  from  the  camp  under  command  of  the  count  of 
Tripoli  and  William  de  Bury,  the  king^s  constable  and  administrator 
of  the  realm.  If  it  should  be  necessary  to  fight  with  the  Damascene, 
this  division  was  to  engage  him  with  the  help  of  the  Lord.  The  doge 
of  Venice  and  his  forces  were  to  set  sail  in  the  galleys,  and,  if  they  en¬ 
countered  the  fleet  of  the  Egyptians,  they  were  to  try  the  fortune  of 
war  and,  as  valiant  warriors,  put  the  enemy  to  the  test  of  the  sword. 
The  third  division  consisted  of  the  people  who  had  come  thither  to  take 
part  in  the  siege  from  all  the  cities  of  the  realm  and  the  greater  part 
of  the  Venetians.  To  this  contingent  was  assigned  the  duty  of  guarding 
the  machines  and  movable  towers.  They  were  to  see  to  it  that  the  fighters 
in  the  siege  engines  did  not  slacken  their  efforts,  that  the  hurling  ma¬ 
chines  continued  their  usual  assaults,  and  that  the  fighting  before  the 
gate  was  not  interrupted. 

This  plan  seemed  good  to  all,  and  it  was  deemed  expedient  that  it 
be  put  into  immediate  execution.  Accordingly,  the  count  of  Tripoli  and 
the  king’s  constable  with  all  the  cavalry  squadrons  rode  out  of  the 
camp  against  the  enemy.  They  advanced  two  miles,  yet  the  foe  did 
not  venture  to  appear.  Nevertheless,  it  was  evident  that  Tughtigin 
had  originally  placed  his  camp  by  the  river  with  heart  and  soul  intent 
on  crossing  the  stream.  But  when  he  learned  through  reports  that  our 
army  had  adopted  such  prudent  plans,  he  decided  that  it  would  be 
dangerous  to  risk  an  encounter  with  men  so  wise  and  valiant.  Accord¬ 
ingly,  he  ordered  the  trumpet  to  sound  the  summons  calling  his  men 
together  and  gave  the  command  to  return  home. 

The  doge  arranged  his  fleet  in  battle  formation  and  sailed  down  to 
Alexandrium  which  is  about  six  miles  from  Tyre.  This  city  is  generally 
known  today  as  Scandalium.  Here  he  learned  that  the  king  of  Damascus 
had  returned  home.  As  there  was  no  sign  of  the  Egyptian  fleet  which 

The  participation  of  the  Damascenes  in  the  effort  to  defeat  the  besiegers  is  in  gen¬ 
eral  confirmed  by  Qalanisi  (Gibb,  Chronicle^  pp,  170—72). 


CAPTURE  OF  TYRE 


15 

he  was  expecting,  he  again  drew  up  the  galleys  on  the  shore,  and  all 
returned  to  the  camp  to  press  forward  the  siege  more  vigorously  than 
ever. 


10.  The  townsfeofle  set  our  machines  on  fire^  Our  troofs  fut  uf 
a  vigorous  resistance.  The  leaders  send  to  Antioch  for  a  man 
skilled  in  the  art  of  throwing  missiles. 

One  day  it  happened  that  some  young  men  of  Tyre  bound  themselves 
together  by  a  solemn  pledge  and  determined  to  steal  into  our  camp 
to  set  fire  to  our  machines  and  movable  towers.  In  this  way  they  hoped 
to  win  the  esteem  of  their  fellow  citizens  and  acquire  undying  fame  in 
the  eyes  of  posterity.  In  pursuance  of  this  plan,  they  stealthily  left  the 
city  and  succeeded  in  setting  fire  to  an  engine  which  was  of  great  use 
to  us.  The  act  was  seen  by  the  Christians,  however,  who  immediately 
flew  to  arms  and  tried  to  quench  the  flames  by  pouring  on  quantities  of 
water.  An  admirable  deed  was  wrought  there  which  is  worthy  of  record. 
A  certain  young  man  of  unusual  character  and  courage  saw  that  the 
machine  was  on  fire.  He  mounted  to  the  top  and  kept  pouring  on  water 
as  fast  as  it  was  brought  to  him  by  others.  The  defenders  who  were 
stationed  in  the  towers  with  bows  and  ballistae  noticed  him  at  once  and 
immediately  directed  all  their  efforts  toward  him.  But,  although  his 
position  made  him  a  target,  as  it  were,  for  their  arrows,  yet  their 
efforts  were  in  vain.  Not  a  single  wound  did  he  receive  during  the 
whole  day.  But  the  young  men  who  had  set  the  fire  were  caught  by 
our  soldiers  and  to  a  man  perished  under  the  avenging  sword  in  the 
sight  of  their  friends. 

Presently  the  Christians  noticed  that  a  machine  within  the  city  was 
aiming  enormous  stones  so  accurately  against  our  siege  towers  that 
both  were  being  seriously  injured.  Since  there  was  no  one  in  camp 
who  possessed  the  expert  skill  necessary  for  aiming  and  hurling  the 
mighty  missiles,  they  sent  to  Antioch  for  a  certain  Armenian  named 
Havedic,  who  was  said  to  be  very  proficient  in  that  art.  He  came  im¬ 
mediately  and  displayed  so  much  skill  in  directing  the  machines  and 
hurling  the  great  stone  missiles  that  whatever  was  assigned  to  him  as 
a  target  was  at  once  destroyed  without  difficulty.  As  soon  as  he  reached 
the  army,  he  was  granted  an  honorable  salary  from  the  public  treasury, 
so  that  he  might  maintain  himself  in  his  customary  magnificence.  He 
applied  himself  earnestly  to  the  work  for  which  he  had  been  summoned 


i6  CAPTURE  OF  TYRE 

and  showed  so  much  skill  that  the  war  seemed  to  be  carried  on  with 
renewed  strength.  In  fact  it  assumed  the  aspect  of  a  new  war  in  the  eyes 
of  the  Tyrians,  whose  woes  were  greatly  increased  by  his  coming.^^ 

1 1.  Balak  IS  slain  at  Hierafolis ,  The  news  causes  great  joy  in  the 
Christian  army^  and  the  siege  of  the  city  is  fressed  on  with 
even  more  vigor. 

While  these  events  were  happening  at  Tyre,  Balak,  the  powerful 
Turkish  satrap  in  whose  chains  the  lord  king  was  still  held,  was  besieg¬ 
ing  the  city  of  Hierapolis.  During  the  progress  of  the  siege,  he  sum¬ 
moned  the  governor  of  the  city  to  him  with  conciliatory  but  crafty 
words.  The  latter,  a  simple  and  credulous  man,  trusted  Balak’s  words 
and  at  once  repaired  to  his  presence.  But  even  as  he  stood  before  him 
Balak  ordered  him  to  be  beheaded. 

Now  when  the  elder  Joscelin,^^  count  of  Edessa,  learned  that  Balak 
was  besieging  a  city  in  his  own  neighborhood,  he  feared  that  if  the 
present  ruler  were  driven  out,  another,  far  more  dangerous  to  him, 
might  be  placed  there.  He  therefore  assembled  a  large  force  from  the 
land  of  Antioch  and  from  his  own  domains  as  well  and  hastened  against 
the  satrap’s  army.  After  locating  the  enemy,  he  drew  up  his  own  lines 
in  battle  formation  and  made  a  sudden  attack.  The  foe  had  been  routed 
and  forced  to  flee,  when  Joscelin  happened  to  fall  in  with  Balak  him¬ 
self.  Entirely  unaware  that  this  was  the  commander  of  the  army,  he 
slew  him  with  the  sword,  threw  him  to  the  ground,  and  cut  ofi  his 
head.  This  was  clearly  the  fulfillment  of  Balak’s  dream.  For  he  who 
cuts  off  a  man’s  head  and  puts  an  end  to  both  his  sight  and  his  life  may 
be  said  with  truth  to  have  torn  out  his  eyes.-® 

Joscelin  was  a  man  of  foresight  and  very  wide  experience.  He  im¬ 
mediately  charged  a  young  man  to  carry  the  head  of  the  prince  to  the 
army,  that  it  too  might  rejoice  over  the  news  of  this  good  luck.  The 
messenger  was  directed  to  go  by  way  of  Antioch,  that  the  townspeople 
as  well  as  the  troops  might  be  informed  of  this  great  success.  The  ar¬ 
rival  of  the  youth  rejoiced  the  hearts  of  all  and  raised  the  happiness 
of  the  Christians  to  the  highest  point. 

Fulcher  does  not  mention  this  expert  artillery  service,  but  William’s  account  is  too 
specific  to  be  denied. 

William’s  awareness  of  both  Joscelin  II  and  Joscelin  III  led  to  the  qualification 
of  Joscelin  I,  for  which  the  reader  is  not  yet  ready. 

See  Book  XII,  chap.  19. 


CAPTURE  OF  TYRE 


17 

Pons,  count  of  Tripoli,  with  his  following  was  present  in  the  camp. 
He  was  ever  obedient  to  the  patriarch  and  the  other  leaders  as  one 
of  the  lowest  servants  and  always  showed  himself  modestly  zealous 
for  the  public  welfare.  That  he  might  show  his  respect  for  the  count 
who  had  sent  the  messenger  and  also  because  of  the  importance  of  the 
mission,  he  raised  the  young  man  to  knighthood  and  conferred  upon 
him  the  arms  of  that  rank.^® 

When  those  who  were  with  us  on  the  expedition  heard  of  this  act 
they  raised  their  hands  to  heaven  and  began  to  praise,  bless,  and  glorify 
God  who  ^hs  terrible  in  His  doing  toward  the  children  of  men.” 
Then,  indeed,  were  our  troops  fired  with  more  ardent  enthusiasm. 
With  courage  and  strength  renewed,  they  pressed  on  still  more  ear¬ 
nestly  the  work  which  they  had  undertaken  and,  by  keeping  up  con¬ 
tinual  skirmishes,  refused  to  allow  the  beleaguered  city  any  respite. 
The  citizens,  on  the  other  hand,  were  suffering  desperately  from  fam¬ 
ine,  for  their  provisions  were  now  entirely  exhausted,  and  since  no  hope 
of  aid  supported  them,  they  began  to  relax  their  efforts  somewhat. 

One  day  a  noteworthy  event  happened.  Some  young  men  of  the 
city,  expert  swimmers,  ventured  out  from  the  inner  harbor  to  the  one 
outside  and  succeeded  in  reaching  the  galley  which,  as  we  have  men¬ 
tioned  before,  was  always  lying  on  the  sea  outside  ready  for  any 
emergency.  They  had  brought  with  them  a  rope  which  they  fastened 
firmly  to  the  vessel.  They  then  cut  the  moorings  and  began  to  tow  the 
boat  after  them  to  the  city.  But  the  lookouts  guarding  the  towers  saw 
the  attempt  and  gave  the  alarm.  Our  men,  roused  by  the  summons, 
hurried  to  the  shore.  Before  they  could  decide  what  to  do,  however, 
the  youths  had  already  towed  the  vessel  inside  the  city  harbor.  The 
galley  was  manned  by  five  men  who  had  been  assigned  to  guard  it. 
One  of  these  was  killed,  but  the  other  four  leaped  into  the  sea  and 
swam  safely  to  shore. 

12.  While  the  Christian  army  is  engaged  in  the  siege y  the  feofle 
of  Ascalon  again  invade  the  country  around  J erusalem. 

The  Ascalonites,  like  persistent  gnats,  were  ever  on  the  alert  to  injure 
the  Christians.  They  were  well  aware  that  the  flower  of  the  army  was 
still  engaged  in  the  siege  of  Tyre,  and  that,  consequently,  the  whole 


This  is  an  early  instance  of  such  reward  for  such  service. 


Ps.  66 :  5. 


CAPTURE  OF  TYRE 


i8 

land  was  without  defenders,  exposed  to  the  Incursions  of  the  enemy. 
Accordingly,  they  once  more  assembled  their  forces  and  went  up  to 
the  hill  country  of  Judea.  There  they  made  a  sudden  attack  on  a  place 
called  Bilin,^®  about  five  or  six  miles  to  the  north  of  Jerusalem,  better 
known  today  as  Mahumaria.  They  took  the  town  by  force  and  put 
most  of  the  inhabitants  to  the  sword.  The  old  men,  however,  with  the 
women  and  children,  retreated  to  the  tower  and  thus  escaped  death. 

The  Ascalonites  spread  unchecked  over  all  the  adjacent  country. 
They  slaughtered  or  took  captive  all  whom  they  encountered,  for  no 
one  hindered  them  in  their  mad  course  as  they  raged  according  to 
their  own  good  pleasure  against  all  who  dwelt  in  that  vicinity. 

13.  The  citizens  struggle  with  grievous  famine.  They  frefare  to 
surrender.  Tughtigin  hastens  to  their  aid  hut  in  vain.  The 
city  capitulates  to  the  Christian  army. 

Meanwhile,  the  Tyrians,  driven  beyond  endurance  by  the  terrible 
straits  of  famine,  began  to  consider  other  plans.  Gathering  in  groups 
they  began  to  discuss  how  to  put  an  end  to  the  miseries  which  they 
were  suffering.  Far  better  would  it  be,  they  thought,  to  surrender  the 
city  to  the  enemy,  and  thus  liberated,  flee  to  other  cities  of  their  nation, 
than  to  waste  away  through  hunger  at  Tyre — to  look  on,  helpless  to 
aid,  while  their  wives  and  children  perished  of  starvation. 

After  the  situation  had  been  discussed  by  groups  in  this  way,  the 
matter  was  finally  carried  by  unanimous  consent  to  the  elders  and 
governors  of  the  city  and  to  the  people  in  general.  The  entire  city  as- 
sembled  in  a  public  meeting  where  the  facts  were  laid  before  them  and 
carefully  considered.  The  opinion  was  unanimous  that  conditions  so 
terrible  must  be  brought  to  an  end  and  peace  obtained,  no  matter  at 
what  risk  or  on  what  terms. 

In  the  meantime,  the  king  of  Damascus  had  learned  of  the  mis¬ 
fortunes  of  the  Tyrians  and  was  moved  by  their  desperate  plight.  He 
summoned  his  allies  from  every  direction  and  went  down  to  the  sea, 
where  he  had  been  before.  Again  he  encamped  near  the  river  close 
to  Tyre.  When  the  Christians  heard  of  this,  they  rightly  feared  the 
purpose  of  his  coming  and  again  drew  up  their  lines  in  battle  forma- 

Fulcher  and  the  documents  of  the  time  call  this  place  Birrum  or  Eire  (see  H.  Hagen- 
meyer,  ed.,  Fidcheri  Carnotensis  historia  Hierosolymitamij  p.  731,  note  4). 


j 


CAPTURE  OF  TYRE 


19 

tion,  in  anticipation  of  an  engagement  before  the  gates.  Yet  they  did 
not  swerve  from  their  purpose  and  continued  to  press  on  the  siege 
without  interruption. 

The  king  of  Damascus  now  sent  wise  and  discreet  men  as  envoys 
to  the  chiefs  of  our  army,  namely,  the  patriarch,  the  doge  of  Venice, 
the  count  of  Tripoli,  William  de  Bury,  and  the  other  lords  of  the 
realm.  They  bore  proposals  of  peace  couched  in  conciliatory  language. 
After  much  discussion  and  many  disputes,  an  agreement  was  reached 
between  the  two  parties :  the  city  was  to  be  surrendered  to  the  Christians 
on  condition  that  those  citizens  who  wished  be  allowed  to  depart  freely 
with  their  wives  and  children  and  all  their  substance,  while  those  who 
preferred  to  remain  at  Tyre  should  be  granted  permission  to  do  so  and 
their  homes  and  possessions  guaranteed  to  them.-^ 

But  the  common  people  and  those  of  the  second  rank  among  the 
Christians,  on  learning  the  character  of  the  negotiations  which  the  bar¬ 
ons  were  considering,  became  very  angry  that  the  city  should  be  sur¬ 
rendered  on  such  terms,  for,  in  that  case,  they  would  be  deprived  of 
the  plunder  and  spoils  which  would  fall  to  their  lot  were  the  place 
taken  by  force.  Accordingly,  utterly  disagreeing  with  the  wishes  of 
their  superiors,  they  unanimously  determined  to  seize  upon  the  results 
of  their  labors  under  the  necessity  of  war.  The  saner  will  of  the  more 
prominent  men  finally  prevailed,  however  3  the  city  was  taken  over  and 
an  opportunity  of  leaving  without  hindrance  was  given  to  the  towns¬ 
people,  as  provided  in  the  pact. 

Then,  in  sign  of  victory,  the  king’s  standard  was  raised  on  the  tower 
over  the  city  gatCj  in  like  fashion,  the  banner  of  the  doge  of  Venice 
was  placed  over  the  one  called  the  Green  tower  3  while  from  the  tower 
of  Tranaria  floated  gloriously  the  colors  of  the  count  of  Tripoli. 

Long  before  the  city  was  taken  or  even  besieged,  however,  the  greater 
part  of  the  diocese  of  Tyre  had  already  passed  into  the  hands  of  the 
Christians.  All  the  hilly  country  near  the  city,  extending  nearly  to 
Lebanon,  both  strongholds  and  fields,  was  held  in  peaceful  possession 
by  a  very  powerful  nobleman  who  lived  in  the  mountains.  Humphrey 
of  Toron,  father  of  the  younger  Humphrey  who  has  since  been  made 

Qalanisi  accords  Tughtigin  credit  for  the  extremely  favorable  terms  granted  to 
the  Muslim  inhabitants  of  Tyre.  He  also  states  that  only  the  extremely  old  or  the  rich 
remained  in  Tyre,  but  there  is  reason  to  believe  that  a  considerable  number  remained 
(see  Gibb,  Chronicle^  pp.  171—72). 


20 


CAPTURE  OF  TYRE 

the  royal  constable/^®  held  in  undisputed  right  all  the  lands  as  far  as 
the  fourth  or  fifth  milestone  from  Tyre.  In  these  same  mountains,  he 
possessed  a  castle,  strongly  fortified  both  by  its  location  and  by  artificial 
means,  and  from  it  he  often  made  sudden  sallies  against  the  citizens 
of  Tyre.  Moreover,  the  lord  of  Tiberias,  William  de  Bury,  the  royal 
constable,  and  Joscelin,  count  of  Edessa,  who  had  been  his  predecessor 
as  lord  of  Tiberias,  also  held  large  estates  in  these  mountains,  from 
which  they  often  laid  dangerous  and  unexpected  pitfalls  for  Tyre.  To 
the  south  also,  on  the  shore  six  or  seven  miles  from  Tyre,  near  a  clear 
and  beautiful  spring,  King  Baldwin  of  precious  memory,  the  predeces¬ 
sor  of  Baldwin  II,  had  built  a  castle  called  Scandalium.^^  For  a  long 
time.  Tyre  had  suffered  greatly  from  recurring  attacks  proceeding 
from  these  points  and  consequently  was  less  able  to  resist  the  im¬ 
portunity  of  the  Christians. 

The  venerable  Odo  is  said  to  have  died  on  this  expedition.  He  had 
been  ordained  metropolitan  of  the  church  at  Tyre  while  the  city  was 
still  in  the  power  of  the  enemy  and  is  said  to  have  been  consecrated  by 
the  patriarch  of  Jerusalem. 

14.  After  the  surrender  of  the  city^  the  towns feo fie  go  out  to 
visit  the  camf»  The  Christians  take  fossession  of  the  city. 

Then  the  townspeople,  worn  out  by  the  long  siege,  emerged  from  the 
city  and  hastened  to  our  camp.  They  were  eager  to  relieve  their  weari¬ 
ness  and  to  see  what  manner  of  men  these  Christians  might  be.  For  as 
if  made  of  iron,  so  patient  in  hardships  and  so  trained  in  the  practice 
of  arms  were  they  that,  in  a  few  months,  they  had  reduced  Tyre  to  the 
extremity  of  destitution  and  had  compelled  that  splendid  city,  with  its 
magnificent  fortifications,  to  submit  to  the  hardest  of  terms.  It  gave 
them  great  delight  to  examine  the  form  of  the  machines,  to  gaze  at 
the  height  of  the  movable  towers  and  the  variety  of  weapons  5  they 
admired  the  position  of  the  camp  and  even  desired  to  know  the  names 
of  the  leaders.  Every  detail  was  investigated  with  the  utmost  care, 
that  an  accurate  and  trustworthy  narrative  might  be  compiled  for 
posterity. 

Humphrey  of  Toron,  the  younger,  was  constable  of  the  kingdom  of  Jerusalem 
from  1152  to  1179.  This  statement  clearly  indicates  that  William  wrote  this  passage 
before  1178,  perhaps  before  1174,  for  Humphrey  was  already  dead  when  William  re¬ 
sumed  writing  toward  the  end  of  1180. 

See  Book  XI,  chap.  30. 


CAPTURE  OF  TYRE 


21 


When  the  Christian  forces  entered  the  city,  they  too,  in  their  turn, 
marvelled.  They  admired  the  fortifications  of  the  city,  the  strength 
of  the  buildings,  the  massive  walls  and  lofty  towers,  the  noble  harbor 
so  difficult  of  access.  They  had  only  praise  for  the  resolute  perseverance 
of  the  citizens  who,  despite  the  pressure  of  terrible  famine  and  the 
scarcity  of  supplies,  had  been  able  to  ward  off  surrender  for  so  long. 
For  when  our  forces  took  possession  of  the  place  they  found  only  five 
measures  of  wheat  in  the  city.  And  although  at  first  the  common  people 
felt  it  hard  that  the  city  should  surrender  under  the  terms  named 
above,  yet  afterwards  they  rejoiced.  For  the  great  efforts  which  they 
had  put  forth  were  commended,  and  they  realized  that  an  achievement 
worthy  of  remembrance  forever  had  been  attained  largely  through  their 
efforts  and  at  their  expense. 

The  city  was  now  divided  into  three  parts,  two  parts  being  assigned 
to  the  king  and  the  third  to  the  Venetians  in  accordance  with  the  pro¬ 
visions  previously  made.  Then  all  with  joy  and  gladness  returned,  each 
to  his  own  land.  This  city  was  taken  and  restored  to  the  Christian  name 
on  June  29,  in  the  year  1124  of  the  Incarnation  of  our  Lord,  which 
was  also  the  sixth  year  of  the  reign  of  Baldwin,  the  second  king  of 
Jerusalem.^^ 

.15.  The  king  is  released  jrom  caftivity.  He  invests  AleffOy  buty 
a] ter  an  engagement  with  the  enemy y  he  raises  the  siege.  He 
returns  to  Jerusalem.  Pofe  Calixtus  dies.  Honorius  is  chosen 
in  his  stead. 

For  about  eighteen  months  or  a  little  longer,  King  Baldwin  of  Jeru¬ 
salem  had  been  held  prisoner  by  the  enemy.  On  August  29  of  this  same 
year,  on  promise  of  paying  a  fixed  sum  of  money  and  giving  hostages, 
he  was  released  and  returned  to  Antioch  under  the  protection  of  the 
Lord.  It  is  said  that  the  sum  fixed  for  his  ransom  was  one  hundred  thou¬ 
sand  micheles,  a  kind  of  money  chiefly  used  in  those  countries  in  trans¬ 
actions  of  commerce  and  in  buying  and  selling  in  the  markets.^^ 

The  king  returned  to  Antioch,  much  perplexed  as  to  the  means  of 

It  seems  strang^e  that  William  should  have  erred  in  the  date  of  the  capture  of  his 
archiepiscopal  city.  The  astronomical  statement  of  Fulcher  yields  July  7,  1124,  with 
which  most  of  the  Arabic  sources,  including  Qalanisi,  agree  (see  H.F.j  p.  735,  note  7j 
Gibb,  Chronicle^  p.  1 7  2  ) . 

The  date  of  Baldwin’s  release  is  correctly  stated,  but  the  interval  of  his  cap¬ 
tivity  was  about  sixteen,  rather  than  eighteen,  months.  The  sum  of  the  ransom  is 
variously  stated  by  different  writers  {H.F.j  p.  75® 5  also  Book  XI,  note  44)* 


22 


CAPTURE  OF  TYRE 


raising  money  for  the  ransom  pledged  and  of  redeeming  his  hostages. 
He  consulted  some  of  his  wise  men  on  the  best  method  of  procedure 
and  was  advised  to  besiege  Aleppo.  That  city  was  then  struggling  under 
a  lack  of  supplies  and  was  almost  without  inhabitants.  The  citizens, 
when  hard  pressed  by  a  siege,  might  easily  be  brought  to  restore  the 
hostages  or  to  pay  a  sum  equal  to  that  which  he  had  agreed  to  give  for 
his  own  ransom.  The  king  agreed  to  the  project.  He  summoned  all 
his  cavalry  from  the  entire  realm,  surrounded  the  city  with  the  usual 
blockade,  and  began  siege  operations.  Thus  the  citizens  could  neither 
go  in  nor  out  and  were  forced  to  depend  upon  their  scanty  stock  of  food. 

Thereupon,  the  people  of  Aleppo  sent  out  repeated  letters  to  the 
princes  of  the  Orient,  and  above  all  to  those  beyond  the  Euphrates,  to 
inform  them  of  the  critical  situation.  They  stated  that  unless  aid  came 
at  once  the  city  would  soon  fall.  The  princes,  filled  with  the  solicitude 
for  an  allied  city,  at  once  assembled  troops  and  united  their  forces  to 
render  aid.  They  crossed  the  Euphrates  and  advanced  in  all  haste  to 
relieve  the  city  from  the  perils  of  siege.  The  relieving  force  consisted 
of  seven  thousand  cavalry,  besides  those  in  charge  of  the  baggage  and 
impedimenta  and  the  servants  who  rendered  to  their  liege  lords  the 
obedience  which  they  owed. 

Perceiving  that  the  enemy  was  arriving  with  such  vast  forces,  the 
king  and  those  with  him  deemed  it  wiser  to  retreat  and  thus  secure 
their  own  safety  and  that  of  the  army  rather  than  incautiously  to  risk 
an  engagement  with  the  foe’s  superior  forces.  Before  the  hostile  army 
reached  the  city,  therefore,  the  Christians  had  retired  to  one  of  their 
fortified  castles  called  Cerep.  From  there  they  proceeded  together  to 
Antioch  where  they  separated.  The  king  with  his  own  following  re¬ 
turned  to  Jerusalem.  He  was  received  with  high  honor  by  the  entire 
body  of  clergy  and  people,  and  his  presence,  long  desired,  for  he 
had  been  absent  about  two  years,  was  most  welcome  both  to  the  city 
fathers  and  to  the  common  people. 

That  same  year.  Pope  Calixtus  II,  of  precious  memory,  departed 
from  this  life.  He  was  succeeded  by  Lambert,  bishop  of  Ostia,  a  native 
of  Bologna,  who  is  known  as  Honorius.  Lambert  was  elected  over  his 
competitor,  Theobald,  a  cardinal-priest  of  title  St.  Anastasia.  As  the 

^'‘Baldwin  II  reached  Jerusalem  April  3,  1125,  after  an  absence  from  Jerusalem 
of  more  nearly  three  years,  though  in  this  error  William  is  following  Fulcher’s  state¬ 
ment  (see  H.F,y  p.  757). 


CAPTURE  OF  TYRE 


23 

election  had  not  been  conducted  in  strict  canonical  order,  however, 
Honorius  resigned  at  the  end  of  twelve  days,  and  in  the  presence  of 
his  brethren  voluntarily  laid  aside  his  miter  and  mantle. 

But  at  this  evidence  of  humility,  the  brethren,  bishops  and  priests, 
cardinals  and  deacons,  feared  for  the  future,  lest  some  innovation  be 
introduced  into  the  Church  of  Rome.  They  therefore  remedied  the 
errors  made  in  the  original  election  and  a  second  time  elected  Honorius 
as  pope.  They  then  fell  at  his  feet  and  showed  him  the  customary 
obedience  as  shepherd  and  pope  over  all.^^ 

16.  Bursequinusy  a  Turkish  frincey  lays  waste  the  lands  of  Anti¬ 
och*  The  king  froceeds  against  him,  A  battle  is  fought.  The 
enemy  is  defeated. 

While  the  king  was  still  at  Jerusalem,  he  was  informed  by  frequent 
messengers  that  Bursequinus  [Bursuqi],^®  a  powerful  Oriental  poten¬ 
tate,  with  a  mighty  host  gathered  from  the  countries  of  the  East,  had 
crossed  the  Euphrates  and  was  now  in  the  territory  of  Antioch.  Since 
there  was  no  one  to  hinder  him,  he  was  overrunning  the  land  according 
to  his  own  good  pleasure.  Whatever  he  found  outside  the  cities  and 
fortified  places  he  consigned  to  the  flames,  and  he  allowed  his  soldiers 
to  pillage  the  whole  country.  The  leading  men  of  Antioch  had  tried 
to  resist  him,  but,  after  several  unsuccessful  attempts,  they  realized 

9 

that  they  could  do  nothing.  They  therefore  made  known  their  straits 
to  the  king,  who  long  ago  had  been  charged  with  the  care  of  the 
principality,  and  besought  him  to  come  to  their  aid  without  delay. 
Burdened  as  he  was  with  the  dual  responsibility  of  the  kingdom  and 
the  principality,  the  king  nevertheless  felt  little  anxiety  about  the  realm 
although  he  was  bound  to  it  by  closer  ties.  For,  often  called  upon  to 
act  in  the  difficulties  of  the  principality,  he  had  devoted  nearly  all  his 
efforts  and  means  to  its  welfare  during  a  period  of  ten  years.  It  was 
while  thus  engaged  that  he  had  been  taken  prisoner  and  for  almost 
two  years  had  suffered  the  indignity  of  the  enemy’s  chains  and  dun¬ 
geons.  In  the  kingdom,  on  the  contrary,  protected  by  the  divine  hand,  * 

Election  of  Honorius  II  occurred  in  the  midst  of  local  political  interference, 
which  all  regretted.  It  was  corrected  as  William  here  indicates. 

Bursuqi  was  not  a  relative  of  Bursuq  but  a  mamluk  in  his  service.  He  was,  how¬ 
ever,  known  by  that  name.  The  possessive  form  of  the  name  is  used  in  this  translation 
to  distinguish  him  from  his  patron. 


CAPTURE  OF  TYRE 


24 

he  had  met  with  no  misfortune,  for  God,  the  Comforter  of  His  chosen 
kings,  had  in  all  things  guided  him  to  prosperity  and  success.  Eager 
faithfully  to  carry  out  his  promises,  however,  he  assembled  all  available 
troops  and  marched  in  haste  to  Antioch. 

Meanwhile,  Bursuqi,  a  very  powerful  prince  who  had  much  experi¬ 
ence  in  war,  had  formed  an  alliance  with  Tughtigin,  king  of  Damascus, 
and  before  the  arrival  of  the  king,  who,  as  he  knew,  had  been  sum¬ 
moned  by  the  people  of  Antioch,  the  two  laid  siege  to  a  fortress  called 
Kafartab.  By  dint  of  many  attacks,  they  compelled  the  besieged  to  sur¬ 
render  on  condition  that  their  lives  should  be  spared.  Then,  in  the  hope 
of  obtaining  other  like  successes,  Bursuqi  crossed  Syria  Minor  and  laid 
siege  to  the  stronghold  of  Sardona.  For  several  days  he  put  forth  great 
efforts  against  this  place,  but,  finally  convinced  that  he  could  not  suc¬ 
ceed,  he  turned  his  attention  to  blockading  the  famous  town  of  Ezaz, 
which  was  not  as  strongly  fortified. 

He  was  engaged  in  setting  up  his  engines,  making  ready  the  ap¬ 
paratus  of  war,  and  testing  out  his  strength  for  the  destruction  of  the 
besieged,  when  the  king  arrived,  accompanied  by  the  count  of  Tripoli 
and  the  count  of  Edessa.  They  had  come  with  large  forces,  at  the  com¬ 
mand  of  God,  to  render  immediate  aid  to  the  besieged.  As  they  ap¬ 
proached  the  enemy,  the  Christians  formed  into  three  divisions.  The 
first,  on  the  right  wing,  was  composed  of  the  chief  men  of  Antioch  j  the 
second,  which  formed  the  left  wing,  was  placed  under  the  command 
of  the  two  counts,  each  with  his  own  army  5  while  the  center  was  held 
by  the  king.  Their  force  consisted  of  eleven  hundred  cavalry  and  two 
thousand  infantry. 

As  the  Christians  advanced,  Bursuqi  recognized  with  certainty  that 
like  wise  men  they  were  prepared  for  an  immediate  engagement.  As 
he  could  not  honorably  decline  battle,  he  also  drew  up  his  forces — 
which  were  said  to  number  fifteen  thousand  knights — in  twenty  bat¬ 
talions.  When  the  two  armies  had  been  thus  disposed  In  military  forma¬ 
tion,  they  advanced  precipitately  upon  each  other  with  more  than 
ordinary  violence.  Sword  clashed  against  sword  with  equal  ardor,  caus¬ 
ing  terrible  carnage  and  death  in  many  a  form.  “For  in  conflicts  of  this 
nature,  resentment  inspired  by  sacrilege  and  scorn  of  laws  always  acts 
as  an  incentive  to  bitter  hatred  and  enmity.  War  is  waged  differently 
and  less  vigorously  between  men  who  hold  the  same  law  and  faith 
than  it  is  between  those  of  diverse  opinions  and  conflicting  traditions. 


CAPTURE  OF  TYRE 


25 

For  even  if  no  other  cause  for  hatred  exists,  the  fact  that  the  combatants 
do  not  share  the  same  articles  of  faith  is  sufficient  reason  for  constant 
quarreling  and  enmity.” 

So  the  two  armies  engaged  in  furious  combat  with  each  other.  Our 
side  finally  prevailed,  however,  for  the  God  of  mercy,  who  can  easily 
overcome  many  with  a  few,  was  on  our  side  3  He  who  hath  said  con¬ 
cerning  His  chosen  people,  ^^How  should  one  chase  a  thousand,  and 
two  put  ten  thousand  to  flight,  except  their  Rock  had  sold  them,  and  the 
Lord  had  shut  them  up?”  The  enemy  was  routed  and  the  Christians 
triumphed  most  gloriously,  for  the  victory  was  granted  them  from  on 
high.  It  is  said  that  the  infidels  lost  two  thousand  men  in  that  battle, 
but  our  people,  only  twenty-four.^® 

Bursuqi,  covered  with  confusion  and  fear  (for  the  expedition  had 
turned  out  far  otherwise  than  as  he  had  anticipated),  now  crossed  the 
Euphrates  and  returned  to  his  own  land.  His  retreat,  however,  was  not 
attended  by  the  same  haughty  assurance  which  characterized  his  ad¬ 
vance. 

The  king  paid  his  ransom  with  a  large  sum  of  money,  collected  in 

* 

part  from  the  spoils  of  the  enemy  and  in  part  through  the  generosity 
of  his  friends  and  loyal  adherents.  In  return,  his  five-year-old  daughter, 
whom  he  had  given  as  hostage,  was  sent  back  to  him.  He  then  took 
leave  temporarily  of  the  people  of  Antioch  and  returned  in  safety  to 
Jerusalem,  a  conqueror.  That  same  year  he  built  a  fortress  in  the  moun¬ 
tains  above  the  city  of  Beirut  and  called  it  Mt.  Glavianus. 

17.  The  king  dejeats  the  feofle  of  Ascalon  and  the  Egyptians 
who  had  come  to  assist  them. 

The  period  of  temporary  peace  and  truce,  which  had  been  concluded 
between  the  king  and  Tughtigin  in  consideration  of  a  sum  of  money, 
had  now  passed.  Accordingly,  the  king  assembled  all  the  knighthood 
of  the  realm  and  invaded  the  land  of  Damascus.  He  overran  that  coun¬ 
try  without  hindrance,  destroyed  some  places  in  the  surrounding  fields, 
and  carried  away  as  prisoners  some  of  the  people.  Then,  laden  with  a 
vast  amount  of  plunder,  the  richest  spoils  of  the  enemy,  he  returned 
home  safe  and  sound. 

De.  32 :  30. 

This  battle  was  foug“ht  June  ii,  1125  (see  HT.,  p.  767).  These  numbers,  also 
given  by  Fulcher,  may  indicate  relative  losses  but  cannot  be  accepted  as  literally  true. 


26 


CAPTURE  OF  TYRE 


Three  days  had  hardly  passed,  however,  and  the  troops  had  not  yet 
been  demobilized,  when  news  came  that  an  Egyptian  army  in  magnifi¬ 
cent  array  had  arrived  before  the  city  of  Ascalon.  The  Egyptians  were 
accustomed  to  send  yearly  four  fresh  expeditions  to  that  city,  that  the 
strength  of  the  Ascalonites  might  be  continually  renewed.’^^  Thus  they 
were  enabled  to  sustain  the  ever-present  conflicts  with  the  Christians 
and  the  continual  losses  so  incurred.  The  new  arrivals  were  generally 
eager  to  try  an  encounter  with  our  forces,  for  they  desired  to  test  our 
strength  and  at  the  same  time  to  give  conclusive  proof  of  their  own 
valor.  It  frequently  happened  in  these  skirmishes  that  many  were  cap¬ 
tured  or  even  slain  by  the  sword,  for  the  Egyptians  were  not  acquainted 
with  the  country  and  had  not  attained  full  experience  in  warfare.  The 
citizens,  older  and  more  experienced,  prudently  avoided  encounters 
with  our  men,  although  they  occasionally  pursued  them  rather  indif¬ 
ferently  if  the  Christians  took  to  flight. 

When  this  information  arrived,  the  king,  rather  continuing  than 
renewing  his  campaign,  hastened  thither.  As  soon  as  he  arrived,  he 
selected  a  place  well  adapted  for  the  purpose  and,  with  some  of  the 
strongest  and  most  valiant  of  his  followers,  placed  himself  in  ambush. 
Some  of  the  light-armed  cavalry  were  sent  on  with  orders  to  rove  here 
and  there  over  the  country  in  order  to  irritate  the  people  of  Ascalon 
and  draw  them  out  in  pursuit. 

At  sight  of  the  Christian  forces  roaming  freely  about  on  the  out¬ 
skirts  of  the  city,  the  citizens  could  not  restrain  their  wrath  over  such 
bold  presumption.  Eagerly  they  seized  arms  and,  regardless  of  con¬ 
sequences,  issued  from  the  city  in  separate  detachments.  Our  men  of 
their  own  accord  turned  their  backs  and  fled.  The  Ascalonites,  still 
utterly  without  caution,  pursued  the  retreating  foe  until  the  place  was 
reached  where  the  king  with  his  picked  knights  was  lying  in  ambush. 
He  did  not  disdain  the  offered  opportunity.  With  the  help  of  his  com¬ 
rades  who  sustained  him  loyally,  he  rushed  out,  stopped  the  infidels, 
and  cut  them  off  as  they  tried  to  retreat  to  the  city,  A  fight  at  close 
quarters  followed ;  the  Christians  attacked  the  infidels  vigorously  with 
their  swords,  and  before  the  latter  could  regain  the  city  in  safety  forty 
of  their  number  were  slain.  The  rest  escaped  into  the  town  but  could 
scarcely  believe  themselves  safe  even  when  they  were  within  the  walls. 

The  Egyptians  had  practiced  this  policy  of  changing  the  garrison  at  Ascalon  for 
many  years.  According  to  Wiet,  the  changes  took  place  twice  each  year  and  did  not 
involve  a  complete  change  of  garrison  each  time. 


27 


CAPTURE  OF  TYRE 

The  wailing  and  lamentation  which  arose  from  within  the  city  was  so 
unprecedented  that  it  was  evident  that  those  who  had  fallen  were  among 
the  bravest  and  noblest  of  their  people. 

Then  the  king  ordered  that  his  men  be  recalled  by  the  sound  of 
trumpet  and  roll  of  drum.  With  heartfelt  joy  he  made  camp  near  the 
city  and  there  as  victor  passed  the  entire  night  in  peace.  He  then  re¬ 
turned  safe  and  sound  to  Jerusalem. 

1 8.  The  king  invades  the  land  of  the  Damascenes^  Tughtigin 
marches  out  against  him.  Battle  is  joined.  Our  army  returns 
in  triumfh. 

In  January  of  the  following  year  (which  was  1126  of  the  Incarnation 
of  our  Lord  and  the  eighth  of  the  reign  of  this  same  King  Baldwin) 
the  king  and  the  lords  gave  orders  that  all  the  people,  from  the  least 
even  unto  the  greatest,  be  assembled.  Through  every  city  of  the  realm 
these  orders  were  proclaimed  by  the  voice  of  the  herald.  Thus  within 
a  few  days,  the  entire  military  strength  of  the  kingdom  was  levied 
and  the  entire  body  concentrated  near  the  city  of  Tiberias,  prepared 
to  invade  the  land  of  Damascus. 

As  soon  as  the  troops  had  assembled  at  the  place  appointed,  the 
military  signals  were  given,  the  baggage  was  arranged,  and  the  ranks 
formed  in  order  of  march.  They  then  traversed  the  country  of  Decapolis 
and  entered  the  country  of  the  enemy.  Thence  they  crossed  a  narrow 
valley  called  Cavea  Roab  and  arrived  at  the  plain  of  Medan.  This 
plain  is  of  wide  extent  with  unobstructed  view.  Through  it,  between 
Tiberias  and  Scythopolis,  formerly  called  Bethsan,  runs  the  river  Dan 
on  its  way  to  unite  with  the  Jordan.  Some  think — and  the  name  itself 
supports  their  theory — ^that  it  is  this  river  which  furnishes  the  last 
syllable  of  the  name  Jordan j  for  the  waters  which  descend  into  the 
sea  of  Galilee  and  flow  out  thence  to  the  confluence  of  this  same  river, 
are  called  Jor.  But  when  the  two  streams  of  the  Jor  and  the  Dan  mingle 
the  river  so  formed  is  called  the  Jordan.  On  the  other  hand,  Bede  and 
certain  others  of  our  learned  men  whose  authority  is  not  to  be  disputed, 
say  that  both  streams  have  their  origin  near  Caesarea  Philippi,  which 
lies  at  the  foot  of  Mt.  Lebanon.^®  One  of  these  rivers  is  called  Jor  and 

Bede  did  not  include  this  book,  Libellus  de  situ  Hierusalem  sive  de  locis  Sanctis^ 
in  the  list  of  his  works,  perhaps  because  he  felt  himself  to  be  only  a  copyist.  His  copy, 
however,  became  famous  as  a  guidebook  for  pilgrims.  It  was  a  somewhat  abridged 


CAPTURE  OF  TYRE 


28 

the  other  Dan.  From  the  union  of  the  two  is  formed  the  flood  of 

5  which  then  descends  as  one  stream  into  the  sea  of  Gennesaret, 
which  is  the  sea  of  Galilee.  From  this  it  again  emerges  as  one  river, 
and  after  flowing  for  almost  a  hundred  miles  through  the  famous 
valley,  it  empties  into  the  lake  of  Asphalt,  which  is  also  known  as  the 
sea  of  Salt. 

Crossing  this  plain  our  army  came  to  the  village  which  is  called 
Salome.  Then,  as  today,  it  was  entirely  peopled  by  Christians.  Our 
men  spared  it,  therefore,  and  treated  the  inhabitants  like  brethren. 
From  there,  with  battalions  arranged  in  good  order  and  all  the  forces 
assigned  to  suitable  places,  they  hastened  on  to  a  place  called  Mergi- 
safar.  It  was  here,  according  to  the  story,  that  Saul,  the  persecutor  of 
the  Church  of  God,  that  ravening  wolf,  heard  the  voice  of  one  saying, 
^^Saul,  Saul,  why  persecutest  thou  me?”  and  so  on.  It  seemed  indeed 
divinely  ordained  that  the  army  of  the  faithful  should  have  arrived 
at  that  place  on  the  anniversary  of  the  day  when  these  things  are  said 
to  have  occurred:  namely,  when  from  a  persecutor  of  the  Church,  Saul 
was  converted  to  a  chosen  vessel  of  the  Lord. 

At  Mergisafar  the  assembled  host  remained  for  two  days.^^  Op¬ 
posite  them  and  not  far  away  they  beheld  the  camp  of  the  enemy.  On 
the  third  day,  the  two  forces  met  in  battle.  Careful  preparation  for 
fighting  had  been  made  by  each  side,  and  now,  with  troops  marshalled 
in  battle  array,  both  infidels  and  Christians  fought  fiercely.  Since  both 
sides  advanced  to  the  conflict  with  equal  force,  the  result  of  the  battle 
was  for  a  long  time  doubtful.  In  accordance  with  his  usual  custom,  the 
king  pressed  the  enemy  hard.  Calling  his  valiant  men  by  name,  he 
cheered  them  to  the  onslaught  by  word  and  example  and  promised 
them  assurance  of  victory.  In  return,  they  strove  valiantly  as  best  they 
might  to  imitate  their  leader.  Endued  with  the  fervor  of  faith,  they 
fell  upon  the  enemy  with  drawn  swords  and  endeavored  to  avenge  at 
one  and  the  same  time  not  only  their  own  wrongs  but  also  those  that 
had  been  committed  against  the  Lord. 

version  of  the  description  of  the  Holy  Land  which  Adamnan  made  from  the  recital  of 
Arculf,  the  Frankish  bishop  who  was  shipwrecked  on  the  western  coast  of  Britain  on 
his  return  from  the  pilgrimage.  Bede’s  version  was  the  one  most  frequently  cited. 

Ac.  9 :  4. 

The  place  of  this  battle  in  the  last  week  in  January,  1126,  is  spelled  Mari  al-Suflrar 
by  Gibb.  The  fluctuations  of  fortune  during  the  battle  are  confirmed  by  Qalanisi 
(Gibb,  Chronicle^  pp.  175—77). 


CAPTURE  OF  TYRE 


Tughtigin,  on  his  part,  inspired  his  men  with  no  less  ardor  by  his 
words  and  roused  their  fighting  spirit  by  his  promises.  He  reminded 
them  that  they  were  fighting  a  just  war  for  the  sake  of  their  wives 
and  children ;  nay,  more,  they  were  striving  for  liberty,  an  even  nobler 
task,  and  for  the  defense  of  their  fatherland  against  robbers.  Cheered 
by  these  words,  they  pressed  on  with  courage  not  less  and  with  strength 
not  unequal  to  ours. 

Inspired  by  the  example  of  the  king  and  the  knights,  the  infantry 
forces  launched  a  fierce  attack  upon  the  enemy’s  ranks  and  pressed 
them  hard.  They  instantly  dispatched  with  the  sword  any  wounded  or 
fallen  infidel  whom  they  chanced  to  find  and  thus  prevented  all  pos¬ 
sibility  of  escape.  They  lifted  up  those  who  had  been  thrown  down 
and  restored  them  to  the  fray.  They  sent  the  wounded  back  to  the 
baggage  train  to  receive  care.  Others  devised  a  scheme  which  is  be¬ 
lieved  to  have  been  most  destructive  that  day  to  the  enemy’s  hordes  3 
they  turned  their  attention  to  wounding  the  horses  of  their  adversaries 
and  thus  rendered  the  riders  easy  victims  to  the  Christians  who  were 

The  king,  followed  by  some  of  his  valiant  and  illustrious  knights, 
hurled  himself  like  a  lion  against  the  serried  ranks  of  the  foe.  De¬ 
struction  on  the  right  and  on  the  left  attended  his  progress,  a  massacre 
terrible  even  in  the  eyes  of  the  conquerors.  Our  annals,  even  to  the 
present  time,  contain  no  account  of  such  a  desperate  and  uncertain 
battle.  Although  the  conflict  was  prolonged  from  the  third  to  the 
tenth  hour,  it  was  scarcely  possible  to  decide  even  in  the  eleventh 
hour  which  side  had  won.  Finally,  by  divine  favor  at  the  intercession 
of  the  great  teacher  of  the  Gentiles,  the  infidels  were  put  to  flight.  They 
had  suffered  a  massacre  which  will  be  memorable  forever,  for  more 
than  two  thousand  of  their  number  are  said  to  have  fallen  on  that  day. 
When  a  count  was  taken  of  the  Christian  forces,  both  cavalry  and  in¬ 
fantry,  it  was  found  that  only  twenty-four  knights  and  eighty  foot 
soldiers  had  been  lost. 

Thus  victory  was  conferred  on  the  Christians  from  on  high,  and 
the  king  held  the  field  as  conqueror.  With  great  joy  and  thanksgiving, 
he  led  his  army  thence  and  began  the  return  march  to  his  own  land. 
On  the  way,  he  found  a  tower  to  which  ninety-six  Turks  had  retreated 
in  the  hope  of  saving  their  lives.  He  attacked  this  vigorously,  seized 
the  fugitives,  and  put  them  to  death  by  the  sword.  A  little  farther  on. 


CAPTURE  OF  TYRE 


30 

another  tower  was  taken  by  assault,  but  since  it  was  surrendered  with¬ 
out  difficulty,  the  privilege  of  life  was  granted  to  the  twenty  Turks 
who  had  been  sent  there  to  protect  it.  The  Christians  undermined  this 
tower  and  it  was  soon  so  completely  wrecked  that  it  fell  to  the  ground 
with  a  mighty  crash. 

Then,  after  obtaining  several  victories  worthy  of  remembrance  for¬ 
ever,  the  troops  returned  in  exultation  to  their  own  country. 

19.  The  count  of  Tripoli  seizes  the  city  of  Raphania,  Henry y 
emperor  of  the  Romans^  dies*  Lothair  reigns  in  his  stead* 

About  this  time.  Pons,  count  of  Tripoli,  determined  to  besiege  Ra- 
phania,  a  city  near  his  own  dominions,  for  he  perceived  that  this  could 
be  easily  accomplished.  In  order  to  carry  out  his  plan  more  effectively 
he  sent  numerous  letters  and  messages  to  the  king  of  Jerusalem,  beg¬ 
ging  that  he  would  come  and  help  him.  The  indefatigable  king,  ever 
ready  to  participate  loyally  in  any  enterprise  for  the  common  welfare 
of  the  Christians,  at  once  repaired  thither  with  an  honorable  escort. 
On  his  arrival,  he  found  the  count  fully  prepared  for  the  campaign. 
Machines  and  everything  necessary  for  besieging  a  city,  including  pro¬ 
visions  sufficient  for  several  days,  were  taken  with  them  from  Tripoli  j 
the  infantry  was  sent  on  ahead,  and  the  two  leaders  conducted  their 
own  troops  to  the  vicinity  of  their  proposed  activity. 

On  reaching  the  place,  they  at  once  placed  a  blockade  around  it, 
a  maneuver  which  effectually  prevented  the  citizens  from  going  in 
or  out.  Because  of  its  natural  situation  and  the  small  number  of  in¬ 
habitants,  Raphania  was  poorly  fortified.  Moreover,  it  had  become  so 
exhausted  by  repeated  attacks  that  it  was  unable  to  hold  out  very  long. 
For  Count  Pons  had  built  a  fortress  in  the  mountains  near  his  own 
lands,  and  the  constant  attacks  made  by  the  garrison  from  that  place 
had  reduced  the  city  to  dire  straits,  in  fact  almost  to  the  last  extremity. 
Accordingly,  after  the  siege  had  been  carried  on  vigorously  for  eighteen 
days,  the  citizens  were  forced  to  surrender.  They  were  granted  the 
privilege  of  departing  freely  with  their  wives  and  children  and  were 
promised  security. 

Raphania  is  one  of  the  dependent  cities  of  the  province  of  Apamea 
in  which  it  is  situated.  It  was  taken  on  the  last  day  of  March.  After 

the  surrender  the  king  returned  to  Jerusalem  and  there  celebrated 
Easter  with  much  devotion. 


CAPTURE  OF  TYRE 


31 

About  the  same  time,  Henry,  emperor  of  the  Romans,  died.^^  In 
his  stead  reigned  Lothair,  duke  of  Saxony,  a  man  commendable  in 
every  respect.  Lothair  afterwards  went  down  into  Apulia  with  a  large 
army  and  took  forcible  possession  of  the  entire  country  as  far  as  Farum. 
He  compelled  Count  Roger,  who  had  seized  Apulia  by  force,  to  flee 
into  Sicily  and  placed  as  ruler  in  Apulia  a  wise  and  discreet  man  called 
Renaud.  After  the  emperor  had  departed,  however,  Roger  returned 
to  Apulia.  He  fought  with  Renaud,  slew  him,  and  regained  the  duchy. 
Later  he  became  king  of  Sicily  and  of  the  entire  province  of  Apulia. 

20.  Bursuqi  again  Invades  the  land  of  Antioch.  He  Is  finally 
stabbed  by  his  own  men  and  dies.  The  Egyptian  fleet  fro- 
ceeds  to  Syria.  There  it  suffers  defeat  and  is  forced  to  return 
without  comfleting  the  camfaign. 

While  the  king  was  still  lingering  at  Tyre,  a  messenger  arrived  in 
haste  from  Antioch.  He  brought  the  news,  both  by  letter  and  word 
of  mouth,  that  Bursuqi,  that  unspeakable  persecutor  of  our  faith,  had 
entered  Coelesyria  with  a  large  force  of  cavalry.  Since  there  was  no 
one  to  oppose  him,  he  was  besieging  cities  and  burning  places  every¬ 
where  on  the  outskirts  according  to  his  own  good  pleasure.  At  the 
same  time,  he  was  carrying  off  the  people  as  his  prisoners  and  reducing 
women  and  children  to  slavery. 

The  king  distrusted  the  Egyptians  and  had  no  doubt  that  they  would 
soon  arrive  with  the  immense  fleet  which  they  had  prepared.  Yet,  at 
this  news,  “like  the  wise  physician  who  hastens  to  apply  his  remedies 
when  he  perceives  that  the  disease  is  becoming  worse,”  he  at  once  laid 
aside  all  other  cares  and  hastened  thither  to  cope  with  the  most  pressing 
need.  But  as  soon  as  Bursuqi  learned  of  this  movement,  he  at  once 
raised  the  blockade  which  he  had  carefully  placed  around  the  noble 
fortress  of  Cerep  and  retired  to  the  most  remote  part  of  the  enemy’s 
country.  Before  the  king  arrived,  however,  Bursuqi  had  seized  by 
force  a  certain  town  of  no  great  renown  and  had  captured  some  women 
and  their  children.  The  men  of  the  besieged  town  had  with  much  dif¬ 
ficulty  and  danger  escaped  the  hand  of  the  enemy.  They  had  chosen  to 
seek  safety  alone  rather  than  to  be  caught  in  the  wretched  bonds  of 

Henry  V  died  May  23,  1125.  Fulcher,  who  was  writing  in  Jerusalem,  probably 
learned  of  it  from  pilgrims  at  the  Easter  festival  following  and  inserted  it  in  his 
account,  which  William  follows.  The  further  information  about  Lothair’s  policy  in 
southern  Italy  was  added  by  William,  but  from  what  source  is  unknown. 


CAPTURE  OF  TYRE 


32 

captivity  with  their  wives  and  children.  Some  time  later,  however,  the 
wicked  Bursuqi,  a  son  of  perdition,  was  stabbed  to  death  by  his  servants 
and  other  members  of  his  household.^^  Thus  by  his  own  acts  he  brought 
upon  himself  the  natural  consequences  of  his  wickedness  and  reaped  the 
fruit  of  his  impiety. 

This,  then,  was  the  situation  in  the  lands  of  Antioch.  Meanwhile, 
as  rumor  had  forecast,  the  Egyptian  fleet  of  twenty-four  galleys  was 
sailing  along  the  shore,  seeking  an  opportunity  to  inflict  injury  upon 
some  of  our  cities,  and  had  reached  Beirut.  They  were  ever  on  the 
alert,  also,  as  if  emerging  from  ambush,  to  surprise  and  seize  any 
Christians  who  might  be  passing  without  due  caution  or  approaching 
Syria.  Finally,  however,  their  water  supply  gave  out  and  they  were 
compelled  to  land  near  a  river  to  seek  means  of  satisfying  their  thirst. 
Thereupon,  the  citizens  of  Beirut  issued  forth  and,  with  the  help  of 
others  from  the  neighboring  towns,  drove  them  with  violence  from  the 
stream.  This  action  utterly  deprived  the  Egyptians  of  the  opportunity 
of  using  the  water.  Making  vigorous  use  of  their  weapons,  the  towns¬ 
people  forced  the  enemy  back  to  the  ships,  whither  they  were  forced 
to  retire  with  a  loss  of  one  hundred  and  thirty  men  who  had  fallen 
by  the  sword. 

21.  Bohemoncl  the  Younger  arrives  at  Antioch,  The  king  re¬ 
stores  the  lands  which  belonged  to  the  frince  by  ancestral 
right  and  gives  him  his  own  daughter  Alice  to  wife. 

In  the  following  autumn,^^  the  younger  Bohemond,  prince  of  Taranto, 
son  of  the  older  Bohemond,  made  an  alliance  with  his  paternal  uncle, 
William,  duke  of  Apulia,  and  concluded  a  treaty  with  him  in  regard  to 
the  future  succession,  by  which  it  was  stipulated  that  the  one  who  died 
first  was  to  be  succeeded  by  the  other  in  entirety.  A  fleet  of  ten  galleys 
and  twelve  other  vessels  suitable  for  carrying  the  baggage  and  equip¬ 
ment  as  well  as  arms  and  provisions  had  been  made  ready.  With  this 
Bohemond  started  for  Syria,  for  he  felt  confident  of  the  good  faith  of 

Bursuqi  was  killed  in  late  November  or  early  December,  1126,  according  to 
Qalanisi  (Gibb,  Chronicle ^  p.  177). 

Bohemond  II  arrived  in  September,  1126.  The  fact  that  the  marriage  of  Bohe¬ 
mond  II  and  Alice,  daughter  of  Baldwin  II,  occurred  so  soon  after  his  arrival  sug¬ 
gests  the  probability  that  negotiations  had  been  going  on  for  some  time  and  the  mar¬ 
riage  was  a  real  condition  to  Baldwin’s  relinquishment  of  Antioch. 


CAPTURE  OF  TYRE 


33 

the  king,  who  had  promised  that,  when  he  came  to  claim  the  heritage 
left  him  by  his  father,  it  would  not  be  refused. 

When  the  king  learned  that  the  fleet  of  the  prince  had  safely  entered 
the  mouth  of  the  Orontes  river,  he  went  forth  with  the  great  lords  of 
the  land  to  meet  him.  And  as  soon  as  Bohemond  had  entered  Antioch, 
Baldwin  with  all  kindness  restored  to  him  the  city  and  the  whole  land, 
the  burden  of  which  he  himself  had  borne  with  watchful  care  and 
anxiety  for  eight  years. 

After  the  principality  had  been  thus  restored,  all  the  leading  men 
and  the  chiefs  of  the  land,  in  the  presence  of  the  king  and  at  his  behest, 
swore  fealty  to  Bohemond  in  his  own  palace.  Then  through  the  offices 
of  certain  friends  of  both  parties,  the  king  gave  Bohemond  his  second 
daughter  Alice  in  marriage.  This  alliance  was  arranged  under  condi¬ 
tions  approved  both  by  the  king  and  the  prince,  that  the  friendly  rela¬ 
tions  and  esteem  between  them  might  be  increased. 

Bohemond  was  about  eighteen  years  old.  He  was  rather  tall  and  of 
fine  figure.  He  had  blond  hair  and  well-made  features.  His  whole  bear¬ 
ing  plainly  showed  the  prince  even  to  those  who  did  not  know  him. 
His  conversation  was  agreeable  and  easily  won  the  favor  of  those  who 
listened  to  him.  He  was  of  a  generous  nature  and,  like  his  father,  truly 
magnificent.  In  respect  to  high  lineage  according  to  the  flesh,  he  was 
second  to  none.  His  father,  Bohemond  the  Elder,  was  the  son  of  the 
illustrious  Robert  Guiscard,  a  man  whose  name  will  live  forever. 
His  mother,  Constance,  a  daughter  of  Philip,  the  excellent  king  of 
the  Franks,  was  a  woman  conspicuous  among  illustrious  women  for 
her  admirable  and  noble  character.^® 

The  nuptials  were  celebrated  according  to  custom  and  the  princess 
with  due  ceremony  united  to  the  prince  in  the  bonds  of  lawful  mar¬ 
riage.  Then  the  king,  relieved  of  the  greater  part  of  his  burden,  re¬ 
turned  to  Jerusalem  safe  and  sound. 

In  the  following  year,  Bohemond  laid  siege  to  the  fortress  of  Ka- 
fartab,  which  had  been  subjugated  several  years  before  by  the  strong 
hand  of  the  enemy.  Military  forces  were  summoned  from  the  entire 
principality,  and  the  engineers  were  ordered  to  build  the  machines 
necessary  for  storming  a  stronghold.  The  place  fell  a  short  time  after 
siege  operations  were  begun.  Bohemond  spared  none  found  therein, 

Book  XI,  chap.  6. 


34  CAPTURE  OF  TYRE 

but  slew  allj  regardless  of  the  bribes  offered  by  those  who  endeavored 
thus  to  secure  life  and  safety.  Such  were  the  first  fruits  of  his  youthful 
prowess  which  this  noble  and  distinguished  prince  offered  as  proofs  of 
his  natural  ability. 


22.  A  serious  enmity  arises  between  Bohemond  II  and  Joscellny 
count  of  Edessa»  The  king  hurries  thither  and  settles  the 
strife.  The  Africans  make  a  fierce  attack  on  Syracusey  a  city 
of  Sicily, 

Before  long,  a  serious  enmity  arose  between  this  prince  and  the  elder 
Joscelin,  count  of  Edessa.  The  reasons  for  this  are  unknown,  at  least  to 
us,  but  they  were  assuredly  hateful  in  the  eyes  of  God,  for  contrary 
to  the  honorable  custom  and  laws  of  our  times,  Joscelin  called  to  his 
aid  bands  of  infidel  Turks,  an  act  which  established  a  vicious  precedent 
for  his  descendants.^”^  Aided  by  them,  he  ravaged  the  land  of  Antioch 
with  fire  and  sword  and  forced  its  inhabitants,  true  servants  of  Christ, 
to  bow  beneath  the  yoke  of  unmerited  servitude.  This  conduct  seems 
all  the  more  extraordinary  and  deserving  of  divine  censure,  because 
it  is  said  to  have  happened  while  Bohemond,  ignorant  of  what  was 
going  on,  was  fighting  in  the  service  of  Christ  against  the  enemies  of 
the  Lord.  Hence  the  aforesaid  Joscelin  merits  the  execration  of  all 
to  whom  this  story,  fraught  with  hate  and  indignation,  comes. 

Rumors  of  this  trouble  reached  the  king  and  caused  him  much 
anxiety.  He  was  concerned,  in  the  first  place,  lest  this  discord  might 
afford  the  enemy  a  favorable  opportunity  to  molest  the  Christians, 
because,  according  to  the  word  of  the  Lord,  “Every  kingdom  divided 
against  itself  is  brought  to  desolation.”  In  the  second  place,  both 
parties  were  closely  related  to  him  by  blood,  for  the  one  was  his  cousin, 
the  son  of  his  mother’s  sister,  and  the  other  was  his  son-in-law,  to  whom 
he  had  recently  given  his  daughter  in  marriage.  Accordingly,  he  set 
out  in  haste  for  Antioch  to  try  to  bring  about  a  reconciliation.  With 
the  devoted  and  loyal  cooperation  of  Bernard,  the  patriarch  of  Antioch, 
he  was  successful  in  establishing  most  cordial  relations  between  the 

The  alliance  of  Christian  leaders  with  Turks  was  no  new  policy,  for  William 
has  recounted  earlier  instances.  Either  this  marks  a  resumption  of  writing  after  a  con¬ 
siderable  interval  during  which  he  forgot  those  earlier  instances,  or  he  has  in  mind 
the  later  careers  of  Joscelin  II  and  Joscelin  III.  This  quarrel  occurred  in  the  summer 
of  1127. 

Lu.  1 1 :  17. 


CAPTURE  OF  TYRE 


35 

two  lords.  Luckily  for  the  king’s  purpose,  the  count  in  the  meantime 
had  contracted  a  serious  illness.  It  was  while  he  was  suffering  from 
this  and  in  great  danger  of  death  that  he  repented  of  his  evil  deeds 
and  made  a  vow  that  if  God  would  grant  him  life  and  health,  he  would 
give  satisfaction  to  the  prince,  become  reconciled  to  him,  and  pay  right¬ 
ful  homage.  And  this  came  to  pass.  For  after  Joscelin  was  fully  re¬ 
covered,  the  two  were  reconciled  in  the  presence  of  the  king  and  the 
patriarch.  Good  will  in  full  measure  now  existed  between  them.  Josce¬ 
lin  swore  fealty  to  him  and  observed  it  thereafter  as  in  duty  bound. 
After  thus  happily  ending  this  affair,  the  king  returned  to  Jerusalem. 

Just  about  this  time.  Count  Roger  of  Sicily  is  said  to  have  set  sail 
for  Africa  with  a  fleet  of  forty  galleys  which  he  had  caused  to  be  pre¬ 
pared  with  great  care.  The  news  of  his  coming  had  preceded  him,  how¬ 
ever,  and  the  people  of  that  province,  forewarned,  had  prudently  taken 
precautions,  so  that  he  might  have  no  opportunity  of  injuring  them. 
On  the  contrary,  with  zeal  equal  to  his  own,  they  armed  all  their  galleys 
and  swiftly  gave  chase.  The  Christians  were  forced  to  flee  without 
accomplishing  their  object,  for  the  pursuit  was  continued  to  the  very 
shores  of  Sicily.  On  arriving  there  with  eighty  galleys,  the  enemy  made 
an  unexpected  attack  upon  Syracuse.  This  ancient  and  noble  city  had 
become  enervated  from  long-continued  peace,  and,  in  its  fancied  se¬ 
curity,  was  wholly  without  apprehension  of  such  danger.  It  at  once 
succumbed.  Without  regard  to  age  or  sex,  the  Africans  massacred  a 
large  number  of  citizens,  while  the  few  who  were  spared  had  to  suffer 
a  slavery  worse  than  any  form  of  death.  The  bishop  of  the  place  with 
a  few  clerics  escaped  with  much  difficulty  by  fleeing  to  the  country  out¬ 
side  the  city.^® 

23.  The  first  archbishop  of  the  Latins  at  Tyre  is  affointed. 

In  the  following  spring,  which  was  the  fourth  year  after  Tyre  had 
been  restored  to  the  Christian  faith,  the  king  and  the  patriarch  met 
with  the  leading  men  of  the  realm  at  the  city  of  Tyre  to  choose  an 
archbishop  over  the  church  there.  William,  the  venerable  prior  of  the 
church  of  the  Sepulchre  of  the  Lord,  was  finally  appointed.  He  was 

This  episode,  which  has  no  direct  connection  with  the  affairs  of  the  kingdom  of 
Jerusalem,  is  another  instance  of  W^illiam’s  familiarity  with  the  affairs  of  southern 
Italy. 


CAPTURE  OF  TYRE 


36 

an  Englishman  by  birth,  and  a  man  of  most  exemplary  life  and  char- 
acter. 

At  this  point,  we  are  entirely  unable  to  restrain  our  lamentations; 
for,  as  the  proverb  says,  “Where  love  is,  there  are  the  eyes;  where 
sorrow  abides  there  is  the  hand.”  This  matter  weighs  heavily  upon  us, 
and  the  pain  it  inflicts  permits  our  heart  no  rest.  For  although  we  ad¬ 
mire  the  prudence  of  that  time,  yet  we  are  perplexed  and  regard  it 
rather  as  rashness.  For  those,  who  two  years  before  this  city  was  re¬ 
stored  to  Christian  liberty  had  consecrated  a  bishop  over  them,  after¬ 
wards,  with  dilatory  and  crass  prudence  neglected  to  provide  a  head 
for  that  same  church  until  four  years  later.  Consequently,  during  that 
time,  the  churches  were  broken  up  and  the  cathedral  church,  although 
it  ought  to  have  received  attention  first  of  all  because  it  had  the  re¬ 
sponsibility  of  governing,  was  curtailed  of  its  own  members.  Thus, 
like  one  accursed,  it  received  the  worser  lot ;  for  it  is  written,  “Cursed 
is  the  man  who  causes  his  own  portion  to  deteriorate.” 

Nevertheless,  that  predecessor  of  ours  and  all  of  us  who  have  fol¬ 
lowed  him  in  that  same  church  have  with  justice  escaped  the  effect  of 
that  curse. For  it  was  not  we  who  brought  about  the  deterioration 
of  our  lot;  on  the  contrary,  we  were  forced  to  enter  upon  conditions 
that  had  been  made  worse  by  others.  May  the  Lord  spare  those  who 
so  mishandled  the  church  and  not  consign  them  to  Gehenna. 

After  receiving  the  gift  of  consecration  from  the  patriarch  of  Jeru¬ 
salem,  William,  our  predecessor  of  good  memory,  started  for  Rome 
to  receive  the  pallium.  This  he  did  in  direct  opposition  to  the  wishes 
of  the  one  who  had  consecrated  him,  and  in  spite  of  the  latter’s  efforts. 
William  was  kindly  received  at  Rome  by  Pope  Honorius  II,  who 
granted  his  request  and  sent  him  back  to  his  own  land  with  much 
honor,  the  bearer  of  an  apostolic  letter.  The  tenor  of  this  was  as 
follows : 

“Honorius,  the  bishop,  servant  of  the  servants  of  God,  to  his  brethren 
the  venerable  suffragan  bishops,  to  the  clergy,  and  to  the  people  of 
Ty  re,  salutation  and  the  apostolic  blessing. 

“We  have  received  with  due  affection  on  the  occasion  of  his  coming 
to  us,  your  archbishop,  our  very  dear  brother  William.  Upon  him. 

This  is  the  first  definite  indication  that  he  was  writing-  after  June,  1175,  when 
he  was  made  archbishop.  Whether  this  material  was  inserted  after  1180  or  written 
during  the  period  from  1175-1178  is  not  clear. 


CAPTURE  OF  TYRE 


37 

elected  according  to  canonical  rules  and  consecrated  by  our  venerable 
brother  Gormond,  patriarch  of  Jerusalem,  we  have  conferred  the 
dignity  of  the  pallium,  that  is,  the  full  pontifical  powers.  We  believe 
that  from  him,  by  the  aid  of  divine  mercy,  will  come  much  fruit  to 
your  mother  church  at  Tyre.  Hence  we  deem  it  well  to  send  him  back 
to  you  with  the  favor  of  the  apostolic  see,  as  the  bearer  of  our  letter. 
We  command  you  as  a  whole  to  receive  him  kindly  and  to  render  him 
in  all  humility  subjection,  obedience,  and  reverence  as  your  own  metro¬ 
politan  and  the  bishop  of  your  souls.  .  . 

“Honorius,  bishop,  servant  of  the  servants  of  God,  to  his  venerable 
brother  Gormond,  patriarch  of  Jerusalem,  salutation  and  the  apostolic 
blessing. 

“Having  received  your  letter  of  brotherly  affection,  we  have  wel¬ 
comed  with  kindness  our  brother  William,  whom  you  have  consecrated 
archbishop  over  the  church  at  Tyre,  and  we  have  invested  him  with 
the  dignity  of  the  pallium,  that  is,  with  the  fullness  of  the  pontifical 
office.  Moreover,  we  have  commanded  the  suffragans  of  his  church 
to  render  to  him  subjection,  obedience,  and  reverence  as  to  their  own 
metropolitan. 

Given  in  the  territory  of  Bari,  July  8.’’ 

With  the  archbishop  the  pope  sent  also,  as  legate  of  the  apostolic 
see,  Giles,  bishop  of  Tusculum,  an  eloquent  and  very  learned  man, 
whose  famous  letters  to  the  people  of  Antioch  are  still  extant.  By  Giles 
the  pope  sent  a  letter  to  Bernard,  the  patriarch  of  Antioch,  in  which 
he  admonished  the  latter  to  restore  to  the  lord  of  Tyre  the  suffragans 
belonging  to  that  church,  whom  Bernard  was  withholding.  Among 
other  things,  he  said,  “Wherefore,  we  command  you  by  the  apostolic 
letter  and  by  our  venerable  brother  Giles,  bishop  of  Tusculum  and 
legate  of  the  apostolic  see,  that  you  restore  to  William  the  suffragans 
of  the  church  at  Tyre,  that,  unless  they  show  the  rightful  submission 
to  him  within  forty  days  after  the  reading  of  the  letter  which  we  have 
sent  you,  we  suspend  them  from  that  time  from  the  episcopal  office.” 

How  it  happened  that  William  had  been  consecrated  by  the  patriarch 
of  Jerusalem  and  owed  obedience  to  him,  although  from  the  time  of 
the  apostles  even  to  that  day  it  is  certain  that  the  church  at  Tyre  was 

July  8,  1128,  according-  to  R.  Rohricht  (see  Regesta  regni  Hierosolymham^  no. 

123)- 


CAPTURE  OF  TYRE 


38 

subject  to  the  see  at  Antioch,  will  be  related  in  a  suitable  place  in  the 
following  history.®^ 

24.  'The  count  of  Anjou  arrives  at  the  invitation  [of  the  king]. 

Melts  end y  the  kin^s  eldest  daughter y  is  given  to  him  in  mar¬ 
riage. 

About  midspring  of  the  following  year  Fulk,  the  magnificent  and 
illustrious  count  of  Anjou,  landed  at  Acre,  By  the  unanimous  advice 
of  all  the  princes,  both  ecclesiastical  and  secular,  the  king  had  invited 
him  hither  to  wed  the  lady  Melisend,  his  eldest  daughter.  He  came 
attended  by  an  honorable  retinue  of  nobles  and  with  a  magnificence 
and  pomp  which  surpassed  that  of  kings. 

With  Fulk  came  William  de  Bury,  the  royal  constable,  who,  on 
the  king’s  release  from  captivity,  had  been  sent  with  some  other  nobles 
to  invite  the  count  thither.^^  On  setting  forth  upon  this  mission,  Wil¬ 
liam  had  been  instructed  to  take  a  solemn  oath  by  the  soul  of  the 
king  and  of  the  princes  of  the  realm  that  within  fifty  days  after  the 
said  count  reached  the  kingdom  in  safety  he  would  be  given  the  king’s 
eldest  daughter  in  marriage,  with  the  expectation  of  succeeding  to  the 
throne  at  Baldwin’s  death.  At  soon  as  he  landed,  therefore,  and  even 
before  the  celebration  of  Holy  Pentecost  which  was  near  at  hand,  the 
king  gave  him  his  eldest  daughter  in  marriage,  according  to  the  terms 
of  the  agreement.^*^  At  the  same  time  he  endowed  the  pair  with  the 
cities  of  Tyre  and  Acre,  to  be  held  by  them  during  the  king’s  own  life¬ 
time.  These  cities  continued  to  be  in  their  possession  until  the  king’s 
death. 

Fulk  showed  himself  a  wise  and  discreet  man.  During  Baldwin’s 
lifetime,  he  devotedly  fulfilled  all  the  duties  of  a  son.  He  was  faithful 
and  active  in  attending  to  matters  of  the  realm,  and  in  his  deference 
to  the  lord  king  he  proved  that  he  was  not  lacking  in  those  qualities 
which  ordinarily  win  friends. 

William’s  implication  that  it  was  wrong  to  have  the  archbishopric  of  Tyre  subject 
to  Jerusalem  suggests  a  point  of  view  which  he  may  have  developed  more  strongly 
after  1180.  He  has  already  recounted  the  circumstances  which  led  to  this  arrangement. 

This  mission  must  have  been  sent  some  time  later,  for  William  de  Bury  was  still 
in  Palestine  in  1126  (i?.  Rsg.j  no.  115),  perhaps  not  until  1127.  The  proposal  had 
the  approval  of  Pope  Honorius,  whose  letter  commending  Fulk  to  Baldwin  II  is 
dated  May  29,  1128  (/?.  Reg.^  no.  122). 

Just  before  June  2,  1129. 


CAPTURE  OF  TYRE 


39 


25*  Gormondy  'patriarch  oj  J erusaleniy  dies.  Stephen  is  chosen  hi 
his  place.  Difficult  questions  arise  between  the  king  and  the 
patriarch , 

That  same  year,  Gormond,  patriarch  of  Jerusalem  of  precious  memory, 
was  besieging  a  fortress  in  the  district  of  Sidon  called  Belthasem,  which 
at  that  time  was  held  by  bandits.  There  he  contracted  the  seeds  of  death 
and  was  stricken  with  a  serious  illness.  He  was  carried  to  Sidon,  where, 
as  his  illness  increased,  he  finally  paid  the  debt  of  mankind  and  went 
the  way  of  all  flesh.  He  had  ruled  over  the  church  at  Jerusalem  for 
nearly  ten  years.®®  In  his  place  was  chosen  a  man,  noble  according  to 
the  flesh  indeed,  but  far  more  noble  in  life  and  character,  Stephen, 
abbot  of  St.  John  of  the  Valley,  in  the  city  of  Chartres.  He  was  a  native 
of  Chartres  and  a  kinsman  of  King  Baldwin.  Of  knightly  rank  and 
mode  of  life,  he  had  been  before  his  conversion  viscount  of  that  city. 
Later,  he  renounced  the  world,  put  on  the  habit  of  religion  in  the 
monastery  just  mentioned,  and  finally,  because  of  his  merit,  was  made 
head  of  that  church.  In  his  youth  he  had  been  thoroughly  instructed 
in  the  liberal  arts. 

Abbot  Stephen  had  come  on  a  pilgrimage  to  Jerusalem  for  the  sake 
of  prayer  and  devotion  and  was  waiting  there  to  make  the  return  pas¬ 
sage.  It  happened  to  be  the  very  time  when,  after  the  obsequies  of  the 
Patriarch  Gormond,  the  clergy  and  people  were  engaged  in  choosing 
a  new  shepherd.  By  common  consent  their  choice  fell  upon  Stephen, 
and  he  was  elected. 

After  his  consecration,  however,  he  began  to  raise  troublesome  ques¬ 
tions  in  opposition  to  the  king.  He  alleged  that  the  city  of  Jaffa  be¬ 
longed  by  right  to  him  and  to  the  church  of  the  Resurrection  of  the 
Lord.  He  even  claimed  that,  after  the  capture  of  Ascalon,  the  Holy 
City  itself  should  by  right  submit  to  the  church  in  the  same  way.  He 
was  a  man  of  lofty  spirit  and  honorable  character,  unswerving  in  every¬ 
thing  he  undertook  and  zealously  insistent  upon  his  own  rights.®® 

The  reference  to  “the  same  year’^  is  misleading'.  Gormond  had  become  patriarch 
in  in 8,  his  ten-year  reign  thus  ending  in  1128.  This  accords  with  other  evidence 
(see  R.  Rohricht,  Geschichte  des  Konigreichs  Jerusalem^  i  loo’-i 2giy  p.  184.,  note  8). 

®®The  assertion  of  such  claims  by  the  patriarch  against  the  king  evidently  meets 
with  William’s  approval.  Compare  the  claims  of  Daimbert  and  William’s  justification 
of  them  (Book  IXy  chaps.  17  and  18). 


40 


CAPTURE  OF  TYRE 


Consequently,  a  serious  enmity  arose  between  him  and  the  kingj 
but  his  premature  death,  according  to  the  story,  put  an  end  to  this. 
For  he  died  before  he  had  completed  a  term  of  two  years.  Some  think 
that  he  was  poisoned,  but  we  have  no  definite  information  as  to  that. 
It  is  said,  however,  that  while  he  was  lying  on  his  deathbed  the  king 
came  to  see  him  and  inquired  how  he  was.  His  response  was,  ^^Sire,  I 
am  now  in  the  condition  which  you  desire.” 

26.  In  co7nfany  with  the  frince  of  Antiochy  the  count  of  TrifoLiy 
and  the  count  of  Edessay  the  king  invades  the  land  of  Damas¬ 
cus.  He  is  comfelled  to  retreat  in  disorder y  however y  with  the 
loss  of  a  fart  of  the  army .  T  he  fatriarch  Stef  hen  dies.  W  il- 
liam  is  chosen  in  his  stead. 

In  the  following  year,  Hugh  de  Payens,  the  first  master  of  the  Knights 
of  the  Temple,  and  several  other  men  of  religion  returned.  They  had 
been  sent  by  the  king  and  the  chief  men  of  the  kingdom  to  the  princes 
of  the  West  for  the  purpose  of  rousing  the  people  there  to  come  to 
our  assistance. Above  all,  they  were  to  try  to  induce  men  of  influence 
to  come  to  help  us  besiege  Damascus.  Led  by  their  persuasive  words, 
many  companies  of  noblemen  had  arrived  in  the  kingdom.  Accord¬ 
ingly,  relying  upon  the  powerful  assistance  of  these  newcomers,  all  the 
Christian  princes  of  the  East  convened  as  by  agreement.  There  were 
present  King  Baldwin  j  Fulk,  count  of  Anjou ^  Pons,  count  of  Tripoli 5 
the  younger  Bohemond,  prince  of  Antioch  j  and  the  elder  Joscelin, 
count  of  Edessa.  After  taking  counsel  together,  all  these  leaders  levied 
military  forces  from  every  direction  and  summoned  their  allies.  Then, 
in  zealous  emulation  of  each  other,  they  marched  in  battle  array  to 
besiege  the  renowned  and  noble  city  of  Damascus.  It  was  their  hope 
that  they  might  take  the  city  by  fighting  at  close  quarters,  or  by  laying 
siege  to  it  force  it  to  surrender.  Divine  providence,  however,  with  just 
though  unseen  judgment,  blocked  this  great  enterprise.  Until  they 
entered  the  land  of  Damascus,  they  had  been  attended  by  good  fortune 
under  the  leadership  of  God.  At  a  place  called  Mergisafar,  however, 

Hugh  de  Payens,  who  had  attended  the  council  of  Troyes  in  1128,  where  the  rule 
of  the  order  of  the  Templars  was  approved,  had  recruited  followers  both  for  the  order 
and  for  the  needs  of  the  kingdom  (see  Book  XII,  chap.  7).  The  sum  total  of  the  knights 
and  other  troops  who  came  from  the  West  with  Hugh  de  Payens  and  with  Fulk  of 
Anjou  must  have  been  considerable  to  permit  such  an  ambitious  undertaking  as  the 
siege  of  Damascus. 


CAPTURE  OF  TYRE 


41 

men  of  lesser  rank  separated  from  the  main  army.  It  was  the  customary 
duty  of  these  men  to  spread  here  and  there  through  the  fields  in  search 
of  the  provisions  and  fodder  necessary  for  the  use  of  men  and  beasts. 
William  de  Bury  with  a  thousand  knights  was  in  charge  of  this  party. 
As  is  usual  on  such  forays,  the  contingent  separated  into  small  parties, 
which  began  to  roam  recklessly  over  the  country.  They  purposely  kept 
apart  from  one  another,  that  each  band  might  claim  for  itself  whatever 
it  found  and  not  share  with  the  rest.  Intent  upon  this  and  busy  in  devas¬ 
tating  the  fields,  all  bent  on  carrying  away  plunder  for  their  own  com¬ 
panies,  these  forces  began  to  conduct  themselves  very  imprudently  and 
soon  passed  beyond  the  bounds  of  military  discipline. 

News  of  this  reckless  behavior  soon  came  to  the  ears  of  Tughtigin, 
the  prince  of  Damascus.^®  Well  aware  that  these  troops  were  unac¬ 
quainted  with  the  locality,  the  prince  hoped  that  by  making  a  sudden 
attack  with  only  his  best  and  most  experienced  warriors,  he  might  suc¬ 
ceed  in  destroying  them.  His  hopes  were  realized.  While  they  were 
incautiously  roaming  about  in  search  of  food,  he  made  a  sudden  attack 
upon  them  and  easily  put  them  to  flight,  for  they  were  intent  upon 
other  things  and  wholly  unprepared  for  danger.  Dispersed  as  they 
were  through  the  fields,  many  fell  by  the  swords  of  the  infidel.  The 
prince  continued  the  pursuit  until  he  had  put  to  flight  not  only  the 
rank  and  file  but  also  the  flower  of  the  army  who  had  been  detailed  to 
guard  the  foraging  party.  Many  of  these  picked  soldiers  were  also  slain. 

When  news  of  this  disaster  reached  the  army,  the  hearts  of  all  were 
kindled  with  wrath.  Eager  to  resent  such  a  wrong  and  to  seek  revenge 
against  the  enemy,  they  snatched  their  weapons  and,  with  resolute  and 
fiery  courage,  prepared  to  move  against  the  foe.  But  against  the  will  of 
divine  power,  the  purposes  of  man  can  make  no  progress.  Suddenly  a 
violent  rainstorm  accompanied  by  fog  descended  upon  them  from  on 
high.  The  roads  were  rendered  impassable  by  the  downpour,  and  the 
fury  of  the  tempest  alone  was  such  that  it  was  hardly  possible  to  hope 
to  escape  alive.  Long  before  this,  the  dense  clouds  and  the  fog,  the 
winds  rushing  from  every  direction,  the  constant  thunder  and  light¬ 
ning  had  given  unmistakable  warning  of  the  storm.  But  the  mind  of 
man,  ignorant  of  the  future,  heeded  not  the  divine  forbearance  which 
would  have  recalled  them.  On  the  contrary,  the  forces  strove  to  pro- 

Tughtigin  had  died  February  ii,  1128.  His  son,  Taj  al-Muluk  Buri,  was  now  in 
charge  of  affairs. 


I 


42  CAPTURE  OF  TYRE 

ceed  against  the  will  of  God,  a  thing  which  is  impossible.  At  length, 
they  realized  that  the  tempest  had  been  sent  upon  them  because  of 
their  sins.  Reluctantly  they  were  obliged  to  abandon  their  purpose. 
Conditions  were  now  entirely  changed.  When  they  first  set  out,  they 
were  greatly  feared  by  the  enemy  as  a  terrible  menace.  Now  these 
same  men  were  a  burden  to  themselves.  Merely  to  return  in  safety  to 
their  own  land,  would,  they  felt,  be  a  great  victory.  The  enemy,  on 
the  other  hand,  was  now  quite  at  ease  and  had  even  become  superior. 

This  disaster  occurred  eight  days  before  the  Ides  of  December  (De¬ 
cember  6)  in  the  year  1130  of  the  Incarnation  of  our  Lord  and  the 
twelfth  year  of  King  Baldwin’s  reign.  It  happened  at  almost  the  very 
place  where  four  years  before  the  king  had  obtained  a  notable  and 
ever-memorable  victory  over  the  same  enemy.® ^ 

Marvellous  is  it,  O  eternal  Saviour,  truly  marvellous  and  far  be¬ 
yond  the  conception  of  man,  how  Thou  bringest  low  those  who  pre¬ 
sume  on  their  own  merits!  Thou  piercest  the  hearts  of  those  who  trust 
in  man  and  in  the  arm  of  their  own  flesh  by  hurling  Thy  malediction 
against  them  as  they  indeed  deserve.  Thou  seekest  no  helper  or  sharer 
in  Thy  glory.  For  Thou  hast  said,  blessed  God,  “I  will  not  give  my 
glory  unto  another.”  ‘Wengeance  is  minej  I  will  repay.”  kill, 
and  I  make  alive j  I  wound,  and  I  heal:  neither  is  there  any  that  can 
deliver  out  of  my  hand.”  Truly,  O  Lord,  hast  Thou  spoken!  For  as 
long  as  the  king  committed  himself  entirely  to  superabounding  divine 
grace  and  employed  only  the  forces  of  his  own  realm,  he  often  an¬ 
nounced  unhoped-for  victories  over  the  enemy.  When,  however,  he 
began  to  rely  upon  numbers  and  presumed  on  his  power  to  exalt  him¬ 
self  by  the  work  of  men,  when  he  began  to  multiply  his  allies  and  to 
trust  in  human  valor.  Thou  didst  withdraw  Thy  favor  and  didst  aban¬ 
don  him  to  his  own  resources.  For,  when  he  trusted  in  the  aid  of  the 
Lord,  he  was  wont,  even  with  small  forces,  to  triumph  easily  over  the 
enemy  ^  but  now,  even  though  accompanied  by  a  multitude,  he  was 
forced  to  retreat  discomfited. 


The  date  of  this  defeat  was  late  in  1129.  Qalanisi,  who  was  presumably  in  Da¬ 
mascus  at  the  time  and  wrote  a  lengthy  account  of  it,  placed  it  in  November  of  that 
year  instead  of  December  6,  as  William  has  it.  It  is  strange  that  William  omitted 
the  highly  interesting  events  which  preceded  the  campaign.  The  Assassins  had  suf¬ 
fered  a  severe  defeat  at  the  hands  of  the  Damascenes  and  had  given  Banyas  to  Baldwin 
as  a  means  of  saving  it  from  Damascus.  This  omission  illustrates  William’s  difficulty 
in  carrying  on  historical  research  without  written  guides  and  with  many  distractions 
of  public  office  (see  Gibb,  Chronicle^  pp.  187-995  also  R.KJ.y  pp.  186-87). 

Is.  48:11.  ®^Ro.  12:19.  ®^De.  32:39. 


CAPTURE  OF  TYRE 


43 

So,  at  this  time,  the  very  heavens  fought  against  them.  Driven  back 
by  the  storm  sent  from  on  high,  they  were  unable  to  accomplish  their 
purpose  and  could  not  avenge  their  comrades  who  had  fallen  by  the 
sword  of  the  enemy. 

After  these  unfortunate  occurrences,  our  leaders  separated,  for  it 
was  evident  that  the  work  which  they  had  undertaken  could  not  be 
carried  out  successfully.  Consequently,  all  returned  home. 

During  this  time,  Stephen,  patriarch  of  Jerusalem,  of  precious  mem¬ 
ory,  died.®^  He  was  succeeded  by  William,  prior  of  the  church  of  the 
Sepulchre  of  the  Lord.  William  was  a  plain,  sincere  man,  handsome  of 
appearance  and  commendable  for  his  noble  character,  although  but 
slightly  versed  in  letters.  He  was  Flemish  by  birth,  a  native  of  Malines. 
He  proved  very  acceptable  to  the  king,  to  the  princes  of  the  realm,  and 
to  the  people  in  general. 

27*  Bohemondy  frince  of  Antiochy  is  killed  in  Ciliciay  near 
Mamistra.  The  king  re  fairs  to  Antioch  in  haste,  Bohemond^s 
•widow  tries  to  f revent  her  father  from  entering  the  cityy  buty 
by  the  efforts  of  the  citizens y  the  state  is  entrusted  to  the  king 
and  the  frincess  is  exiled. 

Soon  after  Bohemond,  prince  of  Antioch,  the  king’s  son-in-law,  re¬ 
turned  to  his  own  province  from  that  campaign,  Ridwan,  prince  of 
Aleppo,®^  a  very  powerful  Turkish  ruler,  a  son  of  Satan,  invaded  the 
land  of  Antioch.  Bohemond,  hoping  thereby  to  keep  him  out  of  his 
own  territory,  hastened  against  him  into  Cilicia.  Other  reasons  also 
relating  to  private  and  domestic  affairs  called  the  young  prince  thither. 
While  encamped  there  in  a  broad  plain  called  the  meadow  of  the  Man¬ 
tles,  he  was  suddenly  attacked  by  a  great  number  of  the  enemy.  His 
men  deserted,  and  Bohemond  was  slain  by  the  foe.®^  He  would  have 
been  a  great  prince,  beloved  of  God,  had  not  premature  death  and 
invidious  fate  snatched  him  from  the  world.  This  misfortune  utterly 
overwhelmed  the  people  of  Antioch.  Since  he  was  young,  they  had 
felt  that  they  might  be  safe  for  a  long  time  under  his  rule,  and  conse¬ 
quently  they  had  ventured  to  undertake  more  than  was  expedient. 

His  death  occurred  late  in  the  year  1130  (see  R.  Rsg,y  no.  133). 

This  is  an  error.  Ridwan  of  Aleppo,  who  had  been  prominent  during  the  siege 
of  Antioch  in  1098,  had  died  in  1114.  Zangi  had  acquired  Aleppo,  and  it  was  now 
ruled  by  him  directly  or  through  a  lieutenant  named  Sawar. 

The  death  of  Bohemond  II  occurred  in  February,  1130.  His  headless  body  is 
said  to  have  been  found  and  given  proper  burial  in  Antioch. 


44 


CAPTURE  OF  TYRE 


Again  they  renewed  their  lamentations,  complaining  that  without  the 
help  of  a  prince  they  were  in  danger  of  falling  a  prey  to  the  enemy  j 
and  again,  after  holding  a  council,  they  called  on  the  king  of  Jerusalem. 

Baldwin  was  greatly  disturbed  at  the  news  of  this  fresh  calamity, 
for  he  feared  that,  deprived  of  a  leader,  some  worse  misfortune  might 
befall  the  principality.  Since  he  regarded  nothing  that  happened  to 
the  Christian  princes  as  alien  to  himself,  he  at  once  laid  aside  his  own 
concerns  and  began  to  assume  the  burdens  of  others.  Anything  that  he 
could  do  for  a  Christian  people  seemed  worthy  of  his  attention.  Ac¬ 
cordingly,  he  proceeded  to  Antioch  as  speedily  as  possible. 

But  as  soon  as  his  daughter  [Alice]  learned  of  her  husband’s  death, 
and,  in  fact,  before  she  was  aware  of  her  father’s  intention  to  come  to 
Antioch,  an  evil  spirit  led  her  to  conceive  a  wicked  plan.  In  order  to 
make  her  position  more  secure  and  to  carry  her  plan  into  effect,  she 
sent  messengers  to  a  certain  powerful  Turkish  chief,  called  Sanguis 
[Zangi].®®  By  his  aid  she  hoped  to  acquire  Antioch  for  herself  in  per¬ 
petuity,  despite  the  opposition  of  her  chief  men  and  the  entire  people. 
For  Bohemond  of  happy  memory  had  left  an  only  daughter,  who  ap¬ 
parently  did  not  stand  high  in  the  favor  of  her  mother.  Whether  she 
remained  a  widow  or  remarried,  Alice  was  determined  to  disinherit  her 
daughter  and  keep  the  principality  for  herself  in  perpetuity.  By  one 
of  her  own  servants  she  sent  to  the  nobleman  just  mentioned  a  present 
of  a  snow-white  palfrey  shot  with  silver.  The  bridle  and  other  trap¬ 
pings  were  likewise  of  silver  and  even  the  silken  saddle  cloth  was  white, 
so  that  uniformity  prevailed  throughout.  By  chance  this  messenger  was 
intercepted  on  his  way  and,  when  brought  into  the  presence  of  the 
king,  confessed  all  the  details  of  the  plot.  As  the  fitting  consequence  of 
his  evil  doings,  he  was  put  to  death  with  extreme  torture.®'^ 

On  learning  of  the  unfortunate  events  which  have  just  been  related, 
the  king  hurried  to  Antioch.  When  he  reached  there,  however,  he  was 
refused  admission  to  the  city  by  his  daughter’s  orders.  The  pangs  of 
conscience  had  laid  hold  on  her  and  she  feared  her  father’s  decision. 

This  is  Zangi,  whose  father  had  been  governor  of  Aleppo  under  Malik  Shah, 
When  the  father  was  killed  in  1094,  Zangi,  then  ten  years  old,  had  been  sent  to  Mosul. 
His  military  career  began  quite  early  and  with  good  fortune.  He  became  governor 
of  Mosul  in  1126—1127  and  extended  his  sway  to  Aleppo  in  1128. 

Some  of  the  details  of  this  story  appear  legendary.  Alice’s  efforts  to  bring  about 
peace  with  Zangi  even  at  the  cost  of  the  marriage  of  her  daughter  with  a  Muslim 
prince,  provided  she  herself  could  continue  to  rule  at  Antioch,  has  confirmation  in 
Arabic  accounts. 


CAPTURE  OF  TYRE 


45 

She  accordingly  entrusted  the  place  to  her  accomplices  and  to  those 
whom  her  money  had  corrupted,  and  made  every  effort  to  resist,  that 
she  might  be  free  to  exercise  her  tyrannical  will.  But  the  result  proved 
to  be  far  other  than  as  she  had  planned.  For  there  were  God-fearing 
men  in  that  same  city  who  scorned  the  bold  insolence  of  a  foolish 
woman.  Among  these  were  Peter  Latinator,  a  monk  of  St.  Paul,  and 
William  Aversa.  With  the  consent  of  others,  they  secretly  sent  mes¬ 
sengers  to  summon  the  king  and,  by  a  prearranged  plan,  placed  Fulk, 
count  of  Anjou,  at  the  gate  of  the  Duke  and  Count  Joscelin  at  the 
gate  of  St.  Paul.  The  gates  were  then  unbarred,  and  the  king  entered 
the  city. 

When  the  princess  learned  of  this,  she  at  once  retreated  to  the  citadel. 
Later,  however,  in  response  to  the  summons  of  the  wiser  men  of  An¬ 
tioch  and  by  the  advice  of  those  in  whom  she  had  full  confidence,  she 
presented  herself  before  her  father,  prepared  to  obey  his  will.  Baldwin 
was  very  indignant  at  her  conduct,  yet  he  was  not  without  paternal 
feelings  and  was  finally  induced  to  give  way  to  the  pleading  of  those 
who  made  intercession  for  her,  Antioch  was  surrendered  to  him,  and, 
lest  she  might  at  some  other  time  make  a  similar  attempt,  the  king 
granted  her  the  coast  cities  of  Laodicea  and  Jabala.  For  her  husband, 
in  his  last  will,  had  destined  these  cities  for  her,  because  they  had 
formed  her  dowry  at  the  time  of  her  marriage. 

When  the  king  had  thus  arranged  the  affairs  of  Antioch,  he  entrusted 
it  to  the  care  of  the  principal  men  and  returned  to  Jerusalem,  where 
private  matters  called  him.  Before  he  left,  however,  he  caused  all, 
both  great  and  small,  to  take  the  solemn  oath  that  during  his  own 
time  and  thereafter  they  would  faithfully  keep  Antioch  and  its  de¬ 
pendencies  for  Constance,  the  minor  daughter  of  Bohemond  the 
Younger.  For  he  feared  the  wicked  malice  of  his  own  daughter,  lest 
she  should  make  a  second  attempt  to  disinherit  her  minor  daughter. 

28.  The  king  returns  to  J erusalem.  He  is  attacked  by  a  serious 
illness  from  which  he  dies.  He  is  buried  with  the  other  kings 
in  the  church  of  the  Sefulchre  of  the  Lord, 

On  his  return  to  Jerusalem,  the  king  was  attacked  by  a  serious  malady 
and  perceived  that  the  day  of  his  death  was  at  hand.  Thereupon  he 
laid  aside  his  royal  state  and,  as  a  humble  suppliant  in  the  sight  of  the 
Lord,  went  forth  from  the  palace.  He  caused  himself  to  be  carried  into 


CAPTURE  OF  TYRE 


46 

the  palace  of  the  lord  patriarch,  because  that  was  nearer  to  the  place  of 
the  Lord’s  resurrection.  For  he  had  full  hope  that  the  One  who  had 
overcome  death  in  that  place  would  make  him  a  sharer  in  His  own 
resurrection.  He  then  summoned  to  him  his  daughter  and  his  son- 
in-law  and  the  boy  Baldwin,  who  was  now  two  years  old.®®  To  them,  in 
the  presence  of  the  patriarch  and  the  prelates  of  the  church  and  some  of 
the  nobles  who  happened  to  be  present,  he  committed  the  care  of  the 
kingdom  with  full  power.  Then,  as  a  devout  prince,  he  bestowed  upon 
them  his  fatherly  benediction. 

After  this,  having  assumed  the  garb  of  religion  as  a  true  confessor  of 
Christ  and  professed  the  religious  life,  if  he  should  live,  he  rendered  up 
his  spirit  to  Him  who  is  the  Father  of  spirits  and  by  the  will  of  God 
departed  to  receive  his  reward  with  the  other  princes  who  had  gone 
before.  He  died  on  the  twenty-first  day  of  August,  in  the  year  of  the 
Incarnation  of  our  Lord  1 131,  and  of  his  own  reign  the  thirteenth.  He 
was  buried  with  his  predecessors,  those  kings  of  pious  memory,  at  the 
foot  of  Mount  Calvary,  before  the  place  which  is  called  Golgotha.  His 
obsequies  were  celebrated  with  great  pomp  and  ceremony  by  his  people, 
with  all  the  magnificence  befitting  a  king.  Even  unto  the  present  time, 
his  memory  is  held  in  veneration  by  all,  because  of  his  exemplary  faith 
and  illustrious  deeds. 

This  is  the  future  Baldwin  III.  William’s  unusual  phrase  jam  bimulo  seems 
somewhat  ambiguous,  for  unless  Baldwin  had  been  born  in  1129  he  could  hardly  have 
been  two  years  old  by  August  21,  1 1 3 1 . 

HERE  ENDS  THE  THIRTEENTH  BOOK 


THE  FOURTEENTH  BOOK  BEGINS 


FULK  OF  ANJOU  AS  KING  OF  JERUSALEM: 

TROUBLES  IN  NORTHERN  SYRIA 

I .  The  lineage  and  character  of  Fulk^  the  third  king  of  J erusalem. 

When  Baldwin  du  Bourg,  the  second  Latin  king  of  Jerusalem,  was 
called  from  this  world,  he  was  succeeded  by  his  son-in-law,  Fulk,  count 
of  Touraine,  Maine,  and  Anjou,  to  whom,  as  we  mentioned  above,  he 
had  given  his  eldest  daughter,  Melisend,  in  marriage.  This  Fulk  was  a 
ruddy  man,  like  David,  whom  the  Lord  found  after  His  own  heart.  _ 
He  was  faithful  and  gentle,  affable,  kind,  and  compassionate,  unusual 
traits  in  people  of  that  complexion.  In  works  of  piety  and  the  giving  of 
alms,  he  was  most  generous.  Even  before  he  was  called  to  guide  the 
affairs  of  the  kingdom,  he  was  a  powerful  prince,  according  to  the 
flesh,  and  very  successful  in  ruling  his  own  people.  He  was  an  expe¬ 
rienced  warrior  full  of  patience  and  wisdom  in  military  affairs.  He  was 
of  medium  height  and  was  already  well  advanced  in  age,  a  man  of 
more  than  sixty  years. ^ 

Among  other  failings  from  which  he  suffered  because  of  human 
frailty  was  that  of  a  poor  memory,  so  fleeting  that  he  seldom  remem¬ 
bered  faces  or  names,  not  even  those  of  his  own  domestics.  If  someone 
on  whom  he  had  recently  conferred  the  high  honor  of  his  friendly 
favor  appeared  suddenly  before  him,  he  was  obliged  to  inquire  care¬ 
fully  who  he  was.  This  often  proved  embarrassing  to  those  who,  pre¬ 
suming  on  their  acquaintance  with  him,  offered  to  act  as  mediators  for 
others  and  found  that  they  themselves  needed  a  patron  with  him. 

His  father,  likewise  called  Fulk,  surnamed  Rechin,  was  the  count 
of  Touraine  and  Anjou.  He  married  Bertelea  [Bertrada],  sister  of 
Amaury  de  Montfort.  They  had  two  sons,  the  Fulk  of  whom  we  are 
speaking  and  Geoffrey  Martel  j  also  a  daughter,  Hermengarde,^  who 

^  It  is  possible,  even  probable,  that  William  had  seen  Fulk.  Actually  Fulk  was 
barely  forty  years  old  when  he  became  king  and  only  fifty-three  when  he  died,  but 
to  a  lad  of  ten  he  must  have  seemed  a  very  old  man.  This  impression  remained  with 
William,  who  thought  of  Fulk  always  as  an  old  man. 

^  Fulk  IV,  le  Rechin,  had  had  three  wives  (A.  Fliche,  Le  Regne  de  Philiffe  ler^  roi 
de  France y  io6o—iio8j  pp.  44,  233)  or  four  wives  (L.  Halphen,  Le  Comte  d^ Anjou 


48  FULK  OF  ANJOU  AS  KING 

married  as  her  first  husband  William,  count  of  Poitou.  Spurned  and 
cast  off  by  him,  she  fled  to  the  count  of  Brittany,  to  whom  she  clung 
with  the  affection  of  a  wife.  To  this  pair  was  born  Conan,  count  of 
Brittany,  who  was  called  the  Fat. 

After  bearing  these  three  children  to  her  lawful  husband,  Fulk  the 
Elder,  Bertrada  deserted  him  and  took  refuge  with  Philip,  king  of 
the  Franks.  He  put  aside  his  legitimate  wife  and  took  Bertrada  as  the 
sharer  of  his  couch  and  the  companion  of  his  cares.  Contrary  to  the  law 
of  the  church  and  despite  all  the  efforts  of  the  bishops  and  nobles  of 
his  realm,  he  continued  to  keep  her  with  him  and  later  treated  her  with 
the  affection  of  a  husband.^  By  her,  he  had  two  sons,  Florus  and  Philip, 
and  a  daughter,  Cecilia,  who  was  mentioned  above.  Cecilia  married  as 
her  first  husband  Tancred,  prince  of  Antioch,  and,  after  his  death,  she 
espoused  Pons,  count  of  Tripoli. 

Fulk’s  younger  son  and  namesake  married,  after  his  father’s  death, 
Guiberg  [Eremberge] ,  the  daughter  of  Elia  [Helie],  count  of  Maine.^ 
She  bore  him  two  sons  and  two  daughters.  His  mother  brought  about 
this  marriage.  In  his  youth,  Fulk  was  serving  as  cupbearer  at  the  court 
of  his  lord,  the  count  of  Poitou,  when  the  news  of  the  death  of  his 
elder  brother  arrived.^  The  count  immediately  seized  the  young  man 

au  Xle  Steele^  pp.  169—70)  before  he  married  Bertrada.  The  last  two  had  been  repudi¬ 
ated  by  him  and  were  still  living"  when  he  married  her.  This  marriage  occurred 
probably  in  1090,  certainly  no  earlier  than  1089.  Her  son,  Fulk,  could  therefore 
have  been  born  no  earlier  than  1089  nor  later  than  1092.  She  fled  to,  or  was  ab¬ 
ducted  by,  Philip  at  Orleans  on  the  night  of  May  15,  1092  (Halphen),  which  might 
indicate  that  her  son  had  been  born  no  later  than  1091.  Mile  Chartrou,  who  has  as¬ 
sembled  all  the  available  information  on  this  problem  (Josephe  Chartrou,  U Anjou  Ae 
//09  a  r/yr,  p.  77),  prefers  either  1090  or  1092  as  the  date  of  his  birth.  Fulk  was 
therefore  no  older  than  forty-one  years  and  may  have  been  only  thirty-nine  when 
he  became  king  of  Jerusalem.  The  other  children  mentioned  by  William  were  of  the 
earlier  marriages.  The  name  of  the  daughter  suggests  that  she,  like  Geoffrey,  was  the 
child  of  the  second  wife,  Ermengarde  de  Bourbon, 

"  Various  stories  arose  to  explain  the  separation  of  Bertrada  from  Fulk  IV.  Fliche, 
after  examining  all  of  them,  concludes  that  it  was  her  irresistible  charm  which  led 
Philip  to  abduct  her,  repudiate  his  wife,  Bertha,  who  had  grown  flabby,  and  marry 
Bertrada.  The  marriage  took  place  very  soon  after  the  abduction  in  1092.  This  viola¬ 
tion  of  the  marriage  sacrament  was  the  chief  cause  for  the  excommunication  of  Philip 
(see  Fliche,  Philippe  ler^  pp.  40—77). 

Her  name  was  Eremberge  rather  than  Guiberg,  and  through  her  Fulk  received 
the  inheritance  of  Helie  de  la  Fleche,  count  of  Maine  (see  Fliche,  Philippe  p.  231). 

®  When  his  oldest  son,  Geoffrey,  died  in  1106,  Fulk  IV  asked  to  have  his  other  son, 
Fulk,  then  at  the  court  of  France  with  his  mother,  succeed  him.  William  IX,  duke  of 
Aquitaine,  leader  of  the  crusade  of  iioi,  happened  to  be  at  the  court  at  the  time  and 
was  entrusted  with  the  task  of  taking  young  Fulk  to  his  father.  Instead,  William  kept 
Fulk  for  a  year  or  more  until  his  father  agreed  to  give  up  some  disputed  border  coun¬ 
try  (see  Fliche,  Philippe  lery  pp.  232—35). 


49 


FULK  OF  ANJOU  AS  KING 

and  put  him  in  prison.  His  object  was  to  wrest  from  Fulk  by  force  cer¬ 
tain  castles  located  in  his  own  domain  which  had  long  been  held  by 
Fulk’s  father  and  brother  by  hereditary  right,  although  in  fief  to  him¬ 
self  as  count  of  Poitou. 

Long  before  this,  his  mother  had  separated  from  his  father  and  had 
fled  to  the  king  of  the  Franks.  When  she  learned  of  her  son’s  imprison¬ 
ment,  her  maternal  feelings  were  aroused.  She  went  to  the  king  and, 
as  a  suppliant,  implored  him  to  order  her  son’s  release  from  prison  and 
to  restore  his  paternal  inheritance.  She  obtained  her  request  and  also 
succeeded  in  persuading  the  king  to  bestow  upon  Fulk  in  marriage  the 
only  daughter  of  Count  Helie,  mentioned  above,  with  her  entire  heri¬ 
tage.  By  Eremberge,  Fulk  had,  as  we  have  said  above,  two  sons  and 
two  daughters.  The  eldest  son,  Geoffrey,  succeeded  his  father  as  count, 
and  to  him  Henry  the  Elder,  the  powerful  king  of  the  Angles,  gave 
as  wife  his  only  daughter,  Matilda,  the  widow  of  Henry,  emperor  of 
the  Romans.® 

By  this  marriage  Geoffrey  had  three  sons:  Henry,  who  now  wisely 
and  vigorously  administers  the  kingdom  of  England  j  Geoffrey,  sur- 
named  Plantagenet  j  and  William,  known  as  Long  Sword. 

Fulk’s  second  son  bore  the  name  Helie  for  his  maternal  grandfather. 
To  him  Rotrou,  count  of  Perche,  gave  his  only  daughter  in  marriage. 
He  promised  that  he  himself  would  not  remarry,  but  would,  on  his 
death,  transfer  to  Helie  in  all  integrity  her  entire  inheritance.  Regard¬ 
less  of  this  agreement,  however,  and  of  his  lavish  promises,  he  married 
a  sister  of  Count  Patritius,  an  English  lord,  by  whom  he  had  several 
children.  Thus  Helie,  contrary  to  his  expectations,  lost  his  wife’s  in¬ 
heritance. 

Sibylla,  one  of  Fulk’s  daughters,  married  the  noble  and  distinguished 
Thierry,  count  of  Flanders.*^  Of  this  marriage  was  born  Philip,  who 

®  Matilda  was  the  daughter  of  Henry  I,  king  of  England,  whom  William  calls 
^‘Elder’^  to  distinguish  him  from  his  grandson,  Henry  II,  who  ruled  England  in  Wil¬ 
liam’s  time.  She  had  been  sent  to  Germany  before  she  was  ten  to  become  the  wife  of 
Henry  V.  Her  English  companions  were  dismissed,  and  she  was  brought  up  in  the 
strict  etiquette  of  the  imperial  court.  Her  marriage  took  place  when  she  was  twelve. 
She  was  a  widow  at  twenty-three.  She  was  much  beloved  in  Germany,  but  her  father 
wanted  her  to  become  his  heir  in  England.  Her  ways  were  doubtless  strange  there, 
and  she  was  always  referred  to  as  *‘the  empress”  even  after  her  marriage  to  Geoffrey 
of  Anjou,  ten  years  her  junior  and  scarcely  seventeen  at  the  time  of  the  marriage. 
Even  her  son,  Henry  II,  was  called  Henry  Fitz-empress  (son  of  the  empress). 

^  Sibylla  had  originally  been  married  to  William  Clito,  the  natural  son  of  Robert  of 
Normandy,  older  brother  of  Henry  I.  The  latter  took  the  initiative  in  having  this 
marriage  annulled  on  the  grounds  of  consanguinity.  Fulk  was  very  angry  when  the 


50  FULK  OF  ANJOU  AS  KING 

today  holds  the  county  of  Flanders.  The  second  daughter,  Matilda, 
had  been  betrothed  to  Henry,  son  of  the  king  of  England.  Before  the 
marriage  took  place,  however,  her  betrothed,  while  sailing  to  England, 
suffered  shipwreck  and  was  drowned.  Matilda  vowed  perpetual  celi¬ 
bacy,  and  in  the  abbey  of  Fontevrault  she  led  a  holy  life  until  her 
death.® 


2.  HoWy  before  he  was  summoned  by  King  BaldwtUy  Fulk  had 
visited  Jerusalem  on  a  pilgrimage ;  and  how  he  was  raised  to 
the  throne. 

After  the  death  of  his  wife  and  before  he  was  summoned  by  the  king, 
Fulk  went  to  Jerusalem  for  the  sake  of  prayer.  There  he  devoted  him¬ 
self  nobly  to  the  service  of  the  Lord  and  gained,  as  he  well  deserved, 
the  favor  of  all  the  people  as  well  as  that  of  the  king.  He  lived  on  terms 
of  intimate  friendship  with  all  the  barons.  For  the  space  of  a  year,  he 
maintained  in  the  kingdom,  at  his  own  expense,  an  hundred  knights.^ 
At  length  he  returned  in  safety  to  his  own  land,  where  he  arranged 
marriages  for  his  sons  and  daughters  and  put  the  affairs  of  his  domain 
in  splendid  condition.  Some  years  after  his  return,  while  he  was  admin¬ 
istering  his  affairs  with  wisdom  and  energy,  an  embassy  arrived  from 
the  king  of  Jerusalem. 

Baldwin  was  anxious  to  arrange  a  marriage  for  his  eldest  daughter 
so  that  he  might  provide  for  the  succession.  Accordingly,  after  long 
deliberation,  by  the  unanimous  advice  of  the  nobles  and  with  the  ap¬ 
proval  of  the  people  also,  he  had  sent  some  of  his  chief  men,,  namely. 


pope  acceded  to  Henry’s  request,  burned  the  papal  edict,  and  defied  the  pope.  Excom¬ 
munication  for  himself  and  an  interdict  on  Anjou,  however,  finally  brought  him  to 
terms  in  1125.  Sibylla  was  to  figure  in  the  affairs  of  the  Holy  Land. 

®  The  son  of  Henry  I  was  named  William.  He  was  drowned  in  the  famous  tragedy 
of  the  White  Ship,  November  25,  1120,  in  which  so  many  young  nobles  lost  their  lives. 
Fulk’s  daughter,  Matilda,  was  thought  by  some  to  have  drowned  with  him.  The  con¬ 
vent  of  Fontevrault  was  a  famous  refuge  for  many  a  titled  woman,  and  Henry  II 
is  known  to  have  donated  generously  to  its  maintenance. 

®  This  first  journey,  according  to  Ordericus  Vitalis,  The  Ecclesiastical  History  of 
England  and  Normandy ^  was  undertaken  after  Fulk  had  made  peace  with  Henry  I 
and  arranged  the  marriage  of  William  and  Matilda.  He  is  thought  to  have  left  Anjou 
in  the  spring  of  1120  and  to  have  returned  in  the  fall  of  U2i.  While  in  the  East  he 
associated  himself  with  the  Templars  and  on  his  return  arranged  to  give  them  an 
annual  revenue  of  thirty  livres  of  Anjou  (see  Ordericus  Vitalis  Xii.  29).  Mile  Char- 
trou  says  that  he  left  shortly  after  April  25,  1120,  and  was  back  before  January  29, 
1122.  She  refers  to  his  grant  of  ‘‘thirty  livres”  to  the  Templars  (Chartrou,  UAnjou, 
pp.  i4“-i5)* 


FULK  OF  ANJOU  AS  KING  51 

William  de  Bury  and  Guy  de  Brisebar,  to  invite  Fulk  to  espouse  his 
daughter  and  become  the  heir  to  the  throne. 

The  count  accordingly  arranged  his  own  affairs  and  set  the  county 
in  order.  He  then  blessed  his  children  and,  in  response  to  the  call  of 
the  king,  set  forth  on  the  journey,  attended  by  a  splendid  retinue  of 
his  nobles,^®  Within  a  few  days  after  his  arrival  in  the  kingdom,  the 
king  gave  him  his  oldest  daughter  to  wife,  as  had  been  provided  in  the 
agreement,  and  conferred  upon  him  as  her  dowry  the  two  coast  cities. 
Tyre  and  Acre.  These  Fulk  held  for  nearly  three  years  and  continued 
to  be  called  count  as  before.  Then,  on  August  21,  in  the  year  1131  of 
the  Incarnation  of  our  Lord,  the  king  died.  On  September  14,  the 
day  of  the  exaltation  of  the  Holy  Cross,  Count  Fulk  and  his  wife 
Melisend  were  solemnly  crowned  and  consecrated,  according  to  cus¬ 
tom,  in  the  church  of  the  Sepulchre  of  the  Lord,  by  William,  patriarch 
of  Jerusalem,  of  happy  memory. 

3.  J oscelin  the  Elder y  count  of  EdessUy  though  sick  and  lying 
on  a  littery  meets  the  enemy  and  futs  them  to  flight.  He  then 
dies.  Also  concerning  his  son,  J  oscelin. 

At  this  time,  Joscelin,  count  of  Edessa,  exhausted  by  a  long  illness, 
was  lying  on  his  bed  awaiting  the  day  of  his  death,  which  was  imminent. 
In  the  year  that  had  just  passed,  while  he  was  in  the  country  near 
Aleppo,  a  tower  built  of  sundried  bricks  had  fallen  upon  him.  To  facili¬ 
tate  the  capture  of  the  place  with  some  of  the  enemy  who  were  shut 
up  within  it,  he  had  ordered  it  to  be  undermined.  But,  since  he  did  not 

The  date  of  Folk’s  final  departure  for  the  Holy  Land  revolves  around  the  date 
of  his  son  Geoffrey’s  marriag^e  with  Matilda,  ‘‘the  empress.”  This  marriage  was 
mutually  vital  to  the  peaceful  relations  of  Anjou  with  its  formidable  neighbor, 
Henry  I  of  England.  Fulk  remained  to  see  that  marriage  concluded  and  left  shortly 
after  it  occurred.  Historians  of  Western  Europe — Stubbs,  Ramsay,  G.  B.  Adams,  and 
even  Luchaire — ^have  been  inclined  to  date  that  marriage  in  1129,  whereas  historians 
of  the  crusades  have  as  a  rule  preferred  1128,  perhaps  to  permit  Folk’s  marriage  to 
Melisend  at  Jerusalem  in  1129.  Miss  Norgate,  however,  reached  the  conclusion  that 
the  marriage  of  Geoffrey  and  Matilda  took  place  in  1128  (Kate  Norgate,  England 
under  the  Angemns^  p.  258).  Mile  Chartrou,  scrutinizing  local  records,  fully  sup¬ 
ports  Miss  Norgate,  dating  the  betrothal  of  the  pair  at  Rouen  May  22,  1127,  the 
knighting  of  Geoffrey  by  Henry  I  June  10,  1128,  and  the  marriage  June  17,  1128 
(Chartrou,  UAnjoUy  pp.  20—23).  Fulk  formally  took  the  cross  at  Le  Mans  on  May  31, 
1128.  He  remained  in  the  West  for  some  months  after  the  marriage,  engaged  in  the 
settlement  of  his  affairs,  and,  after  a  final  visit  to  his  daughter  at  Fontevrault  at  the 
beginning  of  1129,  he  started  for  the  East  (Chartrou,  UAnjoUy  pp.  226—27).  This 
accords  with  William’s  account  and  definitely  dates  the  marriage  of  Fulk  and  Melisend 
as  in  1129. 


52  FULK  OF  ANJOU  AS  KING 

exercise  due  caution,  he  was  himself  caught  in  its  sudden  fall  and  al¬ 
most  buried  alive.  His  people  rescued  him  with  much  difficulty,  and 
he  was  found  to  be  suffering  from  many  fractures.  For  a  long  time  he 
had  been  ill  from  his  injuries,  but  as  yet  had  succeeded  in  detaining  his 
spirit,  which  was  struggling  to  depart.  One  day  a  messenger  arrived 
in  haste.  He  brought  the  news  that  the  sultan  of  Iconium  had  laid 
siege  to  Cresson,  one  of  Joscelin’s  fortresses.^^  At  this,  the  high-spirited 
man,  feeble  and  weak  of  body  but  still  strong  of  heart,  at  once  ordered 
his  son  to  be  called.  He  bade  him  take  all  the  forces  of  the  country  and 
go  forth  to  meet  the  enemy  valiantly  in  the  place  of  his  helpless 
father.  The  son,  however,  began  to  make  excuses.  He  urged,  as  an 
objection,  that  the  above-named  sultan  was  reported  to  be  advancing 
at  the  head  of  a  great  host,  in  comparison  with  which  his  own  soldiers 
were  but  few.  The  father  reflected  with  bitterness  on  his  son’s  pusil¬ 
lanimity,  well  understanding  from  his  reply  what  manner  of  man  he 
would  be  in  the  future.  Then  he  himself  ordered  the  army  and  all  the 
people  of  the  locality  to  be  called  out.  When  this  had  been  done,  he 
directed  that  a  litter  be  made  ready  for  himself.  Regardless  of  his 
suffering  and  weakness,  he  placed  himself  upon  ijt  and  advanced  against 
the  foe.  He  had  accompanied  the  army  in  this  manner  for  some  distance 
when  one  of  the  great  barons  of  the  land,  Geoffrey,  surnamed  the 
Monk,  came  to  him  with  the  information  that  the  sultan,  on  hearing 
of  his  advance,  had  abandoned  the  siege  of  Cresson  and  beat  a  hasty 
retreat. 

On  learning  this,  the  count  ordered  the  litter  on  which  he  was 
being  carried  to  be  placed  on  the  ground.  He  then  raised  his  hands 
toward  heaven  and,  with  tears  and  sighs,  gave  fervent  thanks  to  God 
that  in  his  last  days  the  Lord,  in  His  gracious  mercy,  had  visited  him 
with  such  favor  j  that  he,  though  half  dead  and  on  the  very  verge  of 
the  grave,  was  still  formidable  to  the  enemies  of  the  Christian  faith. 
While  in  the  very  act  of  giving  thanks  thus,  he  rendered  up  to  heaven 
his  last  breath.  His  son,  who  bore  the  same  name  but  was  far  inferior  to 
his  father  in  glory,  was  left  as  the  sole  heir  to  all  his  property. 

The  mother  of  Joscelin  the  Younger  was  a  sister  of  Leo  the  Ar¬ 
menian,  a  very  influential  man  among  his  own  people.^^  Though  small 

Qilij  Arslan  was  forced  to  seek  another  capital  after  the  crusaders  took  Nicaea 
in  1097.  Iconium  was  finally  selected  and  his  successors  were  usually  referred  to  as 
sultans  of  Iconium  or  Rum. 

^2  This  was  Leo,  brother  of  Constantine,  whose  daughter  Arda  had  married  Bald- 


FULK  OF  ANJOU  AS  KING  53 

of  stature,  Joscelin  was  stout  of  limb  and  very  robust.  His  skin  and 
hair  were  dark,  his  face  broad  and  covered  with  scars  from  the  disease 
called  smallpox.  He  had  bulging  eyes  and  a  prominent  nose.  Although 
of  a  generous  disposition  and  distinguished  for  military  prowess,  he 
was  yet  given  to  excessive  revelry  and  drunkenness.  He  was  devoted  to 
licentiousness  and  uncleanness  of  the  flesh  to  the  point  of  infamous 
notoriety.  He  married  Beatrice,  the  widow  of  William  de  Saone,  a 
woman  of  noble  rank  but  of  still  more  noble  character.  By  her  he  had 
a  son,  Joscelin  the  Third,  and  a  daughter  [Agnes],  who  became  the 
wife,  first  of  Renaud  of  Marash  and  later  of  Amaury,  count  of  Jaffa, 
afterwards  king  of  Jerusalem.  Of  this  latter  union  was  born  Baldwin, 
the  sixth  king  of  Jerusalem,  and  Sibylla,  his  sister.  But,  through  his 
lack  of  energy  and  in  punishment  for  his  sins,  this  Joscelin  lost  the 
entire  land  over  which  his  father  had  ruled  so  ably,  as  will  be  explained 
later. 

4.  The  feofle  of  Antioch  affeal  to  the  king',  the  wickedness  of 
the  'princess  is  revealed, 

r 

During  the  first  year  of  Fulk’s  reign,  both  the  city  and  the  entire  land 
of  Antioch  were  without  the  support  of  a  prince,  for  Bohemond  the 
Younger  had  died  before  King  Baldwin,  leaving  as  his  heir  an  only 
daughter.  The  great  men  of  the  country,  fearing  that  the  province 
through  lack  of  a  protector  might  be  exposed  to  the  wiles  of  the  enemy, 
appealed  to  the  king.  They  begged  him  to  assume  the  responsibility  of 
Antioch  and  to  take  everything  under  his  own  care.  The  widow  of  the 
late  prince,  a  daughter  of  King  Baldwin  and  sister  of  Queen  Melisend, 
was  an  extremely  malicious  and  wily  woman.  With  the  help  of  certain 
accomplices  in  her  designs,  she  was  intriguing  to  wrong  the  principal¬ 
ity.  Her  plan  was  to  disinherit  the  daughter  whom  she  had  borne  to 
her  husband  and  thus  secure  for  herself  the  entire  kingdom.  Then, 
after  obtaining  possession  of  the  principality,  she  intended  to  marry 
again  according  to  her  own  pleasure.  But  immediately  after  the  death 
of  her  husband,  King  Baldwin,  who  was  then  living,  had  frustrated 
these  plans.  He  ordered  her  to  be  expelled  by  force  from  Antioch  and 
admonished  her  to  be  content  with  the  portion  which  her  husband  had 

win  I.  He  succeeded  his  brother  as  ruler  of  the  Armenians  in  1123  and  ruled  until 
”35- 

Joscelin  II  (see  Book  XVI,  chaps.  5,  16,  and  Book  XVII,  chap.  ii). 


54  FULK  OF  ANJOtJ  AS  KING 

given  her  as  dowry  at  the  time  of  her  marriage,  namely,  the  two  cities 
on  the  coast,  Jabala  and  Laodicea. 

On  the  death  of  her  father,  Alice  thought  that  a  favorable  time  to 
carry  out  her  original  plan  had  come.  By  lavish  gifts  and  promises  she 
had  secured  certain  powerful  nobles  as  accomplices  in  her  plot:  namely, 
William  de  Sehunna,  brother  of  Guarenton^  Pons,  count  of  Tripoli  j 
and  Joscelin  the  Younger,  count  of  Edessa.^^  This  was  the  very  thing 
which  the  nobles  of  the  land  had  dreaded,  and  therefore  they  were 
striving  with  all  their  power  to  counteract  her  wicked  intentions.  Hence, 
as  was  mentioned  above,  they  appealed  to  the  king,  that  they  might 
have  his  assistance  and  guidance  in  this  matter. 

5.  The  count  of  Trifoli  tries  to  offose  the  king  as  he  is  hasten-- 
ing  to  Antioch  but  is  worsted.  The  affairs  of  Antioch  are  fut 
in  good  condition. 

The  king  listened  with  much  concern  to  the  statement  of  the  deputa¬ 
tion  from  Antioch  in  regard  to  the  disturbance  there.  The  situation 
seemed  to  him  very  serious.  Accordingly,  he  at  once  responded  to  the 
call  and  proceeded  on  his  way  as  far  as  Beirut.  As  the  count  of  Tripoli 
refused  to  allow  him  to  pass  through  his  land,  the  king  took  with  him 
Anselm  de  Brie,  one  of  his  own  loyal  noblemen,  and  went  by  sea  to 
the  Port  of  St,  Simeon.  There  he  was  met  by  some  of  the  noble  and 
influential  men  of  Antioch,  who  led  him  into  the  city  and  placed  the 
whole  country  under  his  command. 

The  count  of  Tripoli  hastened  after  him  to  Antioch,  that  he  might 
oppose  whatever  he  did 3  for,  although  his  wife  was  the  king’s  sister  as 
has  often  been  mentioned,  rumor  said  that  Pons  had  been  bribed  by 
the  princess  to  assist  her.  He  possessed  in  that  vicinity  two  fortressses, 
Arcicanum  and  Rugia.  These  he  held  in  right  of  his  wife  [Cecilia], 
widow  of  Tancred  of  pious  memory,  who  on  his  deathbed  had  given 
them  to  her  as  her  dowry.  These  Pons  now  fortified  with  arms  and 
soldiers  and  used  as  bases  from  which  to  molest  the  king  and  his  men. 
This  roused  great  indignation  among  the  people  of  Antioch,  and  they 
urged  the  king  to  march  against  the  count  to  check  his  insolent  aggres- 

The  wiles  of  a  foolish  and  power-loving  Alice  are  insufficient  to  explain  the  sup¬ 
port  of  Pons  and  Joscelin  II.  Baldwin  II  as  regent  of  Antioch  and  personal  overlord 
of  Joscelin  I  had  indicated  the  possibility  of  a  Latin  empire  under  the  king  of  Jeru¬ 
salem.  Pons  had  resisted  that.  Now,  when  conditions  again  presented  a  similar  oppor¬ 
tunity  to  Fulk,  both  Pons  and  Joscelin  II  resisted. 


FULK  OF  ANJOU  AS  KING  55 

sion.  Mindful  of  the  affront  offered  him  on  his  journey  when  Pons 
refused  to  allow  him  to  pass  through  the  land  of  Tripoli,  the  king 
agreed  to  their  request.  He  mustered  as  large  a  force  as  possible  and 
proceeded  toward  his  adversary.  The  forces  met  near  Rugia.  Both 
sides  were  drawn  up  in  battle  array,  and  a  fierce  combat  ensued.^^  For  a 
long  time  the  result  was  doubtful.  Finally,  however,  the  king  gained 
the  advantage  and  put  the  count  and  his  men  to  flight.  Many  of  the 
latter’s  soldiers,  exhausted  by  the  fight,  were  captured  and  led  in  chains 
to  Antioch.  Eventually,  however,  through  the  earnest  efforts  of  loyal 
advocates  of  peace,  the  king  and  the  count  were  reconciled.  The  cap¬ 
tured  knights  were  restored  to  the  count,  and  the  affairs  of  the  land  of 
Antioch  seemed  to  have  been  put  into  better  condition.  Nevertheless, 
the  wiser  men  of  the  province  feared  that  after  the  king  returned  to  his 
own  land  the  country  might  be  shaken  by  internal  sedition,  which 
would  afford  the  infidels  a  better  chance  to  attack  it.  They  therefore 
earnestly  implored  him  to  remain  longer  among  them.  To  this  the 
king  graciously  consented,  for  he  felt  that  through  the  mercy  of  God 
his  own  realm  was  rejoicing  in  a  state  of  perfect  security,  while  Antioch, 
where  he  was  now  sojourning,  was  in  great  need  of  a  protector. 

Accordingly,  with  the  advice  and  assent  of  the  chief  nobles,  he  set 
in  order  by  his  judicious  management  the  affairs  both  of  the  city  and  of 
the  adjacent  lands.  In  order  to  bring  everything  into  the  best  possible 
condition,  he  expended  upon  this  task  as  much  care  as  he  gave  to  his 
own  affairs,  or  rather  far  more.  This  course  of  action  won  for  him  the 
ever-increasing  gratitude  of  all  the  citizens  and  also  of  the  loyal  party 
among  the  nobles.  He  remained  at  Antioch  as  long  as  the  situation 
seemed  to  demand.  Then,  having  placed  all  the  affairs  of  that  land  in 
safe  condition  and  arranged  everything  in  good  order,  he  returned  to 
the  kingdom,  where  his  own  responsibilities  called  him.  The  princi¬ 
pality  was  left  in  charge  of  a  capable  man  of  high  birth,  Renaud 
Masoier.^® 

These  events  must  be  dated  in  the  summer  of  1132.  William  offers  very  few  dates 
for  the  events  of  the  next  two  books.  He  has  no  contemporary  written  guides,  and  his 
own  distractions  with  current  affairs  prevented  him  from  pursuing  systematic  investi¬ 
gation.  He  was  therefore  more  or  less  dependent  upon  oral  tradition  for  the  events 
of  Fulk^s  reign. 

Now  constable  of  Antioch.  He  had  been  prominent  in  the  campaign  of  1 1 19. 


56 


FULK  OF  ANJOU  AS  KING 


6.  The  king  is  again  summoned  hy  the  feofle  oj  Antioch,  Zangi 
lays  siege  to  a  fortress  in  the  land  of  Trifoli,  At  the  earnest 
request  of  his  sister y  the  king  relieves  the  flace. 

An  interval  passed  during  which  King  Fulk  was  actively  engaged  in  the 
affairs  of  the  kingdom  committed  to  him  by  God  and,  like  Martha,  was 
constantly  occupied  in  carefully  ministering  to  its  needs.  Then  came  a 
messenger  from  Antioch  with  the  news  that  a  vast  host  of  Turks  from 
the  Persian  gulf  and  the  entire  Orient  had  crossed  the  great  river 
Euphrates  and  invaded  the  land  of  Antioch  in  large  numbers.  This 
news  caused  the  king  to  fear  greatly  for  the  principality  which  had  been 
given  into  his  care.  He  was  anxious  about  the  safety  of  those  dwelling 
there,  especially  because  they  had  placed  all  their  hope  in  him.  He  was 
also  worried  because  he  remembered  the  common  saying,  ^^When  your 
neighbor’s  house  is  burning,  your  own  property  is  in  danger  too,” 
and  he  knew  that  the  downfall  of  his  neighbors  would  be  fraught  with 
danger  to  himself.  Realizing  that  it  was  a  noble  work  to  minister  to 
brethren  in  need,  he  summoned  forces,  both  foot  and  horse,  from  all 
over  the  realm  and  prepared  to  march  thither  in  haste.  He  had  reached 
Sidon  with  his  army  when  he  was  met  by  his  sister,  the  Countess  Ce¬ 
cilia,  the  wife  of  Count  Pons  of  Tripoli.  She  brought  the  deplorable 
news  that  Zangi,  prince  of  Aleppo,  a  powerful  Turkish  satrap,  was 
vigorously  besieging  her  husband  in  one  of  his  castles,  called  Montfer- 
rand.^^  Most  urgently  and  persistently,  as  women  will,  she  begged 
and  besought  the  king  to  lay  aside  everything  for  the  present  which  did 
not  imperatively  demand  his  attention  and  to  hasten  at  once  to  re¬ 
lieve  the  desperate  situation  of  her  husband.  The  king,  moved  by  her 
plea,  put  off  temporarily  the  matter  upon  which  he  had  set  forth  and 
directed  his  march  toward  the  castle.  With  him  went  certain  knights 
of  the  county  who  had  not  accompanied  the  count  on  his  expedition. 
As  soon  as  Zangi  learned  that  the  king  was  on  his  way  to  relieve  Pons, 
however,  he  took  counsel  with  his  people  and  voluntarily  abandoned 
the  siege.  He  then  returned  with  his  legions  to  his  own  land. 

Horace  Ef.  xviii.  84. 

Zangi  made  his  first  attack  on  Montferrand  (Barin)  in  1133.  The  capture  of 
Banyas  by  the  Damascenes,  which  took  place  before  this,  is  not  mentioned  by  William 
until  Chapter  17. 


FULK  OF  ANJOU  AS  KING 


57 


7.  The  king  hastens  to  Antioch,  He  futs  to  flight  the  infidels 
who  had  assembled  there.  The  citixens  are  enriched  by  the 
sfoils  taken  from  the  foe. 

Thus  the  count  was  freed.  The  king,  relieved  from  that  anxiety,  now 
returned  to  his  original  purpose  and  proceeded  by  forced  marches  to 
Antioch,  as  he  had  at  first  intended.  The  people  heard  that  he  was  on 
the  way  and  went  out  to  meet  him.  With  the  utmost  joy  they  wel¬ 
comed  their  royal  guest,  for  they  hoped  that  through  his  energetic 
efforts  they  might  be  enabled  to  withstand  safely  the  violence  of  the 
foe,  now  said  to  be  close  at  hand.  For  numbers,  however  large,  are  of 
little  avail  without  a  leader,  and  numerous  cohorts  without  a  com¬ 
mander,  like  sand  without  lime,  will  hardly  hold  together. 

Meanwhile,  frequent  rumors  and  reports  all  pointed  definitely  to 
the  fact  that  the  infidels  had  crossed  the  Euphrates  with  a  strong, 
well-equipped  army.  They  had  associated  with  their  own  forces  others 
whom  they  had  encountered  on  this  side  of  the  river,  men  who  were 
well  acquainted  with  the  locality.  They  were  now  encamped  near 
Aleppo,  whence  they  were  making  sudden  raids  and  laying  waste  the 
entire  country.  Furthermore,  troops  from  all  the  neighboring  territory 
had  been  concentrated  at  a  place  called  Canestrivum.^^  From  there,  by 
the  advice  of  those  who  knew  the  country,  they  proposed  to  make  sud¬ 
den  forays  with  all  their  multitude  upon  the  land. 

The  king  therefore  levied  the  full  strength  of  the  principality  and, 
with  the  knights  who  had  come  with  him,  left  Antioch  and  encamped 
near  the  fortress  of  Harim.  Here  he  waited  for  a  few  days,  like  a 
prudent  man  (for  ^impetuosity  often  ruins  everything’’),  on  the 
chance  that  the  infidels,  whose  forces  were  said  to  exceed  his  own, 
might  challenge  him  to  fight  or  in  some  way  disclose  their  intended 
plan  of  action.  They  did  nothing  of  the  kind,  however,  but  quietly 
remained  safe  in  their  camp,  perhaps  waiting  for  larger  reinforcements. 
Accordingly,  Fulk  made  a  sudden  attack  upon  them.  They  were  taken 
by  surprise,  and  before  they  could  seize  their  weapons  he  had  fallen 
upon  them  with  sword  and  lance.  A  few,  thanks  to  their  horses,  suc- 

This  is  Qinnesrin  (ancient  Chalcis).  Stevenson  dates  the  battle  January,  1133 
(W.  B.  Stevenson,  The  Crusaders  in  the  Easty  p.  132),  while  Qalanisi  dates  it  a  year 
later  (see  H.  A.  R.  Gibb,  trans.,  The  Damascus  Chronicley  pp.  2  20“23). 


58  FULK  OF  ANJOU  AS  KING 

ceeded  in  escaping  j  the  rest  were  slain.  About  three  thousand  of  the 
enemy  perished  in  that  affair.  The  camp,  filled  with  all  kinds  of  com¬ 
modities  and  furnishings,  was  abandoned. 

Our  victorious  troops  returned  to  Antioch  in  exultation.  They  were 
laden  with  marvellous  spoils,  even  to  the  point  of  satiety,  so  that  they 
desired  no  more.  With  them  they  brought  a  great  variety  of  booty — 
slaves,  horses,  herds,  flocks,  and  tents,  in  fact,  riches  of  all  kinds. 

From  this  time,  the  king  enjoyed  full  favor  with  the  people  of 
Antioch,  lords  and  common  people  alike.  The  princess  hated  him  and 
resented  his  presence  at  Antioch,  and,  up  to  this  time,  some  of  the 
nobles  who  favored  her  cause  by  reason  of  the  lavish  gifts  which  she 
distributed  had  been  opposed  to  him.  Now,  however,  the  hearts  of  all 
were  completely  won  over  to  him. 

8.  The  fatrmrch  of  Jerusalem  and  the  nobles  of  the  realm  build 
a  greatly  needed  fortress  and  call  it  Castle  Arnold. 

Thus  the  king  was  detained  in  the  land  of  Antioch,  for,  until  a  prince 
should  be  chosen  there  by  common  agreement,  he  had  again  under¬ 
taken  the  administration  of  that  country,  as  if  it  were  his  own.  Mean¬ 
while  the  Christians  left  in  the  kingdom,  namely,  the  patriarch  and  the 
citizens  of  Jerusalem,  putting  their  trust  in  the  Lord,  assembled  in  full 
strength  at  a  place  near  the  ancient  Nobe,  which  today  is  generally 
called  Bettenuble  [Bait  Nuba].^®  There,  on  the  slope  of  the  hill  at  the 
entrance  to  the  plain,  on  the  road  leading  to  Lydda  and  from  there  to 
the  sea,  they  built  a  fortress  of  solid  masonry  to  ensure  the  safety  of 
pilgrims  passing  along  that  route.  In  the  narrow  mountain  pass,  among 
defiles  impossible  to  avoid,  pilgrims  were  exposed  to  great  danger. 
Here  the  people  of  Ascalon  were  accustomed  to  fall  upon  them  sud¬ 
denly.  The  work,  when  successfully  accomplished,  was  called  Castle 
Arnold.  Thus,  by  the  grace  of  God  and  also  because  of  this  fortress, 
the  road  became  much  safer  and  the  journey  of  pilgrims  to  or  from 
Jerusalem  was  rendered  less  perilous. 

Castle  Arnold  was  about  five  miles  north  and  slightly  west  of  Bait  Nuba  on  the 
road  to  Jaffa. 


FULK  OF  ANJOU  AS  KING 


59 


9.  By  the  advice  oj  the  ktngy  Raymondy  son  of  the  count  of 
PoitoUy  is  invited  to  marry  Constance y  the  daughter  of  Bohc'- 
mond. 

The  fact  that  the  king  had  obtained  such  a  signal  victory  and  was  suc¬ 
cessfully  managing  the  affairs  of  Antioch  according  to  his  own  good 
pleasure  gained  for  him  a  distinguished  reputation.  It  seemed  plain 
that  he  had  been  appointed  by  divine  providence  to  administer  the 
government  of  the  two  kingdoms  and  to  ensure  peace  and  safety  for  the 

Accordingly,  the  nobles  of  Antioch  and  particularly  those  who  ar¬ 
dently  desired  to  observe  loyalty  to  the  late  Lord  Bohemond  and  to  his 
daughter,  who  was  still  a  minor,  came  to  consult  him  confidentially. 
Since  he  had  a  wide  acquaintance  with  illustrious  young  nobles  in  the 
lands  beyond  the  mountains,  in  the  course  of  a  friendly  conversation 
they  begged  him  to  suggest  the  name  of  that  one  who,  among  so  many 
princes,  would  be  best  fitted  to  wed  the  daughter  of  their  lord,  the 
heiress  of  her  father’s  estate.  The  king  listened  graciously  to  their 
request  i  he  commended  their  loyal  solicitude  and  began  to  consider  the 
matter  with  them.  After  many  names  had  been  discussed,  it  was  finally 
decided  by  general  consent  to  invite  for  this  purpose  Raymond,  son  of 
Count  William  of  Poitou,  a  noble  youth  of  distinguished  ability.-^  He 
was  said  to  be  at  the  court  of  Henry  the  Elder,  king  of  the  English, 
from  whom  he  had  received  the  arms  of  a  knight.  Meanwhile,  Wil¬ 
liam,  his  elder  brother,  was  governing  Aquitaine  by  hereditary  right. 
After  weighing  all  aspects  of  the  matter,  they  decided  that  the  wisest 
course  would  be  to  send  a  secret  embassy.  Gerald,  surnamed  Jeberrus, 
a  brother  of  the  Hospital,  was  accordingly  sent  on  this  mission  with 
letters  from  the  patriarch  and  all  the  nobles. 

It  was  feared  that  if  Raymond  were  summoned  with  ceremony  by 
envoys  of  higher  degree,  the  princess,  a  woman  full  of  malicious  wiles, 
might  interpose  obstacles.  It  would  be  easy  to  hinder  anyone  from 
coming.  For  Roger,  who  was  then  duke  of  Apulia  and  who  later  became 
king,  desired  to  succeed  Bohemond,  his  kinsman,  and  was  claiming 

Raymond  was  the  son  of  William  IX,  duke  of  Aquitaine,  who  had  led  the  crusade 
of  1 1 01  and  who  also  had  held  Fulk  a  captive  in  1106.  Apparently  the  captivity  had 
not  been  unpleasant. 

This  is  an  early  instance  of  the  use  of  members  of  the  military  orders  in  diplomatic 
missions.  The  practice  was  to  become  quite  common. 


6o 


FULK  OF  ANJOU  AS  KING 

Antioch  with  all  its  possessions  as  belonging  to  him  by  hereditary  right. 
Robert  Guiscard,  father  of  the  elder  Bohemond,  and  Roger,  count  of 
Sicily,  surnamed  Bursa,  father  of  this  King  Roger,  were  own  brothers, 
born  of  the  same  father  and  mother.  The  younger  Bohemond,  how¬ 
ever,  son  of  the  elder,  was  the  father  of  the  maiden  whom  the  young 
Raymond  was  to  be  invited  to  marry. It  was  necessary  to  use  caution, 
therefore,  in  presenting  the  invitation,  for  if  his  rivals  learned  of  the 
affair,  violence  or  intrigue  might  be  used  to  prevent  his  coming.  When 
the  matter  had  been  arranged  in  this  manner,  the  king  went  back  to 
Jerusalem,  followed  by  the  good  will  of  all. 

10.  Bernardy  fatriarch  of  Antiochy  dies,  Ralfhy  archbishof  of 
Marmstray  succeeds  him  amid  much  disturbance. 

About  this  time,  Bernard,  the  first  Latin  patriarch  of  Antioch,  an  aged 
man  of  precious  memory,  sincere  and  God-fearing,  went  the  way  of 
all  flesh,  in  the  thirty-sixth  year  of  his  pontificate.^^  After  his  death  all 
the  suffragans  of  that  extensive  see,  bishops  as  well  as  archbishops, 
assembled  according  to  custom,  to  provide  suitably  for  the  consolation 
of  the  church,  thus  bereaved  of  its  pastor.  While  they  were  giving  care¬ 
ful  consideration  to  this  important  matter,  as  is  the  custom  in  such 
cases,  one  Ralph,  archbishop  of  Mamistra,  from  Castle  Domfront,  on 
the  confines  of  the  dioceses  of  Normandy  and  Maine,  was  elected.  He 
was  a  military  man,  very  magnificent  and  generous,  a  great  favorite 
both  with  the  people  and  with  those  of  knightly  rank.  He  was  chosen, 
it  is  said,  by  the  vote  of  the  people  alone,  without  the  knowledge  of  his 
brethren  and  fellow  bishops,  and  was  placed  on  the  throne  in  the  cathe¬ 
dral  of  the  Prince  of  the  Apostles. 

When  this  became  known,  those  who  had  assembled  for  the  purpose 
of  placing  a  patriarch  over  themselves,  by  the  will  of  God,  at  once 
dispersed.  They  feared  the  attack  of  the  shouting,  frenzied  mob,  but 
they  refused  to  show  obedience  to  one  whom  they  themselves  had  not 
chosen.  Notwithstanding  this,  Ralph  took  possession  of  the  church  and 
palace  and  at  once  assumed  the  pallium  from  the  altar  of  St.  Peter, 

The  Normans  of  Sicily  naturally  felt  a  continuing'  claim  upon  Bohemond’s  princi¬ 
pality  of  Antioch.  Despite  all  the  precautions,  there  is  little  evidence  of  any  real  inter¬ 
ference  in  the  accession  of  Raymond  of  Poitou.  Perhaps  the  fact  that  the  title  was 
conveyed  through  the  daughter  of  Bohemond  II  was  of  some  consolation  to  the  Normans 
of  Sicily. 

The  death  of  Bernard  and  the  election  of  Ralph  occurred  in  1136. 


FULK  OF  ANJOU  AS  KING  6i 

without  regard  for  the  church  at  Rome.  In  the  course  of  time,  he  drew 
into  his  own  communion  some  of  the  suffragans  of  the  church.  We 
have  been  informed  by  many  that,  if  he  had  kept  on  good  terms  with 
the  canons  of  the  church  and  had  not  presumed  in  a  spirit  of  pride  to 
disturb  their  possessions,  he  might  have  passed  his  life  there  in  peace. 
But  as  the  proverb  truly  says,  “It  is  difficult  for  things  which  have  a 
bad  beginning  to  come  to  a  good  end.”  As  punishment  for  his  sins, 
Ralph  became  so  overbearing  because  of  his  great  riches  that  he  es¬ 
teemed  himself  superior  to  all  others  and  carried  himself  rather  as  a 
prince  of  Antioch  than  as  the  successor  of  Peter  or  Ignatius.  Some  of 
the  elders  of  the  church  he  removed  by  force  j  others  he  bound  and 
threw  into  prison  as  if  they  had  been  guilty  of  capital  crimes.  Among 
his  victims  was  a  certain  Arnulf,  a  learned  man  of  noble  birth,  a  native 
of  Calabria  5  and  likewise  Lambert,  an  archdeacon  of  that  same  church, 
a  man  of  wonderful  simplicity  and  noble  life,  moreover  a  learned  man. 
Like  men  of  blood  they  were  thrust  into  the  dungeon  of  a  certain 
fortress  and  lodged  in  a  room  filled  with  lime.  There  they  were  tor¬ 
tured  for  many  days  under  the  pretext  of  having  conspired  for  the 
death  of  Ralph.  By  these  and  similar  acts  of  savage  cruelty  committed 
against  his  subordinates  he  incurred  universal  hatred.  Finally,  con¬ 
stantly  pricked  by  the  stings  of  a  guilty  conscience,  he  felt  that  he 
was  safe  nowhere,  not  even  among  his  followers  and  servants. 

But  enough  of  this  subject  for  the  present 3  in  the  following  chap¬ 
ters,  at  the  fitting  time  and  place,  we  shall  speak  of  his  end.^^ 

1 1.  Pofe  Honorius  dies ;  Innocent  is  elected  in  his  stead,  A  dan¬ 
gerous  schism  arises.  WiLliamy  archbishof  of  Tyre,  dies ;  Ful¬ 
cher  is  fut  in  his  'place.  He  goes  to  Rome  to  ask  for  the  pal¬ 
lium  and  receives  it. 

While  these  events  were  transpiring  in  the  Orient,  Pope  Honorius 
paid  the  debt  ordained  by  fate  and  came  to  the  end  of  his  days.  A 
meeting  was  held  to  select  his  successor,  but  the  wishes  of  the  cardinals 
were  widely  diverse.  Since  they  were  unable  to  agree,  two  candidates 
were  chosen  3  Gregory,  cardinal  deacon  of  St.  Angelo,  who,  after  his 
consecration  was  called  Innocent  3  and  Peter,  surnamed  Leo,  cardinal- 
priest  of  title  St.  Mary  beyond  the  Tiber,  which  is  called  Fundens 
Oleum.  The  latter,  after  his  consecration,  was  called  Anacletus  by 

Book  XV,  chaps.  i6  and  17. 


62 


FULK  OF  ANJOU  AS  KING 

those  who  had  chosen  him.  Out  of  this  division  there  arose  a  very 
dangerous  schism  which  imperilled  the  churches  of  the  city  and  caused 
the  death  of  people  in  civil  strife.  In  fact,  it  shook  practically  the  entire 
world,  and  through  the  partisan  zeal  which  it  roused  kingdoms  were 
brought  into  conflict  with  one  another.^®  After  many  hardships  and 
great  dangers,  Innocent  was  finally  triumphant,  for  Peter,  the  rival 
pope,  passed  away  first. 

About  the  same  time,  William,  our  predecessor,  laid  aside  the  burden 
of  the  flesh  and  departed  to  the  Lord.-^  He  was  the  first  Latin  arch¬ 
bishop  of  Tyre  after  the  liberation  of  the  city  (for  one  Odo,  who  had 
been  ordained  incumbent  of  this  church  while  Tyre  was  still  held  by 
the  enemy,  died  prior  to  the  liberation  of  the  city,  as  has  been  men¬ 
tioned)  ,  and  was  succeeded  by  Fulcher  of  good  memory,  an  Aquitanian 
from  the  county  of  Angouleme.  Fulcher  was  religious  and  God-fearing, 
possessed  of  little  learning,  but  a  faithful  man  and  a  lover  of  discipline. 
He  had  been  abbot  of  the  convent  of  Celles,  presiding  over  his  brethren, 
the  regular  canons.  At  the  time  of  the  schism  mentioned  above,  which 
arose  between  Pope  Innocent  and  Peter,  son  of  Peter  Leo,  the  legate 
of  the  apostolic  see  was  Gerard,  bishop  of  Angouleme.  He  favored 
Peter  and  consequently  visited  many  annoyances  upon  the  partisans  of 
the  other  side.  Fulcher,  a  man  of  revered  life,  could  not  endure  this 
treatment.  He  took  leave  of  his  brethren  and  went  to  Jerusalem  for 
the  sake  of  prayer.  He  professed  the  regular  life  with  constant  at¬ 
tendance  in  the  cloister  of  the  church  of  the  Sepulchre  of  the  Lord 
and  was  finally  called  to  the  church  at  Tyre. 

For  twelve  years,  he  ruled  that  church  vigorously  and  well  and  was 

This  double  election  to  the  office  of  pope  occurred  in  1130.  Innocent  II  was 
chosen  by  a  small  number  of  the  cardinals,  Anacletus  II  by  a  majority.  The  latter  was 
a  member  of  the  wealthy  Pierleone  family  of  Rome  and  was  trained  at  Cluny.  The 
cause  of  Innocent  II  was  espoused  by  Bernard  of  Clairvaux,  leader  of  the  Cistercians. 
Ultimately  Lothair  of  Germany,  Louis  VI  of  France,  and  Henry  I  of  England  were 
all  won  to  support  Innocent  II,  but  Anacletus  continued  to  claim  the  office  and  to  hold 
Rome  most  of  the  time  until  his  death  in  1138.  An  extended  account  of  this  election 
is  given  by  Gregorovius  (see  F.  Gregorovius,  A  History  of  the  City  of  Rome  in  the 
Middle  Ages,  Vol.  IV,  Part  ii,  chap.  3  -passim;  see  also  ‘‘Innocent  II,*’  Catholic  Ency¬ 
clopedia^  . 

Anacletus  II  died  in  1138,  and  though  his  cardinals  chose  a  successor,  they  were 
persuaded  to  end  the  schism  and  recognize  Innocent  II.  Bernard  of  Clairvaux  was 
largely  responsible  for  this  decision.  Innocent  II  ruled  until  1143. 

2®  The  death  of  William  I,  archbishop  of  Tyre,  may  be  dated  1134  or  early  1135  at 
the  latest  by  subtracting  the  twelve  years  of  Fulcher’s  incumbency  from  1146  or  Janu¬ 
ary,  1147,  ’^vhen  the  latter  became  patriarch  of  Jerusalem, 


FULK  OF  ANJOU  AS  KING  63 

the  fourth  incumbent  before  us,  who  now  preside  over  that  same 
churchj  not  as  deserving  it  by  merit  but  solely  by  the  will  and  long- 
suffering  of  the  Lord.  After  he  had  received  the  gift  of  consecration 
from  the  hand  of  William,  the  patriarch  of  Jerusalem,  Fulcher  de¬ 
sired,  after  the  example  of  his  predecessor,  to  visit  the  church  at  Rome 
to  receive  the  pallium.  The  patriarch  and  his  accomplices,  however, 
prevented  him  by  intrigue  and  violence,  so  that  he  had  great  difficulty 
in  escaping  from  their  hands  in  order  to  go  to  the  church  at  Rome, 
for  the  purpose  above  mentioned.  This  is  plainly  shown  from  the  tenor 

of  the  following  letter  of  Pope  Innocent.  He  writes: 

% 

“Innocent,  bishop,  servant  of  the  servants  of  God,  to  his  venerable 
brother,  William,  patriarch  of  Jerusalem,  salutation  and  the  apostolic 
blessing.  Evangelical  authority  has  declared  that  the  headship  of  the 
whole  church  and  of  the  ecclesiastical  institution  was  conferred  upon 
the  blessed  Peter,  prince  of  the  apostles,  by  divine  privilege.” 

And  below: 

“We  are  astonished  that,  after  the  church  at  Rome  has  labored  so 
exceedingly  for  the  liberation  of  the  church  of  the  East,  and,  by  pour¬ 
ing  out  the  blood  of  many  sons,  has  inspired  to  her  service  the  hearts 
of  both  clergy  and  laymen,  you  have  by  no  means  cared  to  give  a 
fitting  response  to  that  mother  church.  For  you  did  not  deem  it  suf¬ 
ficient  that  you  had  dared  to  disturb  our  venerable  brother  Fulcher, 
archbishop  of  Tyre,  when  he  came,  according  to  the  custom  of  his 
predecessors,  to  receive  the  pallium  from  the  church  at  Rome,  but 
in  addition  you  showed  yourself  unkind,  difficult,  and  exceedingly 
harsh  toward  him  on  his  return  from  us.  To  such  an  extent  did  you 
carry  this  treatment  that  you  refused  to  restore  to  him  the  ancient 
dignity  of  the  church  at  Tyrej  and  to  do  him  justice  according  to  our 
mandate,  within  three  months  after  the  receipt  of  our  letter,  for  the 
losses  suffered  by  him,  either  at  Haifa  or  at  Porphyrion.  In  any  case 
it  would  be  unjust  that  the  honor  which  should  be  shown  him  by  the 
church  at  Antioch,  if  in  her  obedience,  should  be  taken  away  by  you 
or  by  your  successors.  Moreover,  you  are  said  to  conduct  yourself  too 
arbitrarily  toward  those  who  are  subject  to  that  church.  Therefore, 
by  our  apostolic  authority,  we  command  that,  as  you  desire  to  be 
cherished  by  the  pious  zeal  and  solace  of  that  same  mother  church. 


64  FULK  OF  ANJOU  AS  KING 

and  as  you  wish  to  be  aided  in  your  necessities  by  her  patronage,  you 
love  and  honor  the  said  archbishop  and  presume  not  to  disturb  him 
in  any  way.  On  the  contrary,  do  not  defer  showing  him  full  justice  in 
all  matters  concerning  which  he  has  made  complaint  against  you,  and 
that  within  forty  days  after  you  receive  this  present  writing.  Further¬ 
more,  do  not  presume  to  do  anything  contrary  to  the  statutes  of  the 
canons  against  those  subject  to  him.  Otherwise  you  may  have  cause 
to  fear  lest  we  withdraw  from  your  obedience  both  him  and  his  suf¬ 
fragans  and  retain  them  in  our  own  hand. 

Given  at  the  Lateran,  December  1 7.” 

12.  The  church  at  Rome  commands  Fulcher  to  be  obedient  to 
the  fatriarch  of  Jerusalemy  and  that  he  hold  the  same  rank  in 
that  church  which  he  formerly  held  over  the  feofle  of  Anti- 
och. 

On  his  return  from  the  church  at  Rome,  Fulcher  received  the  com¬ 
mand  that,  while  the  matter  as  to  which  of  the  two  patriarchs  he  should 
submit  to  in  perpetuity  was  under  consideration,  he  should  be  obedient 
to  the  patriarch  of  Jerusalem,  according  to  the  directions  given  to  his 
predecessor  j  and  he  was  directed  to  hold  in  the  church  at  Jerusalem 
the  same  dignity  which  his  predecessors  had  held  in  the  church  at 
Antioch  as  long  as  they  had  been  subject  to  it. 

It  is  certain  that  among  the  thirteen  archbishops  who,  from  the 
days  of  the  apostles,  had  been  subject  to  the  see  at  Antioch,  the  arch¬ 
bishop  of  Tyre  had  occupied  the  first  place,  so  that  he  was  called  Proto- 
thronus  in  the  Orient.  In  the  list  of  the  suffragan  bishops  who  were 
under  the  jurisdiction  of  the  church  of  Antioch,  one  may  read  as 
follows : 

First  see.  Tyre,  under  which  are  thirteen  bishoprics  j 
Second  see.  Tarsus,  under  which  are  five  bishoprics  j 
Third  see,  Edessa,  under  which  are  ten  bishoprics  j 
Fourth  see,  Apamea,  under  which  are  seven  bishoprics  j 
Fifth  see,  Hierapolis,  under  which  are  eight  bishoprics ; 

Sixth  see,  Bostrum,  under  which  are  nineteen  bishoprics  3 
Seventh  see,  Anavarza,  under  which  are  nine  bishoprics  3 
Eighth  see,  Seleucia,  under  which  are  twenty-four  bishoprics  3 

This  letter,  here  dated  December,  has  been  assigned  to  January  17,  1139  (see 
R.  Rohricht,  Regesta  regni  Hierosolymiianiy  no.  187). 


65 


FULK  OF  ANJOU  AS  KING 

Ninth  see,  Damascus,  under  which  are  ten  bishoprics  5 
Tenth  see,  Amida,  under  which  are  seven  bishoprics  j 
Eleventh  see,  Sergiopolis,  under  which  are  four  bishoprics  j 
Twelfth  see,  Theodosiopolis,  under  which  are  seven  bishoprics  j 
Thirteenth  see,  Hims,  under  which  are  four  bishoprics  3 
Independent  metropolitans,  eight  j 
Archbishops,  twelve,®^ 

From  the  rescript  of  the  letter  of  Pope  Innocent  sent  to  the  same 
William,  patriarch  of  Jerusalem,  it  is  evident  that  the  church  at  Tyre 
held  the  first  place  among  the  suffragans  of  the  church  at  Jerusalem, 
and  that  she  was  obedient  to  it  solely  by  the  command  of  the  pope. 
It  reads  as  follows : 

“Innocent,  bishop,  servant  of  the  servants  of  God,  to  William,  patri¬ 
arch  of  Jerusalem,  salutation  and  the  apostolic  blessing. 

“In  as  much  as  the  gracious  munificence  of  God  has  greatly  exalted 
the  church  at  Jerusalem  in  your  times,  so  much  the  more  ought  you 
to  show  yourself  kindly  toward  your  brethren  and  to  honor  with  mutual 
love  those  who  render  obedience  to  you.  Therefore,  we  direct  you, 
dear  brother,  to  love  and  honor  with  brotherly  kindness  our  venerable 
brother  Fulcher,  archbishop  of  Tyre,  who  by  the  command  of  the 
holy  church  of  Rome,  is  obedient  unto  you.  See  to  it  with  all  care 
that  you  do  not  bring  upon  him  any  trouble,  or  that  under  pretext  of 
this  submission  to  you  and  the  church  of  Jerusalem,  which,  indeed, 
has  been  imposed  upon  him  by  the  favor  of  the  apostolic  see,  the  noble 
and  renowned  church  at  Tyre  suffers  any  detriment  to  its  rights  and 
dignity.  For  it  is  not  fitting  that  the  honor  which  would  be  shown 
to  it  by  the  church  at  Antioch,  if  it  were  obedient  to  her,  should  be 
taken  away  by  you  or  your  successors. 

Given  at  Albano,  July  17.” 

13.  The  fofe  commands  Fulcher^ s  suffragans  to  obey  hlmy  and 
to  this  end  he  disfatches  several  letters. 

On  his  return  from  Rome,  Fulcher  recovered,  although  with  some 
difficulty,  his  suffragan  bishoprics  which  until  that  time  had  been  under 

This  traditional  organization  o£  the  Christian  church  in  the  East  was  established 
by  the  council  of  Chalcedon  in  451. 

Dated  July  17,  1138  (see  R.  Reg.^  no.  176). 


66 


FULK  OF  ANJOU  AS  KING 

the  authority  of  the  patriarch  of  Jerusalem:  namely,  Acre,  Sidon,  and 

the  other  bishoprics  under  jurisdiction  of  that  same  church  as  if  they 
belonged  to  them  by  proprietary  right,  were  retained  by  the  patriarch 
of  Antioch  by  force.  He  gave  as  an  excuse  that  he  was  not  subject  to 
the  archbishop,  although  he  did  not  deny  that  these  bishoprics  were 
under  the  jurisdiction  of  the  latter.  In  order  that  this  might  be  pre¬ 
vented  and  that  these  bishoprics  might  return  to  their  own  mother 
church  at  Tyre,  Pope  Innocent  wrote  to  the  bishops  of  the  above- 
named  churches  and  also  to  the  patriarch  of  Antioch,  as  follows : 

“Innocent,  bishop,  servant  of  the  servants  of  God,  to  his  venerable 
brothers,  Gerard  of  Tripoli,  R.  of  Tortosa,  and  H.  of  Jubail,  bishops, 
salutation  and  the  apostolic  blessing.  You  must  know,  dear  brothers, 
that  the  status  of  the  church  is  rendered  more  illustrious  when  the 
ranks  that  have  been  established  therein  are  kept  intact  and  the  rever¬ 
ence  due  to  each  prelate  is  shown  without  contention  or  contradiction. 
It  is  fitting  that  each  one  who  has  submitted  himself  to  the  church 
should  consider  the  proper  reverence  and  honor  which  is  due  to  his 
superiors,  if  such  there  be;  for  if  this  reverence  is  wrongfully  and  un¬ 
justly  withheld,  the  principle  of  unity  to  which,  for  the  sake  of  promot¬ 
ing  stability,  ecclesiastical  discipline  has  reduced  everything  by  the 
most  careful  organization  of  all  things  within  the  church,  will  at  once 
disappear.  Therefore,  lest  the  honor  and  dignity  of  your  churches  be 
threatened  or  made  void  on  account  of  undue  contention  or  rebellion 
we  command  and  direct  you,  by  this  apostolic  letter,  that  you  show 
the  obedience  which  you  owe  to  our  venerable  brother  Fulcher,  arch¬ 
bishop  of  Tyre,  as  to  your  metropolitan.  For,  in  virtue  of  our  apostolic 
authority,  we  restore  you  and  your  churches  to  the  church  at  Tyre, 
which  is  your  metropolis,  and,  in  like  manner,  we  absolve  you  from 
the  oath  of  fidelity  by  which  you  have  been  bound  to  the  patriarch  of 
Antioch.  But  if  you  neglect  to  obey  our  commands  and  within  three 
months  after  the  receipt  of  this  letter  do  not  return  to  the  obedience 
of  our  brother  named  above,  by  the  authority  of  God  we  shall  hold 
ratified  the  sentence  which  the  archbishop  shall  promulgate  against 
you,  according  to  canonical  laws. 

Given  at  the  Lateran,  January  17.” 


Beirut.  The  others,  that  is,  Jubail 


Tripoli,  and  Tortosa,  which  held 


Dated  January  17,  1139  (see  R.  Reg.y  no.  184). 


FULK  OF  ANJOU  AS  KING  67 

In  order  that  the  patriarch  of  Antioch,  who  had  held  these  bishoprics 
for  a  long  time  and  who  was  very  powerful,  might  not  hinder  them 
from  carrying  out  his  orders,  the  pope  wrote  to  that  patriarch  in  these 
words : 

“Innocent,  bishop,  servant  of  the  servants  of  God  to  his  venerable 
brother  Ralph,  patriarch  of  Antioch,  salutation  and  the  apostolic  bless- 
ing. 

“It  is  written  in  the  institutions  of  the  holy  canons  that  each  one  must 
be  content  with  his  own  territories  and  not  seek  to  usurp  the  rights  of 
others.  Human  and  divine  laws  alike  forbid  us  to  do  unto  our  neighbor 
that  which  we  would  not  wish  done  to  ourselves.  Since  this  is  so,  we 
command  you,  dear  brother,  not  to  hinder  the  suffragans  of  the  church 
at  Tyre  from  showing  the  obedience  and  reverence  due  to  their  metro¬ 
politan,  our  venerable  brother,  the  archbishop  Fulcher.  Furthermore, 
to  withdraw  from  metropolitans  the  obedience  of  their  suffragans  is 
against  canonical  rules.  We  desire,  therefore,  that  between  prelates  and 
their  subordinates  their  own  rights  and  the  established  order  be  main¬ 
tained  without  contradiction. 

Given  at  the  Lateran,  January  17.” 

Not  only  did  the  lord  pope  write  thus  to  these  prelates,  but  he  also 
wrote  in  like  manner  to  those  bishops  who  had  been  retained  by  the 
patriarch  of  Jerusalem  and  who,  through  fear  of  him,  refused  to  obey 
the  apostolic  command.  He  directed  them  to  lay  aside  all  excuses,  and 
to  show  obedience  at  once  to  the  lord  of  Tyre.  These  letters  read  as 
follows : 

“Innocent,  bishop,  servant  of  the  servants  of  God,  to  his  venerable 
brothers,  Baldwin  of  Beirut,  Bernard  of  Sidon,  and  John  of  Acre, 
bishops,  salutation  and  the  apostolic  blessing. 

“The  holy  fathers  desired  that  there  should  be  in  the  church  differ¬ 
ent  ranks  and  orders  that,  as  Inferiors  showed  submission  and  reverence 
to  their  superiors,  unity  might  result  from  this  very  diversity,  and  the 
administration  of  each  office  might  be  carried  on  to  the  best  advantage. 
But  we  are  annoyed  and  greatly  astonished  to  learn  that,  although  long 
since  we  commanded  you  by  apostolic  letters  to  show  obedience  and 
reverence  to  our  venerable  brother  Fulcher,  archbishop  of  Tyre,  your 
metropolitan,  you  have  disdained  to  do  this  and  have  offered  excuses 

Dated  January  17,  1139  (see  R,  Reg.y  no.  185). 


68  FULK  OF  ANJOU  AS  KING 

and  unsatisfactory  explanations.  For,  assuredly,  rebellion  is  as  the  sin 
of  witchcraft,  and  stubbornness,  as  the  crime  of  idolatry.^^ 

^^And  so  we  command  you,  and  in  virtue  of  our  apostolic  authority 
again  we  direct  you,  henceforward  to  cast  aside  all  excuses  and  to  obey 
in  every  respect  our  brother  Fulcher.  We  forbid  you,  under  pretext  of 
the  obedience  which  you  are  rendering  to  another  primate,  to  withhold 
from  him  one  tittle  of  the  submission  and  reverence  which  you  owe  to 
him  as  your  metropolitan.  Furthermore,  if  you  continue  to  be  obsti¬ 
nate,  we  shall  ratify,  by  the  authority  of  the  Lord,  the  sentence  which 
this  same  archbishop  has  pronounced,  or  shall  pronounce,  against  you 
according  to  canonical  laws.  And  if,  because  you  have  obeyed  this,  our 
brother,  the  patriarch  of  Jerusalem,  shall  give  any  judgment  against 
you,  we  decree  that  that  same  sentence  shall  be  without  force,  and  we 
declare  it  to  be  worthless. 

Given  at  the  Lateran,  January  17.” 

14.  The  circumstances  which  gave  rise  to  the  controversy  he- 
tween  the  two  'patriarchs  are  explainedy  and  the  defense  of 
each  is  given. 

The  fact  that,  while  the  archbishop  of  Tyre  held  by  right  fourteen 
suffragan  bishops,  the  pope  wrote  to  six  only,  needs  some  explanation. 
At  this  time,  the  city  of  Banyas,  which  is  Caesarea  Philippi,  had  no 
bishop,  and  these  six  sees  held  the  other  bishoprics  under  their  jurisdic¬ 
tion.  The  see  of  Sidon  held  Sarepta  as  it  even  yet  holds  it  j  Tripoli  held 
the  bishoprics  of  Botron,  Arka,  and  Artasium  \  and  the  see  of  Antara- 
dos,  which  is  also  known  as  Tortosa,  held  the  bishoprics  of  Arados  and 
Maraclea.  Three  of  these  six,  namely,  Tortosa,  Tripoli,  and  Jubail, 
were  retained  by  the  patriarch  of  Antioch  under  his  own  jurisdiction. 
When  these  cities  just  named  were  taken  by  the  Christians,  the  patri¬ 
arch  consecrated  bishops  in  them.  His  intention  was  that  when  the 
metropolis  of  Tyre  should  be  freed  and  its  archbishop,  according  to 
the  former  arrangement,  showed  the  obedience  owed  to  him  as  patri¬ 
arch,  he  would,  without  difficulty,  restore  them  to  the  archbishop  of 
Tyre,  as  indeed  he  was  bound  to  do  by  right.  But  the  cities  just  men¬ 
tioned  were  in  the  county  of  Tripoli,  where,  as  there  was  no  interfer¬ 
ence  from  the  king,  the  patriarch  of  Antioch  could  do  this  freely. 


I  Sa.  15  :  23. 


Dated  January  17,  1139  (see  R,  Reg.^  no.  186). 


FULK  OF  ANJOU  AS  KING  69 

In  the  other  three,  however,  Beirut,  Sidon,  and  Ptolemais,  which  is 
Acre,  the  patriarch  of  Jerusalem  consecrated  bishops,  with  the  inten¬ 
tion  of  transferring  them  to  his  own  jurisdiction  when  the  metropolis 
of  Tyre  should  be  captured  and  he  himself  should  consecrate  there  an 
archbishop.  For  he  assumed  that,  contrary  to  the  former  custom,  the 
archbishopric  of  Tyre  ought  to  owe  allegiance  thereafter  to  himself. 
In  this  matter  he  relied  on  the  letter  of  Pope  Paschal,  in  which  he 
seemed  to  have  granted  to  Baldwin,  the  first  king  of  Jerusalem,  and 
to  Gibelin,  the  third  patriarch  of  Jerusalem,  that  the  bishops  of  all 
cities  which  the  lord  king  and  his  armies  had  already  acquired  or  might 
thereafter  acquire  should  be  subject  to  the  patriarch  of  Jerusalem. 
This  was  related  before  when  we  were  treating  of  the  reign  of  Bald¬ 
win,  the  first  king  of  Jerusalem.^® 

Accordingly,  since  the  whole  province  of  Tyre  was  freed  before  the 
metropolis  itself,  the  two  patriarchs  divided  the  diocese  between  them. 
The  church  of  Antioch  held  and  still  holds  subject  the  part  which  was 
outside  the  kingdom  of  Jerusalem,  from  the  place  which  is  called  Pas- 
sus  Paganiy  while  the  patriarch  of  Jerusalem  held  subject  that  part 
which  was  on  this  side  and  within  the  limits  of  the  kingdom.  At  length, 
through  the  mercy  of  God,  the  metropolis  of  Tyre  was  freed,  and  in 
the  fourth  year  after  its  liberation,  the  patriarch  of  Jerusalem,  as  we 
have  said,  consecrated  an  archbishop  there  and  restored  to  him  the 
suffragans  which  he  had  retained  under  his  own  jurisdiction. 

But  during  the  time  that  the  patriarch  of  Jerusalem  had  Tyre  under 
his  own  care,  it  became  so  weakened  and  utterly  reduced  that  of  the 
churches  within  the  circuit  of  the  city  itself  only  one  was  preserved  for 
the  future  archbishop. This  result  proved  the  truth  of  the  proverb: 
^Tor  those  who  demand  it,  even  though  they  may  be  undeserving, 
many  shoe  latchets  are  made  from  the  leather  of  others.”  For  even 
to  the  present  day,  the  two  lords  just  mentioned  contend  for  our  very 
vitals,  strong  unto  our  injury  and  enriched  at  the  expense  of  our  pov¬ 
erty.  And  the  church,  with  her  members  torn  asunder,  through  whose 
unity,  by  the  consent  of  the  seven  holy  universal  councils,  she  had 

This  cross  reference  to  the  reign  of  Baldwin  I  may  imply  that  all  of  this  archival 
material  relating  to  church  organization  was  inserted  into  the  history  at  one  time, 
perhaps  in  1182. 

The  churches  in  the  quarter  allotted  to  the  Venetians  were  subject  to  Venice  and 
therefore  exempt  from  jurisdiction  of  the  archbishop  of  Tyre.  There  is  no  clear  indica¬ 
tion  of  how  the  remaining  churches  likewise  became  exempt. 


70  FULK  OF  ANJOU  AS  KING 

flourished  far  and  wide,  from  ancient  days,  even  from  the  time  of  the 
apostles,  the  church,  I  say,  now  lies  mangled  and  deprived  of  those 
more  powerful  members.  She  awaits  consolation,  and  there  is  no  one 
to  comfort  her.  She  stretches  forth  her  hand,  and  there  is  none  to  aid 
her.  We  have  become  like  to  those  of  whom  it  is  said,  “Whatever  folly 
the  kings  commit,  for  that  the  Greeks  suffer.’^  They  are  sated  with 
our  flesh,  and  would  that  sometime  it  might  be  even  to  the  point  of 
nausea. 

Nevertheless,  not  without  justice  do  we  impute  the  cause  of  this 
great  evil  to  the  church  of  Rome  itself,  who,  while  she  commands  us 
to  be  obedient  to  the  patriarch  of  Jerusalem,  suffers  us  to  be  maimed 
unjustly  by  the  patriarch  of  Antioch.  For  if  our  unity  were  restored 
to  us,  we  would  be  ready,  with  willing  hearts,  as  sons  of  obedience,  to 
submit  to  either  patriarch,  without  gainsaying  or  trouble. 

Let  no  one  regard  it  as  foreign  to  our  task  that  we,  who  have  under¬ 
taken  to  write  history,  have  inserted  these  details  about  the  condition 
of  our  church.  For  it  is  not  fitting  that  we  should  treat  of  the  affairs  of 
others  and  be  unmindful  of  our  own.  As  the  proverb  says:  “He  who  is 
forgetful  of  himself  speaks  but  poorly.” 

But  now  let  us  return  to  the  history.^® 

15.  The  count  of  Jaffa  is  accused  before  the  kingy  and  a  great 
disturbance  is  caused  in  the  realm. 

On  the  return  of  the  king  from  Antioch,  as  we  have  mentioned  before, 
a  very  dangerous  disturbance  again  arose.  For  certain  reasons  some  of 
the  highest  nobles  of  the  realm:  namely,  Hugh,  count  of  Jaffa,  and 
Remain  de  Puy,  lord  of  the  region  beyond  the  Jordan,  are  said  to  have 
conspired  against  the  lord  king.  In  order  that  this  may  be  explained 
more  clearly,  it  is  necessary  to  go  back  a  little  in  the  story. 

In  the  time  of  Baldwin  du  Bourg,  who  preceded  King  Fulk  on  the 
throne,  one  Hugh  du  Puiset,  of  the  diocese  of  Orleans,  a  man  of  high 
rank  and  one  very  influential  among  his  own  people,  undertook  a  pil¬ 
grimage  to  Jerusalem.  He  was  accompanied  by  his  wife  Mamilia, 
daughter  of  Hugh  Cholet,  count  of  Roussy.  On  the  way  a  son  was 

Horace  Ef,  i.  ii.  14. 

Even  William  himself  doubted  the  propriety  of  including  this  material  in  his 
history.  He  seems  to  be  apologizing  for  its  insertion.  Perhaps  an  important  reason 
for  including  it  was  the  lack  of  sufficient  other  information  about  Fulk’s  reign  to 
fill  out  the  two  books  allotted  to  it. 


FULK  OF  ANJOU  AS  KING  71 

born  to  them  in  Apulia,  for  the  Lady  Mamilia  was  with  child  when 
she  started  on  the  journey.  Since  the  boy  was  very  delicate  and  could 
not  safely  be  taken  along,  Hugh  sent  him  to  Lord  Bohemond,  his 
relative,  and  then  crossed  the  sea  to  King  Baldwin,  who  was  also  his 
kinsman  according  to  the  flesh. 

Immediately  upon  his  arrival  there,  the  king  bestowed  upon  him 
as  his  own  with  hereditary  rights  to  himself  and  his  heirs  the  city  of 
Jaffa  with  its  dependencies,  and  there,  not  long  after,  the  noble  Hugh 
died. 

The  king  then  gave  his  widow  and  the  aforesaid  city  to  Count  Albert, 
a  noble  lord  from  the  bishopric  of  Liege,  brother  of  the  count  of  Na¬ 
mur  and  a  man  of  great  influence  in  the  empire.  Before  very  long, 
however,  both  Count  Albert  and  his  wife  died.  Meanwhile,  the  child 
Hugh,  who  had  been  left  when  an  infant  in  Apulia,  had  reached  the 
age  of  manhood.  He  sought  and  obtained  from  the  king  his  paternal 
inheritance  which,  on  the  death  of  his  parents,  devolved  by  hereditary 
right  upon  him.  He  then  married  the  Lady  Emelota,  niece  of  the 
Patriarch  Arnulf  and  widow  of  the  illustrious  noble,  Eustace  Gre¬ 
nier.^  ^  By  her  Lord  Eustace  had  had  twin  sons,  Eustace  the  Younger, 
lord  of  the  city  of  Sidon,  and  Walter,  who  ruled  over  Caesarea.  After 
the  death  of  King  Baldwin  and  the  elevation  of  Fulk  to  the  throne, 
there  arose  from  causes  unknown  a  serious  enmity  between  the  king 
and  Count  Hugh.  Some  said  that  the  king  cherished  a  deep  distrust 
of  the  count,  who  was  rumored  to  be  on  too  familiar  terms  with  the 
queen,  and  of  this  there  seemed  to  be  many  proofs.  Hence,  spurred  on 
by  a  husband^s  jealousy,  the  king  is  said  to  have  conceived  an  inexora¬ 
ble  hatred  against  the  man.^^ 

William  appears  to  be  in  error  in  ascribing  the  coming  of  Hugh’s  father,  Hugh  II, 
to  the  time  of  Baldwin  II.  He  has  probably  confused  him  with  his  cousin,  Hugh  III, 
who  did  come  to  the  Holy  Land  in  1128.  La  Monte  has  shown  that  Hugh  II  started 
on  the  expedition  with  Bohemond  I  in  1106,  which  is  a  more  convincing  explanation 
of  his  wife’s  stay  in  Apulia  and  the  birth  of  Hugh  there  about  1106  or  1 107  (J.  L.  La 
Monte,  ^‘The  Lords  of  Le  Puiset  on  the  Crusades,”  Speculum^  XVII  (1942),  102—106). 

See  Book  XI,  note  63. 

This  whole  episode  of  Hugh,  so  interesting  for  its  detailed  account  of  the  opera¬ 
tion  of  feudal  justice,  has  been  questioned  (see  R.  Rohricht,  Geschichte  des  Konigreichs 
Jerusalem^  1100—12^1,  p.  201,  note  2).  It  does  involve  the  retelling  of  relatively 
trivial  court  gossip  to  which  William  seldom  stoops.  Perhaps  he  felt  forced  to  in¬ 
clude  it  because  of  lack  of  other  material  for  the  reign  of  Fulk.  Rohricht  has  dated 
the  episode  as  occurring  in  1132,  but  it  must  be  referred  to  a  later  date,  for  Hugh’s 
name  appears  on  a  grant  by  Alice  of  Antioch  as  late  as  1134  (see  J.  L.  La  Monte, 
Feudal  Monarchy  in  the  Latin  Kingdom  of  Jerusalem^  1100—12^1^  note  36). 


72  FULK  OF  ANJOU  AS  KING 

Count  Hugh  was  young,  tall  of  stature,  and  of  handsome  counte¬ 
nance.  He  was  distinguished  for  his  military  prowess  and  was  pleasing 
in  the  eyes  of  all.  In  him  the  gifts  of  nature  seemed  to  have  met  in 
lavish  abundance  3  without  question,  in  respect  to  physical  beauty  and 
nobility  of  birth  as  well  as  experience  in  the  art  of  war  he  had  no  equal 
in  the  kingdom.  On  his  father’s  side  he  was  closely  related  to  the 
queen,  for  their  fathers  had  been  cousins-german,  that  is,  sons  of  two 
sisters.  Some,  desiring  to  make  light  of  such  rumors,  declared  that  the 
only  source  of  this  hatred  was  the  overweening  arrogance  and  pre¬ 
sumption  of  the  count,  who  refused  to  be  subject  to  the  king  like  the 
other  nobles  of  the  realm  and  obstinately  declined  to  obey  his  com¬ 
mands. 

1 6.  Walter  of  Caesarea  challenges  Count  Hugh  to  single  com¬ 
bat.  The  latter  takes  refuge  with  the  enemy.  He  is  deserted 
by  his  followers. 

One  day  Walter  of  Caesarea,  the  stepson  of  Hugh,  a  man  in  the  full 
vigor  of  life,  of  fine  appearance  and  famous  for  his  strength,  rose  in  the 
assembly  of  the  nobles  when  the  royal  court  was  thronged.  At  the  in¬ 
stigation  of  the  king  himself,  it  was  claimed,  he  publicly  accused  Hugh 
in  the  royal  presence  of  high  treason  and  of  having  conspired  with  cer¬ 
tain  accomplices  of  the  same  faction  against  the  life  of  the  king,  con¬ 
trary  to  good  morals  and  the  laws  of  the  times. 

The  count  denied  the  charge  but  said  that  although  he  was  inno¬ 
cent  he  was  ready  to  submit  to  the  judgment  of  the  court  on  the  accusa¬ 
tions.  After  this  exchange  of  words,  single  combat  between  them  was 
decreed  according  to  the  custom  of  the  Franks,  and  a  suitable  day  was 
set  for  the  combat. The  count  then  left  the  court  and  returned  to 
Jaffa.  He  did  not  present  himself  on  the  appointed  day,  however. 
Whether  his  conscience  smote  him  because  he  was  conscious  of  his  guilt 
or  whether  he  distrusted  the  court  is  uncertain,  but  by  this  action  he 
justly  brought  upon  himself,  even  among  his  own  partisans,  still 
greater  suspicion  of  the  crime  imputed  to  him.  In  view  of  his  obstinate 
disobedience  to  the  summons,  the  court  and  the  assembly  of  nobles 
condemned  him  in  his  absence  as  guilty  of  the  charge  against  him. 

On  learning  of  this,  the  count  took  a  singular  course,  worthy  of  uni- 

This  reference  to  trial  by  combat  as  “a  custom  of  the  Franks’^  instead  of  ^‘our 
custom’^  is  another  indication  that  William’s  parentage  may  be  of  non-French  origin. 


FULK  OF  ANJOU  AS  KING  73 

versal  hatred  and  indignation.  He  set  sail  in  haste  for  Ascalon,  that  city 
hateful  to  the  Christian  name  and  friendly  to  our  enemies,  and  de¬ 
manded  help  from  them  against  the  king.  The  people  of  that  city  gave 
a  ready  assent,  for  they  realized  that  the  internal  dissensions  and  civil 
discord  among  the  Christians  would  redound  to  their  own  advantage 
and  cause  great  danger  to  the  kingdom.  A  treaty  satisfactory  to  both 
sides  was  concluded.  Hugh  thereupon  gave  hostages  and  returned  to 
Jaffa. 

Then  the  Ascalonites,  inspired  by  inexorable  and  stubborn  hatred 
against  us  and  rendered  more  confident  by  the  treaty  with  the  count 
and  by  his  favor,  invaded  our  territories  with  unwonted  boldness  and 
presumption.  Without  hindrance  from  anyone,  they  raided  our  ter¬ 
ritory  as  far  as  Arsuf,  also  known  as  Antipater,  and  carried  off  booty. 

News  of  these  forays  reached  the  king.  He  immediately  summoned 
military  forces  from  all  over  the  kingdom  and  with  a  great  host  of 
people  laid  siege  to  Jaffa.  It  soon  became  evident  to  the  count’s  faithful 
followers  who  were  with  him  in  that  same  city,  namely,  Balian,  senior, 
and  other  God-fearing  men,  that  Hugh  was  determined  to  rush  head¬ 
long  into  danger — that  he  could  not  be  restrained  from  his  fatal  enter¬ 
prise  by  the  sane  warnings  of  his  faithful  friends.  On  the  contrary,  he 
was  obstinately  determined  to  pursue  a  course  leading  to  greater  dan¬ 
ger.  They  therefore  abandoned  the  fiefs  which  they  held  from  him 
and  wisely  betook  themselves  to  the  king. 

17,  The  city  of  Jaffa  is  besieged i  the  nobles  of  the  kingdom  treat 
concerning  feace.  In  the  meantime  B  any  as  is  taken  by  the 
enemy. 

In  the  meantime  the  Patriarch  William,  a  very  gentle  man  and  a 
lover  of  peace,  together  with  certain  princes  of  the  realm,  undertook 
the  task  of  mediation  and,  for  the  sake  of  peace,  tried  to  effect  a  com¬ 
promise  between  the  king  and  the  count.  Mindful  of  the  words  of  the 
Gospel,  that  “Every  kingdom  divided  against  itself  is  brought  to  deso¬ 
lation  3  every  city  or  house  divided  against  itself  shall  not  stand,” 
they  saw  that  these  internal  dissensions  were  most  dangerous  to  the 
kingdom,  and  they  feared,  as  well  they  might,  lest  the  enemies  of  the 
Christian  faith  might  seize  this  as  an  opportune  time  to  do  them  injury. 

Finally,  after  many  disputes,  as  is  usually  the  case  in  affairs  of  this 

Mat.  12:  25. 


74  FULK  OF  ANJOU  AS  KING 

kind,  it  seemed  best  to  the  peacemakers,  both  for  the  sake  of  harmony 
and  for  the  greater  honor  of  the  king,  that  the  count  be  exiled  for  a 
period  of  three  years.  At  the  expiration  of  that  time,  by  the  king’s 
grace,  he  and  those  whom  he  had  led  with  him  might  be  permitted  to 
return  to  the  kingdom,  and  this  without  incurring  the  reproach  which 
would  otherwise  fall  upon  him  as  the  result  of  this  affair.  Meanwhile, 

I 

all  his  debts  and  whatever  moneys  he  had  borrowed  anywhere  were 
to  be  paid  from  the  revenues  of  his  possessions. 

Thus,  at  this  time,  the  king  was  engaged  in  the  vicinity  of  Jaffa,  and 
Lord  Renier,  surnamed  Brus,  with  other  nobles  of  the  realm,  was  also 
there.  Meanwhile,  the  city  of  Banyas  was  under  siege  by  Tegelmeluch 
[Taj-al-Muluk  Buri],  king  of  Damascus.^^  The  king  was  endeavoring 
with  all  his  power  to  procure  aid  to  relieve  this  situation,  but  before  he 
succeeded,  the  city  was  taken  by  force  and  fell  into  the  hands  of  the 
enemy.  The  citizens  were  taken  prisoners,  and  all  the  mercenary  sob 
diers  in  the  city,  both  knights  and  foot  soldiers,  were  seized.  The  wife 
of  the  noble  and  valiant  Renier  was  also  captured  and  carried  away 
with  the  others. 

1 8.  The  count  of  Jaffa  is  severely  wounded  at  J er us alem,  A  tu¬ 
mult  again  arises.  After  recoveringy  however y  he  crosses  the 
setty  according  to  agreement. 

During  this  time,  the  count  of  Jaffa  was  awaiting  passage  and  linger¬ 
ing  in  Jerusalem  as  he  was  wont  to  do.  One  day  he  happened  to  be 
playing  dice  on  a  table  before  the  shop  of  a  merchant  named  Alfanus 
in  the  street  which  is  called  the  street  of  the  Furriers,  The  count,  in¬ 
tent  upon  the  game,  had  no  thought  of  danger.  Suddenly,  before  all 
the  bystanders,  a  knight  of  Brittany  drew  his  sword  in  hostile  fashion 
and  stabbed  the  count  again  and  again.  The  entire  city  was  shaken  at 
the  news  of  the  outrage  j  a  great  crowd  at  once  assembled,  and  an 
ominous  murmur  arose.  But  one  sentiment  issued  from  the  lips  of  all, 
namely,  that  not  without  the  knowledge  of  the  king  could  this  crime 
have  been  committed;  that  the  miscreant  would  hardly  have  dared  to 
attempt  such  a  deed  unless  he  had  been  confident  of  the  king’s  favor. 
Through  the  crowd  ran  the  cry  that  the  count  was  suffering  unjustly 

Taj  al-Muluk  had  died  June  6,  1132.  His  son,  Shams  al-Muluk,  was  now  ruler. 
The  capture  of  Banyas  was  made  by  the  Damascenes  on  December  1 1,  1132  (see  Gibb, 
Chronicle y  pp.  208—18).  This  account  is  out  of  place  here  (see  note  18). 


FULK  OF  ANJOU  AS  KING  75 

from  a  charge  of  which  he  was  innocent  and  that  the  king  had  given  a 
plain  proof  of  the  unreasonable  hatred,  far  beyond  the  merits  of  the 
case,  which  he  had  conceived  against  him.  Accordingly,  the  count  grew 
in  universal  favor  and  good  will,  and  it  was  felt  that  the  accusations 
made  against  him,  of  whatever  nature,  had  proceeded  entirely  from 
malice. 

When  the  king  learned  of  this  sentiment,  he  felt  it  necessary  to  ex¬ 
onerate  himself.  In  order  to  give  substantial  proof  of  his  innocence,  he 
ordered  the  culprit  to  be  placed  on  trial.  No  accuser  or  witnesses  were 
necessary  to  prove  the  crime,  for  it  was  well  known  to  all.  Since  the 
regular  process  of  law  was  needless,  therefore,  the  king  ordered  a  sen¬ 
tence  commensurate  with  his  guilt  to  be  pronounced  upon  the  man.  The 
court  accordingly  convened,  and  the  assassin  was  sentenced  by  unani¬ 
mous  consent  to  suffer  the  penalty  of  mutilation  of  his  members.  The 
judgment  was  reported  to  the  king,  who  ordered  the  sentence  to  be 
carried  out.  He  directed,  however,  that  the  tongue  should  not  be  in¬ 
cluded  among  the  members  so  mutilated.  This  exception  was  made 
lest  it  be  said  that  the  tongue  had  been  removed  purposely  so  that  the 
criminal  would  be  unable  to  confess  the  truth  of  the  matter,  namely, 
that  he  had  been  sent  by  the  king.  By  this  action  Fulk  very  wisely 
protected  his  own  reputation  and  quieted  the  intense  indignation  which 
had  been  roused  against  him.  It  was  impossible  to  extort  from  the 
criminal,  either  in  secret  or  in  public,  before  or  after  the  sentence  was 
carried  out,  an  admission  that  this  monstrous  act  had  been  done  by  the 
order  or  with  the  knowledge  of  the  king.  On  the  contrary,  he  declared 
that  he  had  ventured  to  do  the  deed  on  his  own  initiative  in  the  hope  of 
gaining  the  king’s  favor. 

The  count  remained  for  a  while  in  the  kingdom,  that  his  wounds 
might  be  cared  for  and  his  health  restored.  Then,  when  fully  con¬ 
valescent,  he  left  the  kingdom  and  went  to  Apulia.  His  heart  was  full 
of  sadness,  both  on  account  of  the  injuries  so  recently  inflicted  upon 
him,  and  also  because  by  the  decree  he  was  compelled  to  wander  like  a 
beggar  through  unfamiliar  places,  an  exile  from  his  ancestral  heri¬ 
tage.^® 

Roger,  who  had  now  conquered  all  that  region,  received  him  kindly. 
He  felt  that  this  noble  and  valiant  man  had  been  driven  from  the 

This  expression  of  sympathy  for  Hugh  in  exile  recalls  Ovid’s  exile,  with  which 
William  was  very  familiar. 


76  FULK  OF  ANJOU  AS  KING 

kingdom  through  the  jealousy  of  his  rivals.  Accordingly,  he  had  com¬ 
passion  on  him  and  gave  him  the  county  of  Gargan.  There  the  count,  a 
man  well  worthy  to  be  mourned  by  posterity,  met  a  premature  death 
and  never  returned  to  the  kingdom. 

From  that  time,  all  who  had  informed  against  the  count  and  thereby 
incited  the  king  to  wrath  fell  under  the  displeasure  of  Queen  Melisend 
and  were  forced  to  take  diligent  measures  for  their  safety.  For  her 
heart  was  wrung  with  deep  sorrow  for  the  exiled  count,  and  her  own 
good  fame  was  in  some  measure  besmirched  by  the  infamous  accusa¬ 
tion.  Above  all  others,  she  persecuted  in  every  possible  way  Rohard 
the  Elder,  later  called  Rohard  of  Nablus,  who  had  been  especially 
active  in  exciting  the  jealousy  of  the  king.  It  was  not  safe  for  these  in¬ 
formers  to  come  into  her  presence  j  in  fact,  they  deemed  it  prudent  to 
keep  away  even  from  public  gatherings.  Even  the  king  found  that  no 
place  was  entirely  safe  among  the  kindred  and  partisans  of  the  queen. 
At  length,  through  the  mediation  of  certain  intimate  friends,  her 
wrath  was  appeased,  and  the  king  finally,  after  persistent  efforts,  suc¬ 
ceeded  in  gaining  a  pardon  for  the  other  objects  of  her  wrath — at  least 
to  such  an  extent  that  they  could  be  introduced  into  her  presence  with 
others.  But  from  that  day  forward,  the  king  became  so  uxorious  that, 
whereas  he  had  formerly  aroused  her  wrath,  he  now  calmed  it,  and 
not  even  in  unimportant  cases  did  he  take  any  measures  without  her 
knowledge  and  assistance. 

19.  treaty  is  made  with  the  Damascenes ^  the  fAsoners  who 
were  taken  at  B  any  as  are  restored. 

About  this  time,  the  king  granted  a  temporary  peace  to  the  Damas¬ 
cenes  at  their  request.  In  addition  to  other  things  which  they  offered  in 
order  to  obtain  this  truce,  they  restored,  according  to  agreement,  all 
the  captives  taken  from  the  city  of  Banyas.  The  wife  of  the  valiant 
Renier  de  Brus,  the  lord  of  that  city,  was  among  this  number.  She  was 
returned  to  her  distinguished  husband  after  an  absence  of  two  years, 
and  he  graciously  restored  her  to  her  position  as  his  wife.  Later,  how¬ 
ever,  he  discovered  that  her  conduct  while  with  the  enemy  had  not 
been  altogether  discreet.  She  had  not  satisfactorily  preserved  the  sanc- 

There  is  evidence  enough  to  prove  that  Melisend  was  a  strong-willed  woman 
without  waiting  upon  such  an  incident  for  its  expression.  William’s  conception  of  Fulk 
is  colored  throughout  by  his  boyhood  impression  of  the  king  as  a  very  old  man. 


FULK  OF  ANJOU  AS  KING  77 

tity  of  the  marriage  couch  as  a  noble  matron  should.  Accordingly,  he 
cast  her  off.  She  did  not  deny  her  guilt,  but  entered  a  convent  of  holy 
women  at  Jerusalem,  took  the  vows  of  perpetual  chastity,  and  became 
a  nun.  After  her  death,  the  distinguished  man  married  Agnes,  a  niece 
of  William  de  Bury.  On  Renier’s  death,  Agnes  became  the  wife  of 
Gerard  of  Sidon.  Of  this  marriage  was  born  Renaud,  who  now  rules 
over  this  same  city  of  the  Sidonians. 

The  city  of  Banyas,  which,  as  we  have  said,  was  conquered  in  the 
absence  of  its  lord,  had  long  been  held  by  the  people  of  the  Assassins. 
Shortly  before  the  time  of  which  we  are  speaking,  however,  one  of 
their  rulers  named  Emir-Ali  had  ceded  it  to  the  Christians  in  return 
for  a  fitting  compensation  agreed  upon  by  treaty.'*^  The  king  there¬ 
upon  at  once  granted  it  as  a  possession  with  hereditary  rights  to  this 
same  Lord  Renier. 

At  a  future  time  and  place  a  description  will  be  given  of  the  people 
of  the  Assassins  and  an  explanation  of  the  worthless  traditions,  hateful 
to  God,  which  they  follow.  In  the  meantime,  let  it  suffice  to  know  con¬ 
cerning  them  that  they  are  a  people  very  much  distrusted  and  justly 
feared  by  the  Christians  as  well  as  by  nations  of  other  faiths,  above  all, 
by  princes.'^^ 

20.  Raymondy  son  of  the  count  of  Poitou,  arrives  secretly  at 
Antioch,  He  marries  Constance,  the  daughter  of  Bohemond, 
against  the  will  of  the  frincess,  her  mother,  who  strives  to 
f revent  the  alliance.  Thus  he  obtains  the  kingdom, 

« 

In  the  meantime,  as  we  have  said,  the  people  of  Antioch  had  sent  en¬ 
voys  to  Raymond,  the  son  of  the  count  of  Poitou.  In  accordance  with 
their  instructions,  they  made  careful  inquiries  as  to  where  he  might 
most  readily  be  found.  From  reliable  reports,  they  learned  that  he  was 
at  the  court  of  Henry  the  Elder,  king  of  England,  from  whom  he  had 
received  the  arms  of  a  knight.  They  therefore  proceeded  straightway 
to  England,  where  they  found  the  young  man  and  in  all  secrecy  ex¬ 
plained  to  him  the  reason  for  their  coming.  On  the  advice  of  the  king, 

This  had  occurred  in  1128.  Qalanisi  calls  the  leader  of  the  Assassins  who  gave 
Banyas  to  Baldwin  II,  ‘‘Ismail,  the  Persian’^  or  the  “Missioner”  (see  Gibb,  Chronicle^ 
pp.  191-94.). 

That  the  Assassins  were  feared  as  much  by  the  Muslims  as  by  the  Christians  is 
abundantly  testified  in  Arab  accounts  (see  P.  K.  Hitti,  History  of  the  Arabs y  pp. 
446-4.8). 


78  FULK  OF  ANJOU  AS  KING 

his  benefactor,  Raymond  gratefully  embraced  the  opportunity  offered 
him  and,  after  making  all  necessary  preparations  for  the  journey,  set 
out  incognito.  For  Roger,  duke  of  Apulia,  was  already  aware  of  the 
plans  of  the  people  of  Antioch  in  respect  to  calling  Raymond  and,  in 
consequence,  had  made  arrangements  in  every  coast  city  of  Apulia  to 
waylay  him.  If  the  young  man  could  be  prevented  from  crossing,  the 
duke  hoped  that  by  bribing  the  great  men  of  that  land  he  himself 
might  easily  gain  the  advantages  of  the  inheritance  which  Raymond 
was  seeking. 

Raymond,  however,  prudently  concealed  the  real  purpose  of  his 
journey.  He  cast  aside  all  pride  and,  travelling  as  one  of  the  common 
people,  now  on  foot,  now  astride  a  humble  beast  of  burden,  pursued  his 
journey  among  the  people  and  never  gave  the  slightest  evidence  of 
rank  or  wealth.  Those  who  accompanied  him  were  divided  into  bands 
and  his  household  retainers  likewise.  Some  of  these  people  preceded 
him  by  three  or  four  days’  journey,  and  others  followed  behind,  as  if 
having  no  connection  with  him. 

Thus,  clad  in  the  lowly  habit  of  a  pilgrim,  often  himself  perform¬ 
ing  the  duties  of  a  servant,  he  deceived  everyone  by  his  appearance 
and  escaped  the  snares  laid  by  his  shrewd  and  powerful  enemy.  His 
arrival  at  Antioch  delighted  his  friends  and  brought  no  little  fear  to 
others,  partisans  of  the  princess,  who  were  endeavoring  to  hinder  his 
elevation. 

Shortly  before  this  time,  yet  after  the  departure  of  the  envoys  to 
invite  Lord  Raymond,  the  Princess  Alice,  widow  of  Lord  Bohemond 
and  sister  of  Queen  Melisend,  had  again  marched  to  Antioch.  Despite 
the  fact  that  her  father  had  formerly  thrust  her  from  that  city  and 
ordered  her  to  be  content  with  Laodicea  and  Jabala,  she  assumed  the 
role  of  sovereign  and  again  took  everything  under  her  own  sway.  Her 
sister  had  interceded  with  the  king  not  to  interfere  with  her  actions, 
and  she  had  the  support  of  certain  nobles. 

In  the  meantime,  Ralph,  the  crafty  patriarch  of  Antioch,  a  man  well 
versed  in  wiles,  induced  her  to  believe  that  Raymond,  now  said  to  be 
close  at  hand,  had  been  sent  for  to  become  her  own  future  husband.  In 
this  way  the  prelate  hoped  to  secure  her  favor  and  influence  against 
the  clergy  who  were  persecuting  him.  Alice’s  credulous  mind  readily 
accepted  that  false  hope. 

It  was  at  once  apparent  to  Raymond  that  without  the  good  will  and 


FULK  OF  ANJOU  AS  KING  79 

influence  of  the  patriarch  he  could  not  hope  to  attain  his  desired  end. 
Accordingly,  through  interpreters  friendly  to  both  Ralph  and  himself, 
he  asked  for  an  audience,  that  he  might  win  the  favor  of  the  patriarch 
and  gain  his  support.  It  was  required  of  Raymond  that  he  show  fealty 
to  the  patriarch  by  solemn  oath  5  and  in  return,  it  was  agreed  that  he 
should  marry  Constance  without  opposition  and  receive  the  principality 
in  full  peace.  In  addition,  it  was  provided  that  if  Henry,  his  brother, 
should  come  to  Antioch,  the  patriarch  would  endeavor  loyally  to  se¬ 
cure  for  him  Alice,  mother  of  the  young  princess  and  widow  of  Bohe- 
mond,  as  his  wife,  together  with  her  two  maritime  cities  and  the  lands 
attached  to  them. 

As  soon  as  this  agreement  had  been  made  and  confirmed  with  an 
oath,  Raymond  was  introduced  into  the  city.  While  Alice  still  supposed 
that  all  the  arrangements  were  being  made  for  her  own  nuptials,  he 
was  conducted  to  the  basilica  of  the  Prince  of  the  Apostles  and  there 
married  to  the  Lady  Constance.  The  young  princess  was  not  yet  of 
marriageable  age,  but  the  great  nobles  all  demanded  that  the  marriage 
take  place,  and  the  patriarch  himself  bestowed  the  bride  upon  her 
husband.^® 

On  learning  how  she  had  been  deceived,  Alice  at  once  left  Antioch 
and  retired  to  her  own  domain.  Ever  after  she  pursued  the  prince  with 
relentless  hatred.  From  that  day,  too,  the  patriarch  assumed  a  more 
haughty  attitude.  Firm  in  the  belief  that  he  had  established  himself 
securely  with  the  prince,  he  displayed  unwonted  arrogance  and  became 
unduly  presumptuous  in  his  demands  on  the  prince.^  ^  But  in  this  re¬ 
spect  he  found  himself  entirely  deceived.  For  the  prince  felt  that  the 
oath  of  fealty  which  the  patriarch  had  extorted  from  him  reflected  dis¬ 
grace  upon  himself.  Accordingly,  forgetful  of  the  benefits  which  he 
had  received  from  the  prelate,  he  began  to  persecute  him  unmercifully 
and,  in  spite  of  his  sworn  oath,  aligned  himself  with  the  pontiff’s  ad¬ 
versaries. 

Rohricht  has  dated  this  marriage  1136  (see  R.KJ.^  p,  203),  though  there  is  some 
reason  to  think  that  it  occurred  in  1137.  Constance  in  either  case  was  well  under  ten 
years  of  age  at  the  time. 

This  was  the  first  time  that  a  prince  of  Antioch  had  received  the  investiture  of 
his  state  from  a  patriarch  of  Antioch.  As  Raymond  became  acquainted  with  local  tra¬ 
ditions  and,  even  more,  with  the  clerical  opponents  of  the  patriarch,  he  may  well  have 
resented  the  arrangement  without  further  provocation  from  Ralph.  The  previous  in¬ 
vestiture  of  a  prince  of  Antioch  by  a  patriarch  was  that  of  Bohemond  I  by  Daimbert, 
patriarch  of  Jerusalem  in  1100  (see  Book  IX,  chap.  15), 


8o 


FULK  OF  ANJOU  AS  KING 


Alt  accouftt  of  Rfjyttiotid:  hh  maHHcrs  atid  oppranincr ;  his 
ancestors  and  lineage. 


Lord  Raymond  was  of  noble  blood  and  ancient  lineage.  He  was  very 
tall  and  in  personal  appearance  extremely  pleasing.  He  was  young 
his  cheeks  were  still  covered  with  the  light  down  of  youth — he  was 
handsome  far  beyond  all  the  kings  and  princes  of  the  world,  and  he 
was  affable  and  aoreeable  in  conversation. In  fact,  his  entire  bearing 
was  in  every  respect  that  of  a  charming  and  elegant  prince.  Experi¬ 
enced  in  military  matters  and  expert  in  the  use  of  arms,  he  easily  sur¬ 
passed  all  his  predecessors  as  well  as  those  who  followed  him.  Al¬ 
though  but  slightly  learned  himself,  he  was  nevertheless  a  patron  of 
men  of  letters.^' In  religious  matters,  he  was  most  devoted  and  listened 
attentively  to  the  offices  of  the  church,  especially  on  feast  days.  After 
his  marriage,  he  was  careful  to  observe  and  maintain  faithfulness  in 
the  conjugal  relation.  He  was  temperate  in  eating  and  drinking  also, 
and  munificent  and  free-handed  to  excess.  But  he  was  not  provident 
and  was  far  too  fond  of  vicious  games  of  dice  and  chance.  He  had, 


among  other  defects  of  character,  a  rash  disposition,  a  habit  of  acting- 
on  a  hasty  impulse,  and  he  frequently  gave  way  to  anger  without  re¬ 
straint  or  reason.  He  was  seldom  lucky.  He  paid  no  attention  to  the 
oath  of  fealty  which  he  had  sworn  to  the  patriarch  and  did  not  redeem 
the  promises  he  had  made  to  him. 


The  khig  builds  a 
the  Ascalonites,  It 


fortress  to  check  the  insolent  inroads  of 
7'ecetves  the  name  Gihelin  or  Beersheba, 


Now,  because  of  their  continued  success,  the  Ascalonites  were  becom¬ 
ing  increasingly  bold  and  insolent  and  were  overrunning  the  entire 
region  without  restraint.  Ascalon  itself  was  subject  to  a  very  powerful 
Egyptian  potentate.  If  this  city  should  be  taken,  the  prince  foresaw 
with  alarm  that  the  Christian  army  might  invade  Egypt  and  disturb 
the  peaceful  conditions  which  existed  there.  Accordingly,  at  a  great 


Raymond  was  at  least  twenty  years  old  by  this  time  and  may  have  been  several 
years  older  still.  Rohricht's  statement  that  he  was  born  in  1099,  however,  is  an  error 
due  to  a  confusion  of  Raymond  with  his  older  brother  William,  who  was  born  at 
that  time  (see  Auber,  Hisioire  generate  du  Poitoiiy  VIII,  21,  105—107). 

This  allusion  to  Raymond’s  patronag^e  of  letters  is  tantalizinfc,  for  William  must 
have  had  specific  instances  in  mind.  What  literary  productions,  whether  in  the  vernac¬ 
ular  or  in  Latin,  flowed  from  this  patronage  arc  unknown.  Yet  there  must  have  been 
such  writings  with  which  William  was  acquainted. 


FULK  OF  ANJOU  AS  KING  8i 

outlay  of  money  and  effort,  he  was  endeavoring  to  make  the  land  of 
Ascalon  a  barrier,  as  it  were,  between  Egypt  and  our  territory.  Fearing 
that  the  strength  of  its  people  might  give  way  under  the  constant  hard¬ 
ships  and  perils  of  warfare,  he  took  great  care  to  send  to  their  assistance 
every  three  months  new  people  and  fresh  legions,  together  with  provi¬ 
sions  and  supplies  of  arms.  The  new  arrivals  naturally  wished  to  try 
their  strength  and  to  give  proofs  of  their  courage.  Hence,  against  the 
wishes  of  the  veterans,  they  often  made  experimental  sallies  and  ex¬ 
peditions. 

The  Christians  perceived  that  the  bold  incursions  of  the  enemy 
showed  no  signs  of  ceasing;  their  forces  were  constantly  renewed,  and, 
like  the  hydra,  they  gained  increased  strength  by  the  death  of  their 
citizens.  Hence,  after  long  deliberation,  our  people  resolved  to  erect 
fortresses  round  about.  These  would  serve  as  defenses  against  this 
monster  which  ever  increased  by  the  loss  of  its  heads  and,  as  often  as  it 
was  destroyed,  was  reborn  to  our  exceeding  great  peril.  Within  these 
strongholds  forces  could  be  easily  assembled  which,  from  their  very 
proximity,  could  more  readily  check  the  enemy’s  forays.  Such  fortresses 
would  also  serve  as  bases  from  which  to  make  frequent  attacks  upon 
the  city  itself. 

They  accordingly  chose  a  place  suitable  for  the  purpose,  in  that  part 
of  Judea  which,  in  the  original  distribution,  fell  by  lot  to  the  tribe  of 
Simeon,  and  there  they  prepared  to  rebuild  an  ancient  ruined  city 
called  Beersheba.  The  site  selected  lay  at  the  foot  of  the  mountains 
just  at  the  beginning  of  the  plain  which  extends  without  interruption 
from  those  mountains  to  the  aforesaid  city.  All  the  people  of  the  vicin¬ 
ity  were  called  together;  the  patriarch  William  and  the  nobles  also 
came.  Thus  the  task,  well-planned  and  begun  under  good  auspices,  was 
finished  successfully  with  the  help  of  the  Lord.  For  twelve  miles  from 
Ascalon  they  built  a  strong  fortress  surrounded  by  an  impregnable 
wall,  with  towers,  ramparts,  and  a  moat.  This  place,  in  the  time  of  the 
children  of  Israel,  was  the  southern  limit  of  the  Land  of  Promise  just 
as  Dan,  now  called  Banyas  or  Caesarea  Philippi,  was  the  northern. 
One  often  reads  in  the  Old  Testament,  ^ffrom  Dan  even  unto  Beer¬ 
sheba.”  Here  Abraham  is  said  to  have  established  a  well,  as  he  did 
in  many  other  places,  and  because  of  the  great  quantity  of  water  it 
gave  he  called  it  the  Abundance. 

Ju.  20 :  I. 


82  FULK  OF  ANJOU  AS  KING 

Josephus  also  speaks  of  it  in  the  book  of  the  Antiquities y  as  follows: 
“Abimelech  gave  him  land  and  flocks  and  they  agreed  that  they  would 
dwell  peacefully  together  without  guile.  They  made  a  treaty  at  a  cer¬ 
tain  well  known  as  Beersheba,  which  may  be  called  the  Treaty  of  the 
Well,  and  indeed  it  is  so  called  even  to  this  time  by  the  people  of  the 
vicinity.  This  place  is  also  called  the  Seventh  Well,  and  in  Arabic  it  is 
known  as  Bethgebris,  that  is,  the  House  of  Gabriel.” 

When  the  fortress  was  finished  and  complete  in  every  part,  it  was 
granted  by  common  consent  to  the  brothers  of  the  house  of  the  Hospi¬ 
tal,  which  is  at  Jerusalem.  They  have  guarded  their  charge  with  all 
due  diligence,  even  to  the  present  timej  and  from  that  day,  the  attacks 
of  the  enemy  in  that  place  have  become  less  violent.®® 


23.  The  count  of  Trifoli  is  slain  at  the  Mount  of  the  Pilgrims 
through  the  treachery  of  some  of  his  own  feofle.  He  is  suc¬ 
ceeded  by  Raymond y  his  sony  who  avenges  the  death  of  his 


Not  long  after  this,  Baswaj,  commander  of  the  army  of  Damascus, 
invaded  the  land  of  Tripoli.  Count  Pons  marched  valiantly  forth 
against  him  with  all  his  forces.  The  two  armies  met  near  the  fortress 
called  Mount  of  the  Pilgrims,  and  a  fierce  battle  was  fought.  But  the 
lines  of  his  army  were  broken  and  put  to  flight,  and  the  count  himself 
was  taken  prisoner.®'^  Through  the  treachery  of  the  Syrians  who  lived 
on  the  heights  of  Lebanon,  he  was  betrayed  and  put  to  death.  He  left 
a  son,  Raymond,  who,  as  his  heir,  succeeded  him  in  the  care  of  the 
county.  Gerald,  bishop  of  Tripoli,  was  also  captured  at  this  time.  He 
remained  in  captivity  for  a  while  without  being  recognized,  but  at  last 
a  prisoner  held  by  the  Christians  was  given  in  exchange  for  him  and 
he  was  restored  to  his  former  liberty.  In  this  battle  some  of  the  nobles 
of  Tripoli  fell,  but  the  great  majority  of  those  slain  were  from  the 
middle  class. 

After  the  death  of  his  father  Raymond  collected  the  remnant  of  the 
cavalry  and  with  a  strong  body  of  foot  soldiers  in  addition  went  up  to 
Mt.  Lebanon  with  great  valor.  There  he  seized  and  carried  away  in 
chains  to  Tripoli  as  many  of  those  men  of  blood,  with  their  wives  and 

Josephus  Ant.  i.  12, 

Stevenson  has  dated  the  building-  of  this  fortress  in  1136  (see  Stevenson,  CrusaderSy 
p.  136). 

The  death  of  Pons  is  dated  by  Qalanisi  as  March  25,  1137.  Raymond  II  succeeded 
his  father  (see  Gibb,  Chronicle^  p.  241). 


FULK  OF  ANJOU  AS  KING  83 

children,  as  he  could  find.  For  he  considered  them  guilty  of  his  father’s 
death  and  responsible  for  the  general  massacre  of  the  Christians,  since 
by  their  persuasive  words  they  had  drawn  that  powerful  man  into  the 
plain  of  Tripoli.  Accordingly,  to  avenge  the  blood  of  those  who  had 
fallen  in  battle,  he  visited  upon  them  divers  tortures  in  the  presence 
of  the  people,  and,  in  just  proportion  to  the  enormity  of  the  crime 
which  they  had  committed,  he  caused  them  to  suffer  death  in  its  most 
cruel  forms. 

Such  were  the  first  proofs  of  valor  which  were  given  by  the  young 
count,  whereby  he  won  the  affection  of  all  his  people  and  universal 
approval. 

24.  J ohriy  emferor  of  C onstantinofle y  marches  ufdn  Antioch 
and  seizes  all  Cilicia, 

Meanwhile  numerous  reports  began  to  circulate  through  the  land. 
It  was  rumored  that  John,  emperor  of  Constantinople,  son  of  Alexius, 
was  about  to  descend  swiftly  upon  Syria.  From  every  part  of  his  empire 
he  had  summoned  people  of  all  tribes  and  tongues,  and  now,  with  a 
countless  number  of  cavalry  and  a  vast  array  of  chariots  and  four- 
wheeled  carts,  he  was  on  the  march.  Nor  was  this  mere  empty  rumor. 
As  soon  as  he  learned  from  reliable  sources  that  the  people  of  Antioch 
had  summoned  Raymond  thither,  that  they  had  given  the  city  to  him, 
and  had  bestowed  upon  him  as  his  wife  the  daughter  of  Lord  Bohe- 
mond,  John  determined  to  go  to  Antioch.  Very  wroth  was  he  that, 
without  his  knowledge  or  command,  they  had  presumed  to  give  the 
daughter  of  their  lord  in  marriage  and,  without  consulting  him,  had 
dared  to  hand  over  the  city  to  the  rule  of  another.^®  He  claimed  Anti¬ 
och  with  all  the  adjacent  provinces  as  his  own  and  wished  to  recall 
them  to  his  own  jurisdiction.  He  asserted  that  those  great  princes, 
men  of  valor  and  immortal  memory  who,  at  the  command  of  God,  had 
come  on  the  first  expedition  (time  does  not  permit  the  mention  of 
their  names  one  by  one),  had  entered  into  a  definite  agreement  with 
Alexius,  his  father  and  predecessor  in  the  empire,  with  much  inter¬ 
change  of  gifts  and  courtesy.^^  The  terms  were  that  whatever  cities  or 

According  to  Chalandon,  Alice  had  made  overtures  of  a  marriage  alliance  be¬ 
tween  Constance  and  the  emperor’s  son,  Manuel  (F.  Chalandon,  Les  Comnene^  II,  122). 

William  habitually  refers  back  to  the  early  agreements  which  the  crusading  lead¬ 
ers  had  made  with  Alexius  in  1097.  In  a  sense  the  claims  did  start  there,  but  John  had  a 
more  definite  basis  for  his  claims  in  the  agreement  which  Bohemond  I  had  made  in 
1108  (see  Chalandon,  Les  Comnene^  II,  122-26). 


84  FULK  OF  ANJOU  AS  KING 

any  chance  take  on  that  entire  cam¬ 
paign  should  be  surrendered  without  contest  to  the  empire.  These, 
when  captured,  they  had  undertaken  to  guard  faithfully  to  the  best  of 
their  ability  and  strength  until  he  should  come  with  his  army.  These 
provisions,  John  asserted,  were  included  in  the  pact,  and  the  princes 
had  confirmed  them  with  solemn  oath. 

There  is  no  question  that  these  princes  had  concluded  an  agreement 
with  the  emperor  and  that  he,  in  turn,  had  bound  himself  to  them  by 
definite  pledges  which  he  had  been  the  first  to  break.  Since  he  had  not 
kept  to  the  terms  of  the  agreement,  the  signatory  princes  steadfastly 
maintained  that  they  were  not  bound  to  him.  No  less  did  they  regard 
those  who  had  already  died  as  released  from  their  agreement,  since 
Alexius,  as  a  vacillating  and  unstable  man,  had  dealt  fraudulently  with 
them  and  had  been  the  first  to  break  his  own  pledges.  According  to  the 
law  of  treaties,  therefore,  they  rightly  claimed  that  they  were  released 
from  the  pact,  “For  to  keep  faith  with  one  who  tries  to  act  contrary  to 
the  tenor  of  a  treaty  is  wrong.” 

Accordingly,  the  emperor  sent  oificers  throughout  all  his  empire, 
and  an  entire  year  was  spent  in  making  the  necessary  preparations  for 
a  campaign,  as  befitted  imperial  magnificence.  Then,  followed  by 
chariots  and  horses,  an  innumerable  host,  and  accompanied  by  treas¬ 
ures  of  inestimable  weight,  number,  and  measure,  he  sailed  across  the 
Hellespont,  which  in  common  parlance  is  called  the  arm  of  St.  George, 
and  took  the  road  toward  Antioch.  After  crossing  the  intervening 
provinces,  he  came  into  Cilicia  and  halted  to  besiege  Tarsus,  a  famous 
city  of  Cilicia  Prima.  This  he  took  by  force  of  arms,  cast  out  the  loyal 
subjects  of  the  lord  of  Antioch,  to  whose  faithful  care  it  had  been  en¬ 
trusted,  and  put  in  his  own  nobles.  Without  delay,  in  like  fashion,  he 
made  himself  master  of  Adana,  Mamistra,  and  Anavarza,  the  most 
populous  city  of  Cilicia  Secunda.  He  also  took  the  other  cities  of  that 
province,  together  with  all  the  fortified  towns  and  castles.  Thus,  con¬ 
trary  to  all  justice  and  right,  he  seized  as  a  part  of  his  own  kingdom 
the  entire  province  of  Cilicia,  which  the  prince  of  Antioch  had  held  in 
undisputed  possession  for  forty  years.  For  even  before  Antioch  had 
come  under  our  power  Tarsus  had  been  restored  to  Christian  liberty 
by  Baldwin,  the  duke’s  brother,  and  Mamistra  with  all  the  rest  of 
that  region  had  been  freed  by  the  distinguished  Tancred. 

Thence  advancing  in  mighty  strength,  he  pressed  on  to  Antioch 


fortresses  the  Christians  might  by 


FULK  OF  ANJOU  AS  KING  85 

with  all  his  armies.  Upon  his  arrival  there,  he  immediately  began  siege 
operations.  Mighty  machines  and  engines  were  placed  in  strategic  posi¬ 
tions  around  the  city  and  ever-increasing  pressure  was  exerted  upon 
the  place. 

25.  'Langt  besieges  the  fortress  called  Montf errand,  'The  king, 
with  the  help  of  the  count  of  Tripoliy  seeks  to  raise  the  siegCy 
hut  in  vain.  The  Christians  are  conqueredy  the  count  is  taken 
prisoner y  and  the  king  retreats  to  the  fortress. 

Such  then  was  the  situation  around  Antioch.  Meanwhile,  Zangi,  a 
very  wicked  man  and  a  most  cruel  persecutor  of  the  Christians,  was 
well  aware  that  the  count  of  Tripoli  had  recently  perished  with  a  large 
host  and  that  the  entire  locality  was  now  without  military  forces.  Ac¬ 
cordingly,  he  laid  vigorous  siege  to  Montf  errand.  This  castle  was  situ¬ 
ated  in  the  land  of  Tripoli  on  the  heights  above  the  city  of  Raphania, 
recently  mentioned.  By  fierce  attacks,  persistently  continued  without 
respite,  he  pressed  hard  upon  those  within  the  fortress. 

News  of  this  situation  was  brought  to  Count  Raymond  of  Tripoli, 
son  of  the  late  Count  Pons  and  nephew  of  the  king  on  his  mother’s 
side.  The  young  count  at  once  dispatched  swift  messengers  to  the  king. 
With  earnest  entreaties,  he  besought  Fulk  to  come  without  delay  to  aid 
them  in  the  desperate  situation. 

The  king  ever  felt  paternal  solicitude  for  all  the  troubles  of  the 
Christians.  He  at  once  called  together  the  principal  men  of  the  realm, 
levied  forces  of  both  infantry  and  cavalry  and,  by  making  forced 
marches,  arrived  speedily  in  the  land  of  Tripoli. 

There  he  was  met  by  messengers  from  the  prince  of  Antioch.  They 
brought  the  ill  tidings,  both  by  word  of  mouth  and  by  letter,  that  the 
emperor  was  besieging  Antioch — tidings  which,  alas,  were  too  true.®^ 
With  the  utmost  urgency  they  besought  the  king  to  come  thither  with 
all  his  forces  as  soon  as  possible,  that  he  might  aid  his  brethren  in  their 
critical  situation. 

In  view  of  this  double  emergency,  the  king  called  a  council  to  con¬ 
sider  what  course  to  adopt.  The  opinion  was  unanimous  that  aid  should 
first  be  given  to  the  Christians  besieged  in  the  neighboring  fortress  (a 
task  which  seemed  to  be  easy)  and  that  then  all  with  one  accord  should 
march  on  to  the  relief  of  the  people  of  Antioch.  The  king  and  the 

Antioch  was  beseiged  by  John  on  August  29,  1137. 


86 


FULK  OF  ANJOU  AS  KING 

count  accordingly  united  their  forces  and  attempted  to  march  against 
the  enemy,  but  Divine  favor  did  not  attend  them.  Zangi  had  received 
information  that  they  were  advancing,  and,  as  they  drew  near  their 
destination,  he  abandoned  the  siege  and  led  his  troops  in  battle  forma¬ 
tion  against  them. 

The  Christians  advanced  at  a  brisk  march  toward  the  city,  their 
forces  arranged  in  fighting  array  according  to  the  rules  of  military 
science.  It  was  their  purpose  to  carry  aid  to  the  besieged  and  to  supply 
the  town,  now  entirely  without  food,  with  the  necessary  provisions 
which  they  were  bearing  with  them.  But  the  guides  who  were  leading 
our  army  left  the  easier,  level  road  on  the  left  and,  whether  through 
error  or  malice,  followed  a  difficult  mountain  route.  They  led  the 
Christians  through  a  narrow  and  pathless  district  where  there  was  no 
place  suitable  for  a  battle.  Here  resistance  would  be  difficult,  and  a 
favorable  opportunity  for  attacking  would  be  equally  lacking. 

Zangi  was  a  shrewd  and  experienced  man  of  war.  He  at  once  per¬ 
ceived  the  situation  and  realized  that  the  advantage  was  with  him. 
Aglow  with  fervor,  he  summoned  his  men  and,  himself  foremost 
among  his  thousands,  roused  their  courage  by  his  words  and  challenged 
them  to  follow  his  example.  Fighting  valiantly,  he  fell  upon  the 
Christian  center  and  incited  his  men  to  our  destruction.  Our  first  lines 
broke  ranks;  they  turned  and  fied.  The  leaders  of  our  army  saw  that 
the  first  lines  had  given  way;  they  realized  that  there  was  no  hope  of 
resistance  and  that  they  themselves  in  the  narrow  defiles  could  not 
come  to  their  assistance.  Accordingly,  they  counselled  the  king  to  look 
out  for  his  own  safety  by  withdrawing  into  the  fortress  near  by.  Fulk 
perceived  that  temporarily  this  was  the  best  plan,  for  all  the  infantry 
had  been  either  killed  or  captured.  He  therefore  withdrew  with  a  few 
attendants  into  the  castle.  The  count  of  Tripoli,  a  young  man  of  re¬ 
markable  promise,  was  taken  prisoner,  and  with  him  some  of  his 
knights. 

The  band  following  the  king  entered  the  fortress  and  provided  for 
their  safety  as  they  could.  All  the  baggage,  a  vast  amount,  was  lost 
that  day.  It  included  the  horses  and  pack  animals  which  were  carrying 
provisions  intended  for  revictualing  the  fortress.  The  fugitives  brought 
no  food  with  them  into  the  fortress.  Carrying  only  the  weapons  with 
which  they  were  armed,  they  fled  thither  empty  handed. 

Among  others  who  fell  that  day  was  the  illustrious  Godfrey  Char- 


FULK  OF  ANJOU  AS  KING  87 

puluj  a  brother  of  the  elder  Joscelin,  count  of  Edessa.  He  was  distin¬ 
guished  for  his  high  rank  and  for  his  skill  in  arms.  His  death,  as  that  of 
a  valiant  soldier,  caused  deep  sorrow,  and  his  melancholy  end  touched 
the  entire  army. 

26.  Zangt  again  attacks  the  fortress;  the  besieged  call  on  their 
neighbors  for  helf, 

Zangi  was  well  aware  that  the  Christians  had  carried  no  food  with 
them  into  the  fortress.  All  their  supplies  were  in  his  hands,  and  the 
military  strength  of  the  entire  realm  was  exhausted.  In  addition,  the 
count  was  his  prisoner,  and  the  king,  with  the  greatest  nobles  of  the 
realm,  was  shut  up  without  provisions  in  a  half-ruined  castle.  Accord¬ 
ingly,  he  determined  to  renew  the  siege  of  Montf errand.  He  hoped 
that  now  no  assistance  from  any  source  could  be  brought  to  the  im¬ 
prisoned  garrison  and  felt  confident  that  within  a  short  time  he  would 
succeed  in  taking  the  citadel.  He  therefore  called  his  troops  together 
once  more.  They  responded  to  the  summons  so  laden  with  the  spoils 
taken  from  the  Christians  that  they  disdained  even  larger  plunder  be¬ 
cause  of  the  great  amount  already  collected.  Thus  Montf  errand  was 
again  surrounded  by  hostile  forces,  and  the  siege  was  pressed  forward 
with  vigor. 

Among  the  great  lords  of  the  realm  who  had  taken  refuge  with  the 
king  in  the  fortress  were  William  de  Bury,  the  constable,  Renier  de 
Brus,  an  illustrious  warrior,  Guy  de  Brisebar,  Baldwin  of  Ramlah, 
Humphrey  of  Toron,  a  young  rnan  without  experience  in  warfare,  and 
many  others.  With  them  the  king  took  counsel  as  to  what  should  be 
done  in  such  a  desperate  crisis.  It  was  decided  unanimously  to  appeal 
for  aid  to  the  prince  of  Antioch  and  the  younger  Joscelin,  count  of 
Edessa,  to  summon  the  patriarch  of  Jerusalem  with  all  the  people  of 
the  kingdom,  and  in  the  meantime  to  await  the  coming  of  this  relief 
as  best  they  might. 

Such  was  the  situation  at  Montf  errand.  Just  at  this  time  also  Renaud, 
surnamed  the  Bishop,  a  valiant  soldier  distinguished  for  his  military 
prowess,  was  taken  prisoner.  He  was  the  nephew  of  Roger,  bishop  of 
Lydda,  and  head  of  the  order  of  St.  George.®^  While  engaged  in  pur- 

The  surrender  of  Montferrand  is  dated  in  the  third  week  of  August.  Raymond 
and  Joscelin  II  arrived  some  days  later. 

The  order  of  St.  George  was  short-lived.  It  is  thought  to  have  been  originally 


88 


FULK  OF  ANJOU  AS  KING 

suing  the  people  of  Ascalon  in  his  usual  vigorous  mannerj  but  all  too 
rashly,  he  happened  to  fall  into  an  ambush  and  fell  a  prey  to  the  enemy. 

Meanwhile  the  messengers  did  not  tarry  but  sped  with  all  haste  on 
their  way.  One  went  to  Antioch,  explained  the  dire  straits  of  the  king 
and  his  companions,  and  urged  the  prince  to  hasten  to  their  relief  with¬ 
out  delay.  Another  by  his  vigorous  entreaties  moved  the  count  of 
Edessa  to  action,  while  a  third  sped  to  Jerusalem  and  roused  the  entire 
people. 

The  prince  of  Antioch  hesitated  for  a  little,  uncertain  as  to  what  to 
do.  The  emperor  was  before  his  gates,  and  he  feared  for  the  fate  of  his 
city  if  he  should  attempt  to  leave  it.  On  the  other  hand,  it  seemed 
harsh  and  inhumane  not  to  go  to  the  aid  of  the  king  in  such  a  desperate 
situation.  At  length,  sympathy  with  the  woes  and  anxieties  of  the  king 
and  the  Christian  people  won  the  day.  He  committed  his  city  to  the 
care  of  the  Lord,  in  the  full  assurance  that  it  was  better  to  share  all 
evils  with  his  brethren  than  to  rejoice  in  complete  prosperity  and  peace 
while  they  were  suffering  thus.  He  summoned  the  nobles  and  the 
chief  men  among  the  people,  explained  his  sentiments,  and  invited 
them  all  to  go  to  the  aid  of  the  king.  They  were  easily  persuaded  and 
all  voluntarily  agreed  to  his  desire,  so  pleasing  to  God.  Preparations 
for  departure  were  speedily  made.  They  left  the  city,  blockaded  as  it 
was  by  the  emperor’s  forces,  and  set  forth  as  with  one  mind  to  the  relief 
of  the  king. 

The  count  of  Edessa,  moved  by  similar  emotions,  made  ready  all 
his  forces  and  marched  with  amazing  swiftness  toward  the  same  goal. 
William,  the  patriarch  of  Jerusalem,  assembled  all  the  troops  left  in 
the  kingdom  and,  carrying  with  him  the  Sacred  Cross  of  the  Lord, 
also  hurried  eagerly  thither.  Everywhere,  as  he  hastened  on  his  way, 
he  endeavored  to  raise  reinforcements  and  begged  them  to  go  to  the 
help  of  the  king. 

I 

27‘  Baswajy  governor  of  Damascus^  fillages  and  hums  Nablus, 

While  the  affairs  of  the  king  were  in  this  condition,  news  of  the  situa¬ 
tion  was  brought  to  Baswaj,  governor  of  Damascus  and  chief  of  the 
army,  who  was  mentioned  above.  He  learned  that  the  kingdom  had 
been  stripped  of  its  usual  army,  that  the  king  was  besieged  in  a  remote 

established  by  knig^hts  and  pilgrims  from  England.  It  is  not  connected,  so  far  as  is 
known,  with  any  of  the  other  orders  of  St.  George. 


FULK  OF  ANJOU  AS  KING  89 

part  of  the  realm,  and  that  the  nobles  and  all  the  people,  anxious  to 
liberate  him,  were  flocking  thither  as  with  one  mind.  He  was  con¬ 
vinced  that  the  long-desired  opportunity  of  injuring  the  Christians  had 
now  arrived.  Accordingly,  with  a  large  force,  he  invaded  the  kingdom 
and  suddenly  attacked  the  unfortified  city  of  Nablus,  a  place  without 
walls,  outworks,  or  even  a  moat.  Thus,  wholly  without  warning,  like  a 
thief  in  the  night,  he  fell  upon  the  unsuspecting  citizens  and,  in  a 
furious  onslaught,  spared  neither  sex  nor  age.  Alive  to  the  danger,  but 
alas,  too  late,  the  survivors  with  their  wives  and  children  finally  suc¬ 
ceeded  in  reaching  the  citadel  in  the  middle  of  the  place.  Thus  with 
the  greatest  difficulty  they  escaped  through  the  midst  of  fire  and  mas¬ 
sacre.  Unopposed,  Baswaj  raged  throughout  the  city  with  unbridled 
license  and  consigned  everything  to  the  flames.  He  then  departed 
without  loss.  With  him  he  carried  plunder,  slaves,  and  everything  else 
of  value  in  the  city.®^ 

28.  The  relie j  forces  hurry  to  the  aid  of  the  kingy  but  meanwhile 
still  greater  woes  are  inflicted  upon  the  besieged. 

Meanwhile,  Zangi  continued  his  vigorous  attacks  upon  the  besieged 
with  unremitting  zeal.  The  very  walls  shook  under  the  impulse  of  his 
mighty  engines.  Millstones  and  huge  rocks  hurled  from  the  machines 
fell  into  the  midst  of  the  citadel,  shattered  the  houses  within,  and 
caused  intense  fear  to  the  refugees  there.  Great  fragments  of  rock  and 
all  kinds  of  whirling  missiles  were  hurled  with  such  violence  against 
them  that  there  was  no  longer  any  place  of  security  within  the  walls 
where  the  feeble  and  wounded  might  be  hidden.  Everywhere  was  dan¬ 
ger,  everywhere  hazard 3  everywhere  the  specter  of  frightful  death 
hovered  before  their  eyes.  Apprehension  of  sudden  destruction  and  a 
sinister  foreboding  of  disaster  ever  attended  them.  With  this  very 
object  in  view,  their  cruel  foe  redoubled  his  assaults.  He  arranged  his 
men  in  alternate  divisions  and,  by  using  successive  relays,  renewed  his 
strength.  When  the  first  detachment  became  weary,  fresh  men  were 
brought  into  line,  so  that  the  battle  seemed  continuous  rather  than  be¬ 
gun  anew.  Insufficient  numbers  prevented  the  Christians  from  enjoy¬ 
ing  these  refreshing  changes,  yet  they  sustained  with  unswerving  exer¬ 
tion  not  only  the  earlier  but  also  the  later  attacks.  But  some  succumbed 

This  raid  was  made  in  the  summer  of  1137  while  Fulk  was  involved  with  Zangi 
at  Montferrand  (see  Stevenson,  Crusaders^  p.  146,  note  2). 


90  FULK  OF  ANJOU  AS  KING 

to  severe  wounds  and  others  to  illnesses  of  various  kinds,  so  that  day 
by  day  our  ranks  decreased.  One  failing  was  common  to  all,  the  im¬ 
possibility  of  enduring  constant  engagements.  Their  nights,  devoted 
to  keeping  watch,  were  sleepless,  while  during  the  day  their  strength 
was  further  exhausted  by  never-ending  combat.  The  enemy  granted 
them  no  respite  for  the  restoration  of  their  wearied  bodies. 

As  a  culmination  of  all  these  woes,  the  refugees  had  brought  no 
provisions  with  themj  there  was  no  food  remaining  in  the  fortress 
from  the  former  siege,  and  all  that  which  they  had  intended  to  bring 
in  had  fallen  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy.  Soon  after  they  entered  the 
citadel,  therefore,  the  Christians  were  obliged  to  use  their  horses  for 
food,  since  there  was  nothing  else.  After  these  were  gone,  there  was  no 
food  of  any  description.  So  even  the  strong  and  robust  grew  weak 
from  hunger,  and  leanness,  induced  by  famine,  ravaged  the  strength  of 
even  the  most  vigorous. 

Moreover,  the  number  shut  up  within  the  fortress  was  so  large  that 
the  supplies  were  not  sufficient  to  afford  even  a  modicum  to  each  one. 
The  lodging  places  were  so  overcrowded  that  great  numbers  lay  in  the 
streets  and  squares — ^in  fact,  the  ground  seemed  as  if  covered  with 
rushes.  Javelins  incautiously  thrown  at  random  by  the  archers  often 
fell  in  their  midst  and  inflicted  fatal  wounds.  Zangi  received  full  in¬ 
formation  of  all  these  details  by  reliable  messengers.  Confident  that 
the  Christians  could  not  long  endure  such  straits,  he  urged  his  men  to 
yet  stronger  measures.  He  massed  his  cohorts  so  closely  around  the 
fortress  and  guarded  all  the  entrances  so  strictly  that  no  one,  not  even 
in  a  most  desperate  attempt,  could  reach  our  people,  nor  could  they 
themselves  go  forth. 

The  situation  in  the  beleaguered  city  grew  worse  from  day  to  day. 
Food  was  wholly  lacking  and  hope  was  utterly  gone.  In  this  extremity 
the  Christians  learned  by  their  own  experience  how  imperious  is  the 
rule  of  famine  and  how  true  is  that  saying,  ^Tamine  alone  makes  cities 
free  [from  their  masters].” 

Yet  hope  of  succor  from  the  prince,  the  count  of  Edessa,  and  Jerusa¬ 
lem  in  some  measure  sustained  the  almost  perishing  people.  But,  since 
“for  the  yearning  soul  nothing  moves  swiftly  enough,”  they  distrusted 
all  delay,  their  eagerness  increased  because  deferred,  and  an  hour 
seemed  as  a  year. 

Lucan  Pharsalia  iii.  56. 


FULK  OF  ANJOU  AS  KING 


2g.  Relief  arrives.  In  the  meantime y  however y  the  king  is  induced 
to  surrender.  He  enters  into  an  agreement  with  the  foe  and 
returns  in  safety  to  his  own  land. 

While  these  events  were  transpiring  at  the  besieged  castle  of  Mont- 
ferrandj  Prince  Raymond  was  already  drawing  near  with  his  legions. 
The  count  of  Edessa,  also  with  a  large  force,  was  not  far  away,  and  the 
army  of  Jerusalem,  led  by  the  Cross  of  Salvation,  was  likewise  march¬ 
ing  rapidly  thither.  Information  of  their  approach  was  brought  to 
Zangi  by  reliable  messengers.  He  dreaded  the  arrival  of  these  great 
leaders  and,  above  all,  of  the  emperor,  who  was,  he  knew,  at  Antioch. 
He  feared  that  the  monarch,  on  learning  of  the  troubles  of  the  besieged 
Christians,  might  feel  compassion  for  them,  and  with  his  own  uncon¬ 
querable  army  march  out  in  wrath  against  him.  Before  news  of  the 
approaching  relief  could  reach  the  prisoners  in  the  castle,  therefore,  he 
sent  envoys  to  make  overtures  of  peace.  They  were  instructed  to  say  to 
the  king  and  his  nobles  that  the  fortress,  already  half  demolished, 
could  not  hold  out  much  longer  j  that  the  Christians,  exhausted  by 
starvation,  had  lost  courage  and  had  no  longer  strength  to  resist.  His 
own  army,  on  the  contrary,  possessed  in  abundance  all  things  necessary. 
Nevertheless,  out  of  respect  for  the  king,  a  great  and  illustrious  prince 
among  the  Christians,  he  was  willing  to  restore  all  the  captives  whom 
he  had  recently  taken,  including  the  count,  and  to  permit  the  king  and 
all  his  company  to  leave  the  place  freely  and  peacefully  and  return  to 
their  own  country,  on  condition  that  the  fortress  should  be  surren¬ 
dered. 

The  Christians  were  ignorant  that  aid  was  so  near.  Hunger,  vigils, 
hardships,  and  anguish  of  mind,  together  with  deadly  wounds  had  ut¬ 
terly  exhausted  their  strength  and  reduced  them  to  a  state  far  from 
warlike.  They  received  the  proffered  terms  with  great  eagerness  and 
were  astonished  that  such  humanity  could  exist  in  a  man  so  cruel.  Grate¬ 
fully  they  accepted  the  conditions  imposed,  without  questioning  the 
reason  thereof.  As  soon  as  the  understanding  had  been  reduced  to  an 
agreement  pleasing  to  both  parties,  the  count  of  Tripoli  was  released 
and  with  him  a  large  number  of  captives.  The  king  and  his  men  then 
marched  out  at  once,  receiving  kindly  treatment  from  the  enemy,  and 
the  fortress  was  surrendered  to  the  Turks.  The  king,  agitated  indeed 
but  yet  happy  in  his  release  from  a  situation  of  great  perplexity  and 


92  FULK  OF  ANJOU  AS  KING 

danger,  went  down  from  the  heights  into  the  fields  near  Arka.  There 
he  learned  that  the  prince  and  the  count  were  at  hand.  He  met  them 
with  great  affection  and  commended  their  brotherly  love  and  solici¬ 
tude,  but  lamented  that  it  was  offered  too  late.  He  thanked  them 
heartily  because  they  had  showed  so  much  consideration  for  his  affairs 
and  as  far  as  lay  within  their  power  had  rendered  the  desired  aid. 
Then,  refreshed  by  friendly  talk  with  one  another,  they  parted  and 
each  returned  to  his  own  land.®^ 

30.  On  his  return  to  A ntloch  the  frince  finds  the  city  under  siege. 

He  makes  a  valiant  resistance.  Finally  y  how  every  through  the 
intervention  of  certain  individuals y  he  is  reconciled  to  the 
emferor. 

The  prince  of  Antioch  returned  home  with  all  haste,  for  his  own 
affairs  were  in  a  very  critical  condition.  He  had  left  the  most  powerful 
prince  of  the  world  before  his  gates  intent  on  hostile  measures.  Enter¬ 
ing  by  the  upper  gate,  which  is  next  to  the  citadel  and  stronghold  of  the 
city,  Raymond  found  the  emperor  still  determined  to  carry  out  his 
original  design.  Accordingly,  for  several  days  there  was  active  warfare 
between  the  two  armies.  Often  secretly  but  still  more  often  openly, 
the  people  of  Antioch  sallied  forth  against  the  emperor’s  army  and 
frequently  wrought  great  havoc.  Without  regard  to  the  fact  that  both 
sides  professed  the  same  faith,  they  fought  with  one  another  as  with 
enemies. 

The  emperor,  for  his  part,  caused  immensely  heavy  rocks  to  be 
hurled  from  the  mighty  machines  and  engines.  In  this  way,  he  sought 
to  weaken  and  break  down  the  defenses  of  the  city  and  to  shatter  the 
walls  and  towers  at  the  gate  of  the  Bridge.  The  legions,  armed  with 
arrows  and  all  sorts  of  missiles,  were  disposed  in  a  circle  round  the 
place.  Aided  by  a  strong  band  of  slingers,  they  sought  at  long  range  to 
prevent  the  townspeople  from  defending  the  walls  and  were  ever  on 
the  ch  for  an  opportunity  to  approach  and  undermine  the  fortifica¬ 
tions. 

As  this  critical  situation  developed,  men  of  good  sense  in  both  armies 
began  to  fear  that,  if  wiser  counsel  did  not  speedily  prevail,  things 
would  come  to  such  a  desperate  pass  that  a  fitting  solution  for  possible 
dangerous  crises  would  not  easily  be  found.  Accordingly,  in  apprehen- 

The  narrow  margin  o£  time  between  the  surrender  of  the  king  and  the  arrival 
of  the  relief  forces  is  confirmed  by  Qalanisi  (Gibb,  Chronicle^  pp.  242—43). 


FULK  OF  ANJOU  AS  KING  93 

sion  of  such  a  result,  certain  persons  interposed  as  arbitrators.  They 
went  to  the  camp  of  the  emperor  with  proposals  of  peace  and,  with 
propitiatory  words  and  a  great  show  of  humility,  endeavored  to  soften 
his  wrath.  In  this  wise  and  discreet  manner,  as  was  meet,  they  ap¬ 
proached  the  monarch  and  tried  to  pave  the  way  for  peace.  It  was 
finally  arranged  by  the  arbiters  and  those  who  had  charge  of  bringing 
about  the  much-desired  peace,  that  the  prince,  attended  by  all  his 
barons,  should  present  himself  before  his  imperial  majesty  and,  in  the 
presence  of  the  illustrious  and  distinguished  nobles  of  the  imperial 
palace,  should  with  all  due  solemnity  swear  allegiance  and  fealty  to  the 
emperor.  Furthermore,  he  should  take  a  solemn  oath  that  whenever 
the  emperor  desired  to  enter  Antioch  or  its  citadel,  either  in  war  or 
peace,  the  prince  should  not  refuse  to  allow  him  a  free  and  undisputed 
entrance.  If  the  emperor  should  peacefully  restore  Aleppo,  Shayzar, 
Hama,  and  Hims  to  the  prince,  as  had  been  stipulated  in  the  treaty, 
Raymond  was  to  rest  content  with  these  cities  and  others  near  by,  and 
without  contest  give  back  to  the  emperor  the  city  of  Antioch  to  be  held 
by  right  of  ownership. 

In  return  for  the  fealty  shown  him,  the  emperor  should  agree  that 
if,  by  the  aid  of  God,  he  succeeded  in  taking  Aleppo,  Shayzar,  and  all 
the  adjacent  region,  he  would  allow  the  whole  to  be  given  to  the  prince 
without  trouble  or  diminution  and  that  the  latter  and  his  heirs  should 
hold  it  in  peace  by  perpetual  right,  but  in  benefice,  which  is  commonly 
called  in  fief. 

In  accordance  with  this  agreement,  the  prince,  attended  by  his  noble 
suite,  proceeded  to  the  imperial  camp.  He  was  received  by  the  emperor 
with  fitting  honor,  and,  after  the  covenant  had  been  revised  to  the 
satisfaction  of  both  parties,  the  prince  tendered  the  oath  of  fealty  to 
the  emperor.  Thereupon,  the  emperor  at  once  granted  him  the  investi¬ 
ture  of  the  cities  named  above,  with  all  their  dependencies,  and  prom¬ 
ised  faithfully  that  if,  by  the  will  of  God,  he  should  take  them  the 
following  summer,  he  would  personally  surrender  them  to  the^prince. 

As  soon  as  the  treaty  was  concluded  and  peace  fully  reestablished, 
the  imperial  standard  was  raised  over  the  principal  tower  of  the  citadel. 
Then,  laden  with  most  bountiful  gifts,  the  prince  returned  to  Antioch 
with  his  retinue.  Since  the  severe  winter  season  was  at  hand,  the  em¬ 
peror  went  back  to  Cilicia  with  all  his  army,  that  he  might  spend  the 
winter  on  the  seacoast  near  Tarsus. 


HERE  ENDS  THE  FOURTEENTH  BOOK 


THE  FIFTEENTH  BOOK  BEGINS 


EMPEROR  JOHN  SEEKS  TO  EXTEND  HIS 
INFLUENCE  OVER  THE  LATIN  STATES 

I.  The  emferor  lays  siege  to  Shayxar;  the  frince  and  the  count 
of  Edessa  attend  hiniy  as  in  duty  bound  by  their  oath  of  allegi” 
ance  to  him. 

The  emperor  passed  the  winter  months  in  Cilicia.  On  the  approach 
of  spring,  that  season  most  favorable  for  the  pursuit  of  war,  he  sent 
forth  the  heralds  to  proclaim  an  imperial  edict  by  which  the  com¬ 
manders  of  the  army,  the  centurions,  and  the  commanders  of  fifties 
were  instructed  to  draw  up  their  forces,  to  repair  the  engines  of  war, 
and  to  arm  the  entire  people.  Envoys  had  already  been  sent  to  invite 
the  prince,  the  count  of  Edessa,  and  the  other  principal  lords  of  those 
parts  to  march  forth  with  the  emperor  to  war. 

Accordingly,  from  all  directions  the  troops  assembled.  About  April  i, 
the  emperor,  in  order  to  make  good  the  agreement  between  himself 
and  the  prince,  directed  the  entire  host,  with  blare  of  trumpts  and  roll 
of  drums,  to  proceed  toward  Shayzar.  He  entered  the  enemy’s  coun¬ 
try  and  a  few  days  later  encamped  before  the  city. 

As  soon  as  they  learned  of  this,  the  prince  and  the  count  levied 
troops  from  all  over  their  domains  and,  with  the  same  purpose  in  view, 
followed  the  emperor  as  quickly  as  possible.  Soon  they  arrived  with 
their  armies  before  the  city  named  above. 

The  situation  of  Shayzar  is  very  similar  to  that  of  Antioch,  between 
the  mountain  and  the  river  which  flows  past  the  latter  city.  The  greater 
part  lies  in  the  plain  which  extends  to  the  river,  but  there  is  also  another 
part  built  on  the  slope  of  the  mountain.  On  the  heights  above  towers 
the  citadel,  which  was  generally  believed  to  be  impregnable.  From  this 
stronghold,  on  the  right  and  on  the  left,  the  walls  run  down  to  the  river 
and  enclose  the  city  with  the  suburbs  adjacent  to  it. 

The  emperor  crossed  the  river,  encircled  the  city  with  his  troops, 
and  laid  siege  to  the  place  on  that  side  which  seemed  most  easily  as¬ 
sailable  because  of  the  suburbs  before  it.  From  the  machines,  set  up  in 


EMPEROR  JOHN  AND  THE  LATIN  STATES  95 

strategic  positions,  poured  forth  constant  volleys  of  heavy  stones  which 
shook  the  towers  and  walls  and  even  the  houses  of  the  people  within. 
Under  the  repeated  blows  of  these  enormous  missiles,  the  fortifica¬ 
tions,  on  which  the  inhabitants  had  relied  as  their  greatest  defense,  were 
utterly  overthrown  and  in  their  fall  wrought  dreadful  havoc  among 
the  townspeople. 

The  emperor,  a  man  of  great  courage,  pressed  on  the  assault  with 
glowing  zeal  and  promised  rewards  for  victory.  Thus  he  kindled  the 
enthusiasm  of  the  young,  ever  eager  for  glory,  for  the  strife  and  com¬ 
bats  of  war.  Protected  by  the  breastplate  and  girt  with  the  sword,  his 
head  covered  with  a  golden  helmet,  he  mingled  with  the  ranks  and 
cheered  now  these,  now  those,  with  words  of  encouragement.  Again, 
like  a  man  of  the  people,  he  roused  their  valor  by  his  example  and 
fought  valiantly,  that  he  might  render  others  more  courageous  for  the 
fray.  Thus  did  this  man  of  lofty  spirit  move  about  without  ceasing 
among  the  troops.  From  the  first  hour  of  the  day  even  unto  the  latest 
he  endured  the  heat  of  battle.  He  gave  himself  no  rest — not  even  to 
take  food.  For  either  he  was  admonishing  those  who  served  the  engines 
to  take  better  and  more  frequent  aim  or  he  was  inspiring  courage  in 
those  who  were  engaged  in  the  thick  of  the  combat.  He  restored  the 
strength  of  the  fighters  by  successive  relays  of  men  and  substituted 
fresh  troops  for  those  who  were  exhausted. 

But  while  others  were  engaged  in  strenuous  conflict,  the  prince  and 
the  count,  both  young  men,  let  themselves  be  drawn  away  by  the 
frivolous  pursuits  common  to  men  of  their  years.  They  were  continu¬ 
ally  playing  at  games  of  chance  to  the  great  detriment  of  their  own 
interests.  Moreover,  by  this  lack  of  interest  in  warlike  pursuits,  they 
influenced  others  to  take  a  less  active  part  in  the  siege. 

When  their  ill  conduct  came  to  the  notice  of  the  emperor,  he  was 
greatly  incensed,  and  more  than  once  by  friendly  admonitions  given  in 
secret  he  strove  to  call  them  back  to  their  duty.  He  set  before  them  his 
own  example  and  reminded  them  of  the  fact  that  he,  although  the 
most  powerful  monarch  of  the  land,  did  not  spare  himself  physical 
hardships  and  great  expense.  For  some  days  the  army  continued  with¬ 
out  ceasing  to  carry  on  engagements  and  conflicts  of  this  nature.  Fi¬ 
nally,  the  emperor,  indignant  that  a  weak  city  could  so  long  resist  his 
incomparable  army,  wearied  of  the  delay.  He  accused  his  men  of 
laxity  and  tried  to  incite  them  to  more  vigorous  efforts.  He  com- 


96  EMPEROR  JOHN  AND  THE  LATIN  STATES 

manded  that  the  attacks  be  redoubled  and  the  siege  pressed  on  with 
more  boldness. 

During  the  vigorous  but  ineffective  siege  of  the  city,  that  suburb  in 
the  lower  part  of  the  town,  which  was  mentioned  above,  was  captured 
in  a  hand-to-hand  fight.  No  mercy  was  shown  to  the  citizens  found 
there,  except  in  the  case  of  those  who  by  word  or  dress  or  by  some  other 
sign  indicated  that  they  would  follow  the  Christian  faith.  For  Shayzar 
contained  and  had  contained  from  the  beginning  many  people  who  be¬ 
longed  to  the  faithful  and  who,  under  the  wretched  yoke  of  slavery, 
were  unjustly  oppressed  by  their  infidel  masters.^ 

2.  The  emferor  in  anger  raises  the  siege  and  returns  to  Antioch 
without  accomplishing  his  end. 

As  soon  as  the  suburb  was  taken,  the  citizens,  alarmed  lest  the  enemy 
should  burst  forcibly  into  the  inner  part  and  attack  their  wives  and 
children,  begged  for  a  short  truce.  This  was  granted.  The  lord  of 
Shayzar  was  a  certain  noble  Arab  named  Machedolus.^  This  man 
secretly  sent  messengers  to  the  emperor  and  humbly  besought  him 
with  many  prayers  to  save  the  city  and  protect  the  citizens.  He  prom¬ 
ised  to  give  in  return  a  large  sum  of  money.  The  dissolute  and  inactive 
conduct  of  the  prince  and  the  count  during  the  campaign  had  deeply 
angered  the  emperor,  especially  in  view  of  the  fact  that  in  pursuance 
of  his  promise  he  was  laboring  in  their  behalf.  Their  promises  of  fealty, 
rather  specious  than  reliable,  he  counted  as  nothing;  they  were,  in  fact, 
dead  without  works.  Accordingly,  he  detested  them,  and,  to  punish 
their  faithlessness,  he  had  already  determined  in  his  own  mind,  with 
the  counsel  of  a  few  intimate  advisers,  that  at  the  first  opportunity 
which  offered  the  least  semblance  of  honor,  he  would  raise  the  siege 
and  return  home. 

Accordingly,  as  soon  as  the  money  agreed  upon  for  raising  the  siege 
was  paid,  the  heralds  were  ordered  to  proclaim  peace,  and  the  legions 
were  directed  to  make  ready  for  departure.  Camp  was  at  once  broken. 

^  Shayzar  was  the  native  city  of  Usamah  and  is  described  in  his  autobiography  (see 
P.  K.  Hitti,  An  Arab-Syrian  Gentleman  and  Warrior  in  the  Period  of  the  Crusades: 
Memoirs  of  Usamah  ibn-Mtcnqidh^  pp.  3--5  et  fassim). 

-  It  is  difficult  to  recognize  in  William’s  Machedolus  the  name  of  Usamah’s  uncle 
who  governed  the  city  at  this  time.  The  uncle’s  name  is  Izz-al-Din  abu-al-Asakir’ 
Sultan.  He  died  in  1154  and  was  succeeded  by  one  Taj-al-Dawlah  (see  Hitti,  Usamah^ 
Introd.,  p.  6). 


EMPEROR  JOHN  AND  THE  LATIN  STATES  97 

Orders  were  given  that  the  legions  proceed  toward  Antioch  and  that 
the  entire  army  hasten  thither.^ 

When  the  count  and  the  prince  learned  of  the  emperor’s  action,  they 
repented  of  their  conduct,  but,  alas,  too  late.  They  endeavored  to  alter 
his  intention,  but  he  could  not  be  swerved  from  the  decision  he  had 
made.  He  rejected  all  their  efforts  at  persuasion  and  hastened  his  de¬ 
parture.  The  count,  far  more  sophisticated  and  wily  than  the  prince,  is 
said  to  have  acted  very  maliciously  in  this  matter.  Influenced  by  a  secret 
hatred  against  the  prince,  his  lord,  which  he  later  openly  acknowl¬ 
edged,  he  led  the  imprudent  youth  astray  by  his  own  greater  subtlety 
so  that  the  latter’s  power  might  not  be  increased.  By  every  possible 
means  he  endeavored  to  bring  upon  him  the  emperor’s  displeasure,  lest 
through  that  monarch  the  importance  of  the  young  prince  might  be 
increased. 

3.  The  emferor  again  demands  the  citadel  of  A ntioch  jrom  the 
frince  and  thus  indicates  his  intention  of  remaining  for  a  time 
in  that  vicinity. 

The  emperor  arrived  at  Antioch  with  his  sons  and  his  suite  and  en¬ 
tered  the  city  attended  by  a  large  body  of  soldiers.  He  was  conducted 
with  great  ceremony,  first  to  the  cathedral  and  then  to  the  palace  of 
the  prince,  who,  with  the  count,  assumed  the  office  of  marshal.  The 
patriarch  with  all  the  clergy  and  people  followed  in  procession  accord¬ 
ing  to  custom.  Songs  of  praise  and  the  sound  of  musical  instruments 
accompanied  his  progress  as  well  as  frequent  bursts  of  joyous  applause 
from  the  populace. 

For  several  days,  as  if  the  palace  were  his  own,  the  emperor  in¬ 
dulged  freely  as  he  would  in  the  pleasures  of  the  baths  and  other  rec¬ 
reations  pertaining  to  physical  welfare.  To  the  prince  and  the  count,  to 
their  nobles,  and  even  to  some  of  the  citizens,  he  showed  profuse  and 
almost  prodigal  munificence.  At  length,  he  caused  the  two  lords  with 
all  the  nobles  of  the  province  to  be  summoned  to  his  presence.  When 
they  appeared  before  him,  he  addressed  the  prince  as  follows:  ^^You 
know,  my  dear  son  Raymond,  that  out  of  love  for  you  we  have  tarried 
in  this  vicinity  a  long  time,  that  we  might  enlarge  your  principality 

®  According:  to  Qalanisi,  who  describes  the  emperor’s  spring-  campaign  on  the  upper 
Orontes,  the  real  reason  for  raising  the  siege  was  the  news  that  Zangi  was  collecting 
a  large  army  and  would  soon  pounce  upon  the  Christians  (see  H.  A.  R.  Gibb,  trans., 
The  Damascus  Chronicle^  pp.  248-52). 


98  EMPEROR  JOHN  AND  THE  LATIN  STATES 

and  extend  your  possessions  to  the  detriment  of  the  enemies  of  our 
faith.  This  we  have  done  in  accordance  with  the  agreement  formerly 
entered  into,  through  the  mediation  of  wise  men,  between  our  empire, 
beloved  of  God,  and  you,  our  loyal  vassal.  An  opportune  occasion  has 
now  come,  and  it  is  time  to  fulfil  our  promise  and  to  place  all  the  ad¬ 
joining  region  under  your  rule,  as  the  stipulations  of  the  treaty  clearly 
provide.  But  you  well  know,  and  these  nobles  who  stand  with  you  in 
our  presence  also  know,  that  to  carry  out  the  obligations  by  which  we 
are  bound  is  not  the  matter  of  a  short  time.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  evi¬ 
dent  that  your  affairs  demand  an  even  longer  sojourn  on  my  part  and 
yet  greater  outlay.  Consequently,  you  must  surrender  to  our  care  the 
citadel  of  this  city,  according  to  the  tenor  of  the  agreement,  that  our 
treasure  may  be  placed  there  in  security.  Our  forces  must  also  have 
free  access  to  the  city,  that  they  may  come  and  go  without  hindrance. 
The  engines  of  war  needed  for  the  siege  of  Aleppo  cannot  be  so  readily 
procured  from  Tarsus  or  Anavarza  or  the  other  cities  of  Cilicia.  For 
these  purposes  this  city  affords  far  better  facilities  than  any  other  place 
can  offer.  Fulfil  your  promise,  therefore,  and,  conforming  to  the  fealty 
which  you  have  shown,  do  your  duty.  It  will  be  the  task  of  our  im¬ 
perial  highness  to  carry  out  the  obligations  resting  upon  us  and  to  inter¬ 
pret  these  liberally  and  with  overflowing  measure.” 

The  prince  and  his  nobles  were  appalled  at  the  severity  of  these 
words.  For  a  long  time  they  anxiously  deliberated  over  the  problem, 
uncertain  what  response  to  make.  For  it  seemed  a  very  harsh  and  seri¬ 
ous  matter  that  the  city,  which  our  nation  had  acquired  at  such  peril 
and  which  had  been  restored  to  the  Christian  faith  at  the  expense  of 
the  precious  blood  of  happy  princes,  should  fall  into  the  hands  of  the 
effeminate  Greeks.  Antioch  had  always  been  the  head  and  governor 
of  many  great  provinces,  and,  without  her,  it  seemed  to  us  that  the  rest 
of  the  country  could  not  hold  out.  On  the  other  hand,  there  could  be 
no  question  that  this  had  been  included  in  the  agreement  made  by  the 
prince.  Moreover,  the  emperor  had  brought  in  with  him  so  many  of 
his  own  men  that  it  would  be  difficult  to  resist  him  if  he  should  be  in¬ 
clined  to  use  force.  The  matter  was  at  this  critical  point  when  the  count 
of  Edessa  spoke  thus,  on  behalf  of  all.  ^^Sire,  the  words  of  your  im¬ 
perial  highness  are  fraught  with  divine  eloquence  and  are  worthy  of 
all  acceptance,  for  we  see  that  their  purpose  is  wholly  concerned  with 
increasing  our  power.  But  a  new  matter  calls  for  fresh  consideration, 


EMPEROR  JOHN  AND  THE  LATIN  STATES  99 

nor  does  it  lie  within  the  power  of  the  lord  prince  alone  to  agree  to  this 
demand.  He  must  consider  most  carefully  with  the  advice  of  his 
nobles,  of  me,  forsooth,  and  of  his  other  loyal  subjects,  how  your  dic¬ 
tum  and  demand  may  best  be  carried  into  effect.  For  if  there  should 
be  an  uprising  of  the  populace,  the  execution  of  your  demand  might 
be  hindered.” 

The  count’s  response  was  acceptable  to  the  emperor.  A  short  delay 
was  thereupon  granted,  that  the  proposed  deliberation  might  be  held. 
The  count  then  went  home  j  the  prince  remained  in  the  palace,  where, 
according  to  report,  he  was  practically  a  prisoner. 

4.  An  ufrising  occurs  in  Antioch;  the  emferor  in  alarm  rescinds  his 
demand;  the  quarrel  is  settled y  and  the  emferor  leaves  the  city. 

As  soon  as  the  count  reached  home,  he  dispatched  secret  messengers  to 
inform  the  people  of  the  emperor’s  demands  and  to  rouse  them  to 
arms.  A  tumult,  accompanied  by  loud  shouting,  soon  arose  throughout 
the  city ;  crowds  assembled  from  every  direction,  and  the  din  increased 
to  a  mighty  uproar.  When  the  count  heard  the  disturbance,  he  took 
horse  and  rode  swiftly  to  the  palace,  as  if  fleeing  from  the  pursuit  of  the 
populace.  He  threw  himself,  breathless,  at  the  feet  of  the  emperor. 
The  monarch,  astonished  at  his  abrupt  entrance,  inquired  solicitously 
.why,  contrary  to  the  etiquette  and  discipline  of  the  sacred  palace,  he 
had  rushed  so  informally  into  the  presence  of  his  imperial  majesty.  The 
count  answered  that  necessity  knew  no  law.  The  pursuit  of  a  raging 
mob  had  compelled  him  to  transgress  customary  rules  in  order  to 
avoid  peril  of  death.  In  answer  to  the  emperor’s  repeated  inquiries  for 
details  he  said  that  he  had  entered  an  inn  to  rest  and  was  about  to  re¬ 
fresh  himself  there.^  Suddenly,  the  entire  populace,  armed  with  swords 
and  other  weapons  such  as  fury  supplies,  besieged  the  door  of  the 
house.  As  one  man  they  began  to  denounce  him  as  a  man  of  blood,  a 
betrayer  of  his  country,  a  murderer  of  the  people,  one  who  had  taken 
money  from  the  emperor  and  was  about  to  sell  the  city  to  him.  They 
demanded  that  he  be  surrendered  to  them.  They  had  actually  broken 
into  the  house  before  he  had  succeeded  in  making  his  escape  through 
the  midst  of  a  thousand  dangers. 

In  the  meantime,  the  mighty  uproar  was  heard  throughout  the  city  j 

^  The  mention  of  an  inn,  hcsfitlum^  as  a  place  fit  to  house  one  of  the  Latin  princes 
implies  a  highly  developed  system  of  caring  for  transients,  both  merchants  and  soldiers. 


100  EMPEROR  JOHN  AND  THE  LATIN  STATES 

unbridled  tumult  reigned.  Repeated  rumors  circulated  throughout  the 
city  that  Antioch  had  been  sold  to  the  Greeks,  that  the  citadel  had  al¬ 
ready  been  surrendered  to  them,  and  that  the  citizens  would  be  forced 
to  leave  the  homes  of  their  forefathers  and  depart  from  their  ancestral 
possessions.  Kindled  to  fury  by  these  reports,  the  townspeople  attacked 
members  of  the  emperor’s  household  wherever  found.  They  dragged 
them  down  from  their  horses,  despoiled  them  with  violence,  beat 
them  with  whips,  and  put  to  the  sword  all  who  showed  the  least  re¬ 
sistance.  Fugitives,  desperately  trying  to  escape  from  wounds  and 
death,  were  pursued  with  drawn  swords  into  the  very  palace  of  the 
emperor. 

The  clamor  of  the  citizens  and  the  vehement  outcries  of  his  own  fol¬ 
lowers  roused  the  emperor  to  action.  He  ordered  the  prince  and  the 
nobles  to  be  summoned  immediately.  Alarmed  lest  some  serious  dem¬ 
onstration  be  made  against  himself,  he  restrained  his  anger  for  the 
time  being,  and  in  reference  to  the  rather  free  remarks  which  he  had 
made  that  day  in  the  presence  of  all,  he  said:  remember  that  I  dis¬ 

cussed  with  you  today  a  matter  which  may  perchance  have  given  rise 
to  this  excitement  among  the  people.  At  this  time,  I  wish  all  the  people 
as  well  as  the  fathers  of  the  city  to  know  that,  since  my  demand  seems 
to  you  so  harsh  and  difficult,  I  revoke  my  sentence  and  retract  that 
which  I  proposed.  Retain  for  yourselves  the  citadel  and  the  whole  city 
as  well.  It  is  sufficient  for  me  that  the  conditions  which  have  prevailed 
up  to  this  time  continue.  I  know  that  you  are  in  very  truth  my  loyal 
servants,  and  I  am  confident  that  you  will  never  prove  false  to  the 
fealty  which  you  have  promised  and  guaranteed.  Go,  therefore,  and 
try  to  quiet  the  raging  populace.  If  my  sojourn  in  Antioch  causes  them 
any  degree  of  apprehension,  let  them  not  be  further  concerned.  To¬ 
morrow,  God  willing,  I  shall  take  my  departure.” 

All  present  manifested  approval  of  the  emperor’s  resolve.  His  pru¬ 
dence,  his  farseeing  counsel,  and  his  wise  discernment  were  highly 
extolled.  The  prince  and  the  count  then  went  out  with  others  of  the 
principal  men  and  by  words  and  gestures,  nods  and  signs,  endeavored 
to  calm  the  uproar.  Silence  was  at  last  obtained  and  the  mob  reduced 
by  friendly  words  to  some  degree  of  tranquillity.  The  mediators  then 
earnestly  besought  them  to  return  to  their  homes,  to  lay  aside  their 
arms  and  be  quiet.  This  result  was  finally  brought  about. 

On  the  following  day  the  emperor,  attended  by  his  sons,  his  kindred, 


EMPEROR  JOHN  AND  THE  LATIN  STATES  loi 

and  all  his  following,  left  Antioch,  and  by  his  orders  the  camp  was 
established  outside  the  walls.® 

5 .  Envoys  are  sent  to  the  emferor  to  try  to  affease  his  anger.  In 
this  they  are  successful,  T  he  emferor  returns  to  his  own  land. 

Wise  men  in  the  city,  however,  realized  that  the  emperor’s  wrath  had 
been  excited  against  the  prince  and  the  great  nobles.  Although  he  had 
wisely  concealed  his  real  feelings,  yet  he  believed  that  they  were  re¬ 
sponsible  for  instigating  and  secretly  encouraging  the  popular  upris¬ 
ing.  Accordingly,  in  the  hope  of  restoring  peace,  men  of  experience 
and  judgment  were  sent  as  envoys  to  his  imperial  majesty.  They  were 
to  offer  excuses  for  the  prince  and  the  principal  men  of  the  land  and  to 
declare  that  they  were  not  guilty  of  exciting  sedition  among  the  people. 

The  deputies  were  introduced  into  the  presence  of  the  emperor.  Act¬ 
ing  on  behalf  of  their  mission,  they  earnestly  alleged  the  innocence  of 
the  prince  and  strove  to  convince  the  emperor  of  the  fact  in  the  follow¬ 
ing  words:  ^^Your  imperial  majesty  and  august  highness  knows  far 
better  than  we  that  in  all  communities,  and  far  more  in  cities  and 
wherever  men  congregate  in  large  numbers,  all  are  not  possessed  of 
equal  wisdom  or  endowed  with  equal  judgment.  People  have  different 
manners  and  customs,  they  follow  varied  pursuits,  as  their  interests 
direct.  Most  true  is  that  wise  saying:  ^My  three  guests  seem  almost  to 
quarrel.’®  And  this  also:  ^As  many  men,  so  many  minds.’ ^  In  the 
midst  of  this  great  variety  of  manners  and  habits,  it  is  the  duty  of  the 
wise  man  to  discern  those  who  are  deserving  and  to  distribute  rewards 
in  proportion  to  merit.  Following  out  this  reasoning,  the  frenzied 
actions  of  an  irresponsible  mob  should  not  redound  to  the  detriment 
of  the  better-disposed  element.  It  often  happens  that  a  disorderly  mob, 
which  brooks  no  restraint,  rashly  excites  quarrels  and  disturbances.  But 
it  is  also  certain,  as  ancient  and  long-approved  custom  shows,  that  in 
all  well-constituted  cities  the  rash  impulses  of  the  populace  are  re¬ 
strained  and  unbridled  audacity  checked  by  the  wise  moderation  of  the 

®  This  account  of  the  reason  for  the  departure  of  John  from  Antioch  is  accepted 
by  Chalandon.  There  were  deeper  reasons  than  this  ruse  of  Joscelin  for  the  resentment 
of  the  Latin  populace  against  the  Greeks.  The  overlordship  of  Antioch  by  John  car¬ 
ried  with  it,  expressed  or  implied,  the  reestablishment  of  a  Greek  patriarch.  Inno¬ 
cent  II,  alarmed  by  John^s  conduct  in  Cilicia,  issued  a  bull  forbidding  Latin  Christians 
to  serve  in  the  army  of  the  Greeks  (Jaffe,  R^g,y  no.  7883)  5  F.  Chalandon,  Les  CornnhiCy 
II,  154— 56 i  see  also  note  17,  below). 

®  Horace  Ef,  ii.  ii.  61. 


^  Terence  Fhor,  ii.  iv.  14. 


102  EMPEROR  JOHN  AND  THE  LATIN  STATES 

elders.  If  it  were  otherwise,  the  condition  of  the  crowd  would  be  far 
better  than  that  of  the  nobles  3  unless  the  elders  were  permitted  to  cor¬ 
rect  the  errors  of  the  thoughtless  populace,  the  confusion  of  a  heedless 
mob  would  prevail  rather  than  the  experience  of  the  wise.  Without  the 
knowledge  of  the  prince  and  of  those  charged  with  carrying  on  the 
most  important  affairs  of  state,  the  irresponsible  people  committed 
this  outrage.  Let  them  bear  the  punishment  they  deserve,  but  let  the 
prince  and  the  nobles  be  held  guiltless.  In  proof  of  his  innocence,  the 
prince  is  ready  to  abide  by  the  terms  of  the  treaty  and,  if  permitted,  to 
transfer  the  city  with  the  citadel  into  the  hands  of  the  emperor.” 

By  this  plea  and  others  of  similar  import,  the  emperor  was  induced 
to  change  the  feeling  of  intense  indignation,  which  was  due  to  suspi¬ 
cion  alone,  for  one  of  a  kindlier  nature.  He  sent  for  the  prince  and  also 
the  count  and  the  nobles  and  directed  that  they  approach  his  presence 
in  a  friendly  way.  Thus  the  cloud  of  anger  which  had  separated  them 
was  dispersed  5  the  emperor  graciously  received  their  salutations  and 
in  return  extended  a  kindly  greeting. 

At  length  he  informed  them  that  urgent  reasons  compelled  him  to 
return  home.  On  taking  leave,  he  solemnly  promised  that,  with  the 
help  of  God,  he  would  return  with  a  strong  force  and  would  carry  out 
the  agreement  which  he  had  made.  He  then  led  his  entire  army  into 
Cilicia.®  Thence,  when  his  business  in  that  country  and  in  Syria  was 
finished,  he  made  ready  his  forces  for  the  march  and  returned  to  his 
own  land. 

6.  The  king  of  J erusalem  lays  siege  to  a  fortress  beyond  the  J or- 
dan  and  takes  it  by  force.  Our  army  suffers  a  deflorable  de¬ 
feat  at  Tekoah,  Eudes  de  Montfaucon  falls  at  that  flace. 

In  the  following  summer,  not  long  after  these  events  had  happened 
at  Antioch,  Thierry,  count  of  Flanders,  a  great  and  distinguished  man 
among  the  princes  of  the  West  and  a  son-in-law  of  the  lord  king,^  came 
on  a  pilgrimage  to  Jerusalem,  with  a  noble  retinue. 

The  king  and  the  people  as  a  whole  received  him  with  the  utmost 
joy.  By  the  advice  of  the  patriarch  and  other  princes  of  the  realm,  it 

®  The  acquisition  of  Cilicia  and  the  capture  of  Leo  and  other  leaders  of  the  Armenian 
state  were  the  most  tangible  results  of  John’s  campaign  during  these  two  years. 

®  Thierry  of  Alsace  profited  from  the  misfortunes  of  William  Clito,  son  of  Robert 
Curthose.  He  obtained  Flanders  and  Sibylla,  the  daughter  of  Fulk,  both  formerly  in 
Clito’s  possession.  This,  the  first  of  his  journeys  to  the  Holy  Land,  was  made  in  1139. 


EMPEROR  JOHN  AND  THE  LATIN  STATES  103 

was  unanimously  decided,  with  the  help  of  the  splendid  force  of  valiant 
knights  who  accompanied  him,  to  besiege  a  certain  stronghold  on  the 
other  side  of  Jordan,  near  Mt.  Galaad,  in  the  territory  of  the  Am¬ 
monites.  This  fortress  was  a  great  menace  to  our  lands.  It  was  a  cavern, 
on  the  slope  of  a  very  high  mountain,  the  approach  to  which  was  prac¬ 
tically  inaccessible.  Above  it  towered  a  mighty  precipice  which  reached 
from  the  top  of  the  promontory  to  the  depths  of  the  adjacent  valley. 
On  one  side,  a  narrow  and  dangerous  path  between  a  high  projecting 
cliff  and  the  precipice  just  described  led  to  the  same  cave. 

In  this  cave  a  band  of  wicked  robbers  and  bandits  from  the  lands  of 
Moab,  Ammon,  and  Galaad  had  established  themselves^  and  from 
this  base,  as  opportunity  offered,  they  were  in  the  habit  of  making  fre¬ 
quent  and  unexpected  forays  upon  our  lands.  These  raids  were  often 
attended  with  great  danger  to  us.  Full  information  of  the  conditions 
prevailing  in  Christian  territory  was  supplied  to  the  bandits  by  scouts 
well  acquainted  with  the  region  who  were  sent  out  before  each  attack. 
Our  leaders  were  exceedingly  anxious  to  remove  these  evils,  and  ac¬ 
cordingly,  as  we  have  said,  they  proposed  to  besiege  the  cave.  They 
summoned  all  the  people  from  that  locality  and,  accompanied  by 
military  forces,  crossed  the  Jordan.  On  reaching  their  destination,  they 
seized  the  approach,  as  far  as  the  inequalities  of  the  country  and  the 
narrow  defiles  permitted,  and  located  their  camp  there.  Then  the 
forces  were  stationed  in  a  circle  around  and  the  place  besieged.  In  ac¬ 
cordance  with  the  laws  of  warfare,  they  proceeded  to  harass  the  enemy 
in  every  way  and  to  hem  them  in  as  closely  as  possible,  in  order  to  force 
them  to  surrender.  The  robbers,  on  their  part,  with  all  the  cunning  that 
ever  attends  on  misfortune,  vigilantly  prepared  to  defend  themselves. 

Thus  almost  the  entire  Christian  army  was  as  with  one  mind  val¬ 
iantly  engaged  upon  this  siege.  Meanwhile,  certain  Turks  had  per¬ 
ceived  that  all  the  region  across  the  Jordan  had  been  stripped  of  sol¬ 
diers  and  thus  lay  exposed  to  hostile  attacks.  Accordingly,  they  seized 
the  opportunity  offered  at  this  time  and  crossed  the  Jordan.  Leaving 
the  land  of  Jericho  on  the  right,  they  proceeded  along  beside  the  lake 
of  Asphalt,  which  is  also  called  the  Dead  sea,  and  from  there  advanc¬ 
ing  to  the  mountainous  country,  they  fell  upon  that  part  of  the  province 
which  in  olden  times  belonged  by  lot  to  the  tribe  of  Judah.  They  took 
possession  by  force  of  Tekoah,  the  city  of  the  prophets  Amos  and  Ha- 
bakkuk,  and  killed  the  few  people  who  still  remained  there.  They 


I 


104  EMPEROR  JOHN  AND  THE  LATIN  STATES 

found  it  almost  denuded  of  inhabitants  for,  warned  betimes  of  the 
enemy^s  approach,  all  had  departed  and,  with  their  wives  and  chil¬ 
dren,  their  herds  and  flocks,  had  fled  to  the  neighboring  cave  of 
Odolla.  Consequently,  as  the  village  was  empty,  the  invaders  entered 
the  houses  of  the  fugitives  and  carried  off  whatever  had  been  left. 

Now  it  happened  that  in  those  days  there  had  come  to  Jerusalem 
from  Antioch  Robert,  surnamed  the  Burgundian,  of  pious  memory 
in  the  Lord.  He  was  a  distinguished  knight,  valiant  in  arms,  noble  both 
according  to  the  flesh  and  by  nature,  an  Aquitanian  by  birth  and  master 
of  the  Knights  of  the  Temple.  Accompanied  by  some  of  his  brethren 
and  by  a  few  knights  of  various  ranks  who  had  remained  at  Jerusalem, 
he  immediately  made  all  speed  to  the  place  just  mentioned.  At  their 
head  marched  Bernard  Vacher,  one  of  the  king’s  household,  bearing 
the  royal  standard,  and  all  the  people  followed. 

But  as  soon  as  the  Turks  learned  that  the  Christians  were  on  the  way, 
they  left  Hebehis,  the  home  of  the  prophet  Joel,  and  fled  toward 
Hebron,  the  burial  place  of  the  patriarchs.  From  there  they  intended 
to  descend  into  the  plain  and  proceed  toward  Ascalon.  The  Christians, 
however,  although  they  knew  that  the  foe  was  in  full  retreat,  did  not 
follow  in  close  pursuit,  as  if  confident  of  victory.  On  the  contrary,  they 
scattered  recklessly  in  different  directions,  more  intent  on  plunder  than 
on  destroying  the  enemy.  The  Turks,  although  already  in  flight,  soon 
perceived  this.  With  renewed  courage,  they  again  massed  in  their  usual 
fashion  and  as  far  as  possible  strove  to  rally  their  scattered  forces.  Full 
of  confidence,  they  fell  unexpectedly  upon  the  bands  of  Christians,  who 
were  roving  hither  and  yon  without  thought  of  danger,  and  wrought 
great  destruction  with  the  sword.  Nevertheless,  a  few  of  our  people 
made  an  effort  to  resist.  They  gathered  together  and  engaged  in  battle. 

Meanwhile,  the  shrill  sound  of  trumpets  and  horns,  the  champing 
of  horses,  the  flash  of  glittering  armor,  the  voices  of  the  leaders  cheer¬ 
ing  on  their  men,  together  with  the  clouds  of  dust  raised  by  the  horses’ 
hoofs,  carried  the  alarm  to  the  scattered  forces  of  the  Christians.  They 
hastened  to  the  place  of  combat.  But  before  they  could  join  their  com¬ 
rades  who  were  trying  to  make  a  resistance,  our  first  ranks  gave  way 
and  fled.  The  enemy  had  showed  their  superiority,  and  our  people  were 
vanquished. 

Closely  pursued  by  the  enemy  with  arrows  and  drawn  swords,  the 
Christians  tried  to  flee.  But  escape  was  practically  impossible,  because 


EMPEROR  JOHN  AND  THE  LATIN  STATES  105 

the  place  was  rough  with  rocks  and  almost  pathless.  Some  perished  by 
the  swordj  and  others  were  hurled  headlong  from  precipices.  From 
Hebron,  which  is  Kirjath-Arba,  even  to  the  boundaries  of  Tekoah  the 
Turks  pursued  and  wrought  terrible  massacre  upon  the  Christians. 
Many  noble  and  famous  men  fell  on  that  day.  Among  others  who  per¬ 
ished  was  the  illustrious  Knight  Templar,  Eudes  de  Montfaucon.  His 
death  caused  universal  sorrow  and  mourning. 

The  victorious  enemy  returned  in  triumph  to  Ascalon,  rejoicing  over 
the  destruction  of  the  Christians  and  the  spoils  which  they  carried  with 
them. 

When  our  people  who  were  engaged  in  the  siege  [at  Mt.  Galaad] 
learned  of  the  disaster  which  had  befallen  us,  they  were  filled  with  con¬ 
sternation.  A  realization  of  the  fact,  however,  that  by  the  law  of  war 
victory  falls  now  to  one  side  and  now  to  the  other  comforted  them,  and 
they  continued  their  work  with  renewed  vigor.  Within  a  short  time,  by 
the  will  of  God,  they  took  that  stronghold  and  returned  home  cov¬ 
ered  with  glory. 

7.  Xangi  causes  the  kingdom  of  Damascus  much  uneasiness. 

The  Damascefies  affeal  to  the  Christians  for  aid.  They  ob¬ 
tain  it  under  certain  conditions,  Xangi  returns  to  his  oivn 
land. 

While  these  events  were  taking  place  in  the  land  of  Jerusalem,  Zangi, 
mightily  puffed  up  by  his  successes,  like  an  ever-restless  worm,  dared 
to  aspire  to  conquer  the  [Saracen]  kingdom  of  Damascus.  Word  was 
brought  to  Ainardus  [Anar],  the  governor  of  that  country,  who  was 
likewise  the  chief  of  the  army  and  the  father-in-law  of  the  king,  that 
Zangi  had  entered  his  territory  with  a  hostile  army.^^  The  governor  at 
once  dispatched  envoys  to  the  king  of  Jerusalem.  Most  earnestly  he 
begged  in  conciliatory  words  that  he  and  the  Christian  people  would 
lend  their  aid  and  counsel  against  a  cruel  enemy,  equally  dangerous  to 
both  kingdoms.  Lest  he  might  seem  to  be  boldly  soliciting  free  aid 
from  the  king  and  his  nobles,  with  little  hope  of  return,  he  promised 
to  pay  twenty  thousand  pieces  of  gold  per  month  for  the  necessary  ex¬ 
penses  of  the  enterprise.  The  treaty  also  included  the  provision  that  as 

Anar,  or  Mu^in  al-Din,  who  had  disting-uished  himself  by  holding  Hims  against 
Zangi  in  1137,  was  a  mamluk  of  Tughtigin  and  became  the  actual,  if  not  nominal, 
ruler  of  Damascus  in  1139. 


i 


io6  EMPEROR  JOHN  AND  THE  LATIN  STATES 

soon  as  the  enemy  had  been  driven  from  Damascus  the  city  of  Banyas, 
which  had  been  wrested  from  us  a  few  years  before,  should  be  restored 
without  contest.  Moreover,  as  a  guarantee  that  the  articles  of  the  treaty 
would  be  carried  out,  he  promised  to  give  as  hostages  sons  of  nobles,  in 
number  as  agreed  upon. 

After  listening  to  these  proposals,  the  king  called  together  all  the 
nobles  of  the  realm,  laid  before  them  carefully  all  the  provisions  and 
details  of  the  treaty  offered  by  the  deputies,  and  asked  their  advice  as 
to  the  response.  For  a  long  time  they  deliberated,  and  finally,  after 
mature  consideration  and  a  careful  interchange  of  opinions  over  each 
detail,  it  was  resolved  to  lend  assistance  to  Anar  and  the  Damascenes 
against  this  most  cruel  enemy,  a  menace  to  both  kingdoms. 

It  was  thought  best  that  this  assistance  be  given  freely,  ‘dest  the 
enemy,  rendered  more  powerful  because  of  our  inactivity,  should  gain 
that  kingdom  and  use  its  power  thus  increased  against  us.”  Additional 
circumstances  rendered  the  cause  very  popular  3  the  most  potent  reason 
and  the  one  which  lent  universal  favor  to  the  proposition  was  the  fact 
that  at  the  end  of  the  treaty  was  added  the  clause  about  the  city  of 
Banyas. 

8.  With  the  hel'p  of  the  Damascenes ^  the  city  of  Banyas  is  be¬ 
sieged. 

Thus  the  general  plan  was  approved.  As  soon  as  the  hostages  men¬ 
tioned  above  had  been  received  and  placed  in  security,  large  forces  of 
cavalry  and  infantry  from  all  over  the  realm  were  ordered  to  assemble 
at  once  at  Tiberias.  Meanwhile,  Zangi,  in  his  superabundant  valor,  had 
invaded  the  land  of  Damascus  with  immense  forces  of  cavalry.  Leav¬ 
ing  the  city  behind  him,  he  had  already  advanced  as  far  as  a  place  called 
Rasaline.  There  he  had  established  himself  and  his  legions  tempo¬ 
rarily,  for  the  advance  of  the  Christians  caused  him  some  hesitancy. 
Unless  our  forces  hindered  his  plans,  however,  he  felt  confident  that 
he  could  easily  attain  his  desired  end. 

News  that  Zangi  had  halted  at  the  place  mentioned  above  reached 
the  Christians  j  also  that  the  Damascenes  had  marched  out  from  the 
city  and  were  awaiting  the  arrival  of  the  king  and  his  troops  at  Nuara. 
Accordingly,  they  broke  camp  and,  with  standards  raised,  hastened  as 
with  one  mind  to  the  aforesaid  place.  But  as  soon  as  Zangi  was  in¬ 
formed  of  this  movement,  he  hastily  withdrew,  for  he  was  ever  on  the 


EMPEROR  JOHN  AND  THE  LATIN  STATES  107 

alert  and  had  no  mind  to  come  into  conflict  with  two  armies  at  the  same 
time  on  hostile  soil.  Accordingly,  before  the  Christians  could  unite  with 
the  Damascenes  he  left  his  position  and  hastily  retreated.  Leaving  our 
forces  and  those  of  the  Damascenes  on  the  left,  he  proceeded  by  forced 
marches  to  the  region  commonly  known  as  the  valley  of  Baccar. 

Our  troops,  nevertheless,  continued  on  to  the  appointed  place,  where 
they  united  with  the  Damascenes.  There  they  learned  definitely  that 
Zangi  had  departed.  Accordingly,  by  unanimous  consent,  the  course 
of  the  entire  army  was  turned  toward  Banyas,  as  agreed  upon  in  the 
treaty.  We  have  already  mentioned  that  a  few  years  before  this,  Tugh- 
tigin,  king  of  Damascus,  had  taken  this  city  by  force  of  arms.^^  After¬ 
wards,  however,  the  magistrate  to  whom  he  had  entrusted  it  had  de¬ 
serted  the  Damascenes  and  gone  over  to  their  enemy,  Zangi.  This  was 
the  reason  our  allies  were  making  such  strenuous  efforts  to  bring  it 
under  the  power  of  the  king  of  Jerusalem.  They  preferred  that  it 
should  be  restored  to  the  Christians,  whose  favor  they  enjoyed,  rather 
than  see  it  held  by  an  enemy  whom  they  greatly  feared  and  distrusted  j 
for  from  it  as  from  a  near  vantage  point  he  could  do  them  much  injury 
and  cause  them  even  greater  trouble. 

9.  The  frtnce  of  Antioch  and  the  count  of  Trifoli  also  come  to 
helf  in  the  siege.  The  city  is  closely  blockaded, 

Banyas  is  the  city  which  is  commonly  called  Belinas  and  which,  be¬ 
fore  the  children  of  Israel  entered  the  Promised  Land,  was  known  as 
Leshem.  Afterwards,  the  sons  of  Dan  received  this  as  their  allotment 
and  called  it  Leshem  Dan,  as  may  be  read  in  Joshua,  where  it  is  writ¬ 
ten  :  ^^theref ore  the  children  of  Dan  went  up  to  fight  against  Leshem, 
and  took  it,  and  smote  it  with  the  edge  of  the  sword,  and  possessed  it, 
and  dwelt  therein,  and  called  Leshem,  Dan,  after  the  name  of  Dan 
their  father.” 

Later  this  city  was  called  Caesarea  Philippi,  because  Philip  the 
Tetrarch,  son  of  the  elder  Herod,  enlarged  it  in  honor  of  Tiberius 
Caesar  and  made  it  famous  with  marvellous  buildings.  Thus  it  owed 
one  appellation  to  the  name  of  Caesar  and  the  other  to  that  of  the  man 
who  enlarged  it. 

Toward  this  city  the  allied  armies  directed  their  course.  They 
reached  there  May  i,  and  at  once  blockaded  it  on  all  sides.  Anar  and 


See  Book  XIV,  chaps.  17,  19,  and  notes  18,  45. 


Jos.  19:47* 


io8  EMPEROR  JOHN  AND  THE  LATIN  STATES 

his  forces  took  up  a  position  on  the  east,  between  the  city  and  the  woods, 
in  a  place  called  Cohagar.  The  forces  of  the  king  were  stationed  on  the 
west  toward  the  open  fields.  The  position  of  the  troops  thus  encircling 
the  city  prevented  all  approach  to  those  shut  up  within  and  removed 
any  opportunity  of  entrance  or  exit.  It  was  moreover  deemed  wise — 
and  the  action  was  sanctioned  by  common  consent — to  dispatch  mes¬ 
sengers  to  Raymond,  prince  of  Antioch,  and  to  the  count  of  Tripoli  to 
invite  them  to  participate  in  the  siege  already  begun.  This  was  imme¬ 
diately  done. 

Meanwhile,  the  Christians,  with  the  help  of  their  equally  zealous 
allies,  the  Turks,  ever  ready  for  the  daily  conflict,  continued  to  press 
on  the  siege  without  intermission.  From  the  hurling  engines  called 
petraries  they  threw  huge  stones  of  great  weight,  which  shook  the  walls 
and  demolished  the  buildings  within  the  city  itself.  Showers  of  arrows 
and  darts  also  rained  like  hail  upon  the  harassed  townspeople,  so  that 
it  was  impossible  to  find  any  place  of  security  within  the  walls.  Even 
the  defenders,  though  protected  by  wall  and  ramparts,  as  they  hurled 
stones  or  drew  their  bows  scarcely  ventured  to  look  upon  the  assailants 
without. 

Then  might  have  been  witnessed  a  strange  and  novel  sight :  a  hostile 
people  encouraging  an  enemy  to  the  fiercest  warfare  and,  as  an  ally, 
actually  in  arms  for  the  destruction  of  a  common  foe.  Nor  could  it  be 
readily  discerned  which  of  the  allied  armies  battled  the  more  valiantly 
against  the  common  adversary  or  urged  on  the  attack  the  more  bitterly 
or  persevered  the  longer  in  the  burden  of  battle.  Christians  and  Da¬ 
mascenes  were  equal  in  courage  and  united  in  purpose.  Although  in 
training  and  in  the  practice  of  arms  they  were  indeed  unlike,  yet  in  the 
desire  to  inflict  injury  upon  the  enemy  one  race  did  not  yield  to  the 
other.^^ 

The  besieged,  although  wearied  to  the  point  of  exhaustion  by  the 
ceaseless  attacks  and  by  the  burden  of  vigils  and  excessive  toil,  still  kept 
up  a  vigorous  resistance.  As  far  as  their  strength  permitted,  they  made 
every  effort  to  defend  their  wives  and  children  and,  above  all,  their 
liberty.  The  pressure  of  misfortune  made  them  more  ingenious,  and 
every  possible  mode  of  resistance  was  tried.  This  continued  for  some 
time.  It  finally  became  evident  to  the  Christians  that  no  advantage 

William  apparently  found  it  not  too  difficult  to  approve  of  an  alliance  with 
Muslims  against  other  Muslims. 


EMPEROR  JOHN  AND  THE  LATIN  STATES  109 

could  be  gained  unless  they  could  build  a  wooden  tower,  move  it  close 
to  the  walls,  and  wage  war  upon  the  besieged  from  above.  But  in  all 
that  region  no  suitable  material  for  such  a  purpose  was  to  be  found. 
Anar  therefore  dispatched  men  to  Damascus  for  tall  beams  of  great 
size  which  long  ago  had  been  set  aside  especially  for  such  a  purpose. 
He  bade  them  use  all  possible  speed  to  accomplish  their  errand  and 
return. 

10.  The  frtnce  and  the  count  arrive,  A  storrning  engine  Is 
erected.  The  cltvzenSy  In  the  hofe  of  atdy  stoutly  defend 
themselves. 

Meanwhile,  the  prince  of  Antioch  and  the  count  of  Tripoli,  who  had 
been  summoned  by  our  deputies,  arrived.  They  brought,  as  had  been 
hoped,  a  large  number  of  strong  fighters,  with  whom  they  joined  our 
camp.  Their  coming  doubled  the  distress  of  the  besieged,  and  they 
seemed  to  lose  all  hope  of  resistance.  The  newcomers  were  anxious  to 
test  out  their  strength,  in  eager  emulation  of  one  another.  Longing  for 
praise  and  glory,  they  formed  their  men  into  separate  companies  and 
vigorously  attacked  the  city.  As  a  result,  the  terror  of  the  besieged  in¬ 
creased,  and  lack  of  confidence  in  their  own  forces  fell  upon  them.  The 
allied  forces,  on  the  other  hand,  grew  more  certain  of  victory,  their 
courage  increased,  and  ennui  diminished  as  day  after  day  found  them 
stronger  for  assault. 

While  these  events  were  happening  before  Banyas,  the  messengers 
sent  to  Damascus  returned  without  delay.  They  brought  with  them 
immense  beams  of  the  necessary  size  and  strength.  These  were  quickly 
dressed  by  the  carpenters  and  workmen  and  put  together  solidly  with 
iron  nails.  Soon  an  engine  of  great  height  towered  aloft,  from  whose 
top  the  entire  city  could  be  surveyed.  From  this  vantage  point,  arrows 
and  missiles  of  every  sort  could  be  sent,  while  great  stones  hurled  by 
hand  would  also  help  to  keep  the  defenders  back.  As  soon  as  the  engine 
was  ready,  the  ground  between  it  and  the  walls  was  levelled  off,  and 
the  machine  was  attached  to  the  ramparts.  There,  as  it  looked  down 
upon  the  whole  city,  it  seemed  as  if  a  tower  had  been  suddenly  erected 
in  the  very  midst  of  the  place. 

Now  for  the  first  time  the  situation  of  the  besieged  became  intolera¬ 
ble  j  they  were  driven  to  the  last  extremity,  for  it  was  impossible  to 
devise  any  remedy  against  the  downpour  of  stones  and  missiles  which 


no  EMPEROR  JOHN  AND  THE  LATIN  STATES 

fell  without  intermission  from  the  movable  tower.  Moreover,  there 
was  no  safe  place  within  the  city  for  the  sick  and  wounded,  or  where 
those  who,  still  strong  and  vigorous,  were  sacrificing  themselves  in 
defense  of  the  others  might  withdraw  to  rest  after  their  labors. 

In  addition,  they  were  now  debarred  from  passing  back  and  forth 
about  the  ramparts  and  could  not  without  peril  of  death  carry  aid  to 
their  comrades  who  were  falling.  For  the  weapons  and  modes  of  as¬ 
sault  used  by  those  fighting  below  could  be  considered  little  or  nothing 
in  comparison  with  the  manifold  dangers  to  which  they  were  exposed 
from  the  fighters  in  the  tower.  In  fact,  it  seemed  to  be  rather  a  war 
with  gods  than  with  men.  Zangi  had  promised  faithfully  to  come  to 
their  aid,  and  at  first  and  even  up  to  that  very  moment  they  had  cher¬ 
ished  the  belief  that  he  would  do  so.  Now,  however,  in  the  imminent 
danger  all  hope  of  relief  or  chance  of  defense  had  apparently  departed. 

II.  A  legate  of  the  church  of  Rome  lands;  he  froceeds  to  the 
siege,  T.^he  city  is  taken  and  a  bishof  is  ordained  there.  All  the 
frinces  refair  to  J er us alem. 

During  the  progress  of  this  campaign,  a  legate  from  the  church  of 
Rome  arrived  at  Sidon.  Albericus,  bishop  of  Ostia,  was  a  Frenchman 
by  birth,  from  the  bishopric  of  Beauvais.  He  had  been  sent  on  a  special 
mission  to  investigate  the  trouble  which  had  arisen  in  the  church  at  An¬ 
tioch  between  the  lord  patriarch  and  his  canons.  A  short  time  before 
this,  Peter,  archbishop  of  Lyons,  a  man  of  revered  life,  had  come  to 
Syria  in  the  capacity  of  envoy  on  this  same  matter.  But  he  was  stricken 
by  death  and  did  not  accomplish  the  mission  entrusted  to  him.  Hence 
Albericus  was  appointed  in  place  of  the  venerable  archbishop  just 
named  to  bring  the  controversy  to  a  fitting  end,  as  will  be  related 
further  on.  When  Bishop  Albericus  learned  that  the  entire  Christian 
army  was  still  engaged  in  the  siege  of  Banyas  and  that  William,  pa¬ 
triarch  of  Jerusalem,  Fulcher,  archbishop  of  Tyre,  and  other  princes 
of  the  realm  were  there,  he  hurried  thither  as  rapidly  as  possible. 
Although  the  Christians  had  not  faltered  in  their  undertaking  but 
were,  on  the  contrary,  zealously  carrying  it  on,  yet  the  support  of  this 
wise  man  and  the  sanction  of  apostolic  authority  spurred  them  on.  His 
words  of  exhortation  gave  them  added  stimulus  and  fired  them  with 
desire  to  attack  the  city  still  more  vigorously. 

Meanwhile,  those  who  had  ben  detailed  for  work  at  the  machines 


EMPEROR  JOHN  AND  THE  LATIN  STATES  iii 

continued  to  press  the  besieged  mercilessly  and  without  ceasing.  No 
opportunity  for  rest  was  given,  and  to  their  condition  of  chronic  fatigue 
was  added  ever-increasing  panic  and  apprehension  of  danger.  Their 
number  too  was  constantly  decreasing^  for  some  had  fallen  by  the 
sword,  and  others  had  suffered  fatal  wounds.  Still  others  gave  way 
through  utter  exhaustion,  so  that  the  defenders  could  not  continue  to 
ward  off  attacks  as  they  had  been  doing. 

Anar,  the  governor  of  Damascus  and  the  commander  in  chief  of  the 
army,  was  a  man  of  keen  insight  who  loyally  adhered  to  the  strict  terms 
of  the  covenant  which  he  had  made  with  us.  He  realized  the  plight  of 
the  enemy  j  he  knew  also  “that  misfortune  ever  inclines  one  to  lend 
a  listening  ear  and  that  cumulative  misery  is  wont  to  drive  its  victims 
to  accept  even  the  hardest  terms.”  Accordingly,  he  put  the  saying  liter¬ 
ally  to  the  test.  He  secretly  sent  some  of  his  own  followers  to  invite 
the  people  to  surrender,  that  they  might  save  their  lives.  At  first  they 
shrank  from  the  idea  with  abhorrence  and  pretended  that  they  could 
hold  out  for  some  time  longer,  as  if  they  still  had  hope  of  further  re¬ 
sistance.  Nevertheless,  in  the  end,  they  thankfully  embraced  the  prof¬ 
fered  terms  with  much  avidity.  Their  ruler,  however,  a  powerful 
nobleman  whom  they  themselves  call  the  amir,  fearing  that  he  might 
come  to  want,  added  a  provision  to  the  terms  offered.  In  consideration 
of  the  surrender  of  the  city,  he  asked  that  he  be  given  some  compensa¬ 
tion  therefor,  the  amount  to  be  determined  through  the  good  offices 
of  some  just  man.  For  it  seemed  shameful  and  disgraceful  that  a  noble 
lord,  the  former  ruler  of  a  great  city,  should  be  driven  from  his  heredi¬ 
tary  possessions  and  compelled  to  beg.  This  petition  seemed  fairly  just 
and  reasonable  to  Anar.  He  therefore  guaranteed  that  the  request 
should  be  granted,  for  he  was  absolutely  determined  to  bring  the  city 
into  our  power  as  soon  as  possible.  The  provision  was  as  follows:  an 
annual  revenue,  in  amount  as  agreed  upon  between  them,  was  to  be  as¬ 
signed  to  the  amir,  payable  from  the  proceeds  of  the  baths  and  orchards  j 
free  permission  to  depart  with  all  their  goods  should  also  be  obtained 
for  those  citizens  who  wished  it.  To  those  who  preferred  to  remain 
there  or  upon  their  estates,  whether  In  the  city  or  in  the  country,  either 
permanently  or  temporarily,  rather  than  to  go  elsewhere,  he  promised 
tranquil  possession  under  good  conditions,  when  assurance  of  fealty 
should  be  given. 

The  king  and  all  the  rest  of  the  Christians  received  this  arrangement 


II2  EMPEROR  JOHN  AND  THE  LATIN  STATES 

with  favor,  and  all  the  citizens  prepared  to  surrender  the  place  without 
delay.  Then  Anar,  perceiving  that  the  negotiations  had  arrived  at  the 
desired  point  of  harmony  and  that  the  matter  was  settled  in  every  de¬ 
tail,  placed  the  facts  in  a  friendly  way  before  the  king,  the  patriarch, 
the  prince,  and  the  count.  He  carefully  explained  all  details  of  the 
secret  negotiations  which  he  had  conducted  and  urged  them  with  all 
the  eloquence  in  his  power  to  agree  to  the  treaty.  Out  of  respect  for  the 
wisdom  and  sincere  fidelity  of  the  man,  they  approved  the  terms,  gave 
their  assent,  and  promised  that  in  all  good  faith  they  would  act  in  every 
respect  according  to  the  arrangements  which  he  had  made. 

Upon  the  surrender  of  the  city,  therefore,  the  townspeople  with 
their  wives  and  children  and  all  their  belongings  were  permitted  to 
leave  without  hindrance.  Accordingly  they  departed  to  the  place  which 
they  had  chosen.^"* 

As  soon  as  the  city  came  into  their  power,  the  Christians,  at  the  sug¬ 
gestion  of  the  patriarch  and  with  the  consent  and  approval  of  Fulcher, 
archbishop  of  Tyre,  under  whose  jurisdiction  the  church  at  Banyas 
certainly  belonged  by  his  right  as  metropolitan,  chose  as  bishop  of  that 
place  Adam,  archdeacon  of  Acre.  To  him  was  committed  the  spiritual 
care  of  the  faithful  who  desired  to  remain  there.  The  temporal  juris¬ 
diction,  however,  was  restored  to  Renier,  surnamed  Brus,  from  whom, 
a  few  years  before,  it  had  been  wrested  by  force. 

The  king,  accompanied  by  the  prince  of  Antioch,  the  patriarch,  and 
the  papal  legate,  then  hastened  to  Jerusalem  to  render  thanks  and 
solemn  sacrifices  to  God.  The  prince  tarried  there  for  some  days  to 
make  the  customary  prayers  and  then  returned  to  Antioch.  Before  his 
departure,  he  endeavored  to  ascertain  the  legate’s  intentions  concern¬ 
ing  the  patriarch  of  his  own  city.  He  assured  him  that  he  might  have 
full  confidence  of  his  own  support  and  begged  him  to  come  to  Antioch 
without  delay.  For  the  legate,  as  has  been  said,  had  been  sent  to  investi¬ 
gate  certain  charges  made  against  the  patriarch  by  some  of  the  canons 
of  his  own  church  and  to  bring  the  matter  to  a  proper  conclusion. 

It  is  now  time  to  explain  what  has  already  been  said  about  this  pa¬ 
triarch.  That  this  may  be  more  readily  understood,  it  is  necessary  to  go 
back  somewhat  earlier  in  the  story. 

The  siege  had  lasted  nearly  a  month,  May  20  to  June  12,  1140.  The  town  was 
surrendered  to  Anar,  who  in  turn  gave  it  to  the  Christians  according  to  promise  (Gibb, 
Chronicle^  pp.  259—61). 


EMPEROR  JOHN  AND  THE  LATIN  STATES  113 


12.  The  frince  of  AnUoch  conspires  with  the  adversaries  of  the 
patriarch  of  that  city.  The  patriarch  departs  for  Rome.  He  is 
taken  prisoner  by  Roger y  duke  of  Apulia.  A  reconciliation  is 
eventually  brought  about  between  them.  The  patriarch  fi¬ 
nally  reaches  Rome. 

When  Lord  Raymond  first  came  to  Antioch  and,  indeed,  even  before 
he  married  his  destined  bride,  in  order  that  he  might  more  easily  gain 
his  desired  end  he  took  an  oath  of  fealty  to  Ralph,  who  at  that  time 
presided  over  the  church  at  Antioch.  He  promised  on  his  honor,  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  formula  of  showing  allegiance,  that  “from  that  day 
forth  he  would  do  nothing  either  in  thought  or  deed,  by  which  the 
patriarch  might  lose  honor,  life,  or  limb  or  be  held  in  vile  captivity.” 
He  did  not  abide  by  this  oath,  however,  even  for  a  short  time.  On  the 
contrary,  as  soon  as,  through  the  interest  and  efforts  of  the  patriarch, 
he  had  won  his  wife  and  obtained  control  of  the  entire  country,  he 
allied  himself  with  the  latter’s  opponents  and,  contrary  to  the  alle¬ 
giance  which  he  had  sworn,  lent  them  aid  and  counsel  to  the  detriment 
of  the  patriarch. 

With  the  assistance  of  such  a  powerful  coadjutor,  the  patriarch’s 
enemies  continued  their  hostile  designs  with  even  more  boldness  and 
went  to  Rome.  His  adversaries  were  Lambert,  an  archdeacon  of  that 
same  church,  a  man  of  honorable  character,  well  lettered  but  with  little 
or  no  experience  in  secular  affairs,  and  one  Arnulf,  a  learned  man  of 
noble  rank,  well  versed  in  worldly  matters,  by  birth  a  Calabrian.  With 
the  consent  and  approval  of  the  prince,  these  two  men  set  out  for  Rome 
to  appeal  to  the  pope.  The  patriarch,  although  much  against  his  will, 
was  constrained  by  the  prince  to  go  there  also. 

Matters  were  so  arranged  that  Arnulf  went  on  ahead  and  proceeded 
by  a  shorter  route  to  Sicily.  There  he  associated  himself  with  his  friends 
and  relatives,  for  he  was  a  native  of  Calabria,  where  he  later  became 
bishop  of  Cosenza  (for,  as  we  have  said,  he  was  a  man  of  very  high 
rank).  He  went  to  Roger,  duke  of  Apulia,^®  to  whom  he  was  well 
known  and  said,  “Illustrious  prince,  your  mortal  enemy,  who  has  de¬ 
prived  you  and  your  heirs  forever  of  Antioch  and,  in  defiance  of  law, 
has  raised  over  it  an  unknown  man,  is  given  into  your  hand  as  you 

Roger  II  had  been  crowned  king  of  Sicily  by  Pope  Anacletus  II  in  1130.  His  title 
was  recognized  by  Pope  Innocent  II  at  the  peace  of  Mignano,  July  25,  1139.  For  what 
reasons  William  here  prefers  the  title  of  duke  of  Apulia  is  not  clear. 


II4  EMPEROR  JOHN  AND  THE  LATIN  STATES 

desired,  and  that  without  cost.  Behold  the  Lord  has  delivered  the 
patriarch  of  Antioch  to  you,  and  his  numerous  sins  have  brought  him 
here.  Rouse  yourself,  then^  consider  how  you  may  best  capture  himj 
for  assuredly,  through  him,  the  way  may  again  be  opened  for  you  to 
succeed  to  your  rightful  and  legitimate  heritage  of  which  you  have 
been  unjustly  deprived  by  this  man.” 

Influenced  by  these  words,  the  duke  of  Apulia,  a  shrewd  and  wily 
man,  at  once  ordered  secret  pitfalls  to  be  carefully  laid  in  all  the  coast 
cities  so  that  the  patriarch,  on  his  arrival,  might  be  seized,  cast  into 
chains,  and  sent  immediately  to  Sicily.  Accordingly,  when  Ralph,  ap¬ 
prehending  nothing  of  the  sort,  landed  at  Brindisi  after  a  prosperous 
voyage,  the  directions  of  the  duke  were  carried  out.  All  the  effects 
which  he,  as  a  powerful  prince,  had  brought  with  him  were  seized, 
his  retinue  was  dispersed,  and  he  himself  was  bound  and  handed  over 
to  that  same  Arnulf  to  be  dragged  to  Sicily  and  conducted  before  the 
duke.  Thus  for  the  first  time  Arnulf  had  the  opportunity  to  indulge 
his  rage  freely  against  Ralph,  his  wicked  persecutor,  and  to  take  a 
double  revenge  for  all  the  evils  which  he  had  suffered  at  his  hands. 

The  patriarch  was  finally  brought  before  the  duke.  Friendly  col¬ 
loquies  took  place  between  the  two,  Ralph  was  a  discreet  man  of  fine 
appearance  and  possessed  an  eloquent  tongue.  He  finally  recovered, 
although  under  certain  conditions,  all  that  he  had  lost.  His  retinue  was 
also  restored  to  him.  On  his  part,  he  promised  that  on  his  return  he 
would  revisit  the  duke.  He  was  then  dismissed  with  all  honor  and  con¬ 
tinued  on  his  journey  to  Rome. 

On  arriving  there,  he  had  difficulty  at  first  in  obtaining  an  audience 
with  the  pope.  He  was  regarded  as  a  persecutor  of  the  church,  one  who 
desired  to  lessen  the  preeminence  of  the  apostolic  see  and  infringe  upon 
its  prerogatives  by  setting  up  a  rival  chair  and  claiming  that  it  was 
equal  to  that  of  Rome.  Consequently,  as  guilty  of  Ihe  majestSy  he  was 
refused  entrance  to  the  holy  palace  and  audience  with  the  pope. 

1 3 .  He  is  accused  by  his  enemies y  hut  finally  returns  to  his  own 
land  in  full  favor. 

The  pope  and  the  entire  church  were  much  inclined  to  take  advantage 
of  any  honorable  opportunity  to  make  matters  difficult  for  the  patri¬ 
arch,  while  they  showed  the  utmost  favor  toward  his  adversaries.  They 
regarded  him  in  fact  with  suspicion,  because  he  was  a  rich  and  mag- 


EMPEROR  JOHN  AND  THE  LATIN  STATES  115 

nificent  man  and  refused  to  acknowledge  that  the  see  which  he  held, 
that  is,  Antioch,  was  subject  to  the  church  of  Rome.  He  contended,  on 
the  contrary,  that  it  was  equal  in  all  respects  to  that  of  Rome.  “Each,” 
he  said,  “was  the  church  of  Peter,  but  that  of  Antioch  was,  as  it  were, 
distinguished  by  the  prerogative  of  the  first  born.”  Hence  they  strove 
in  many  ways  to  annoy  him.^® 

Finally,  certain  mediators,  friendly  to  both,  interceded  for  him  and 
opened  the  way.  Through  their  kind  offices,  he  was  admitted  to  the 
presence  of  the  pope,  surrounded  by  his  court  in  solemn  assembly. 
Great  magnificence  attended  his  reception.  After  he  had  appeared  sev¬ 
eral  times  in  the  consistory,  his  adversaries  seized  their  opportunity 
and  publicly  accused  him.  The  charges  were  presented  and  prepara¬ 
tions  made  with  all  the  solemnity  of  the  law  to  proceed  to  the  trial. 

But  it  was  well  known  to  the  entire  court  that  the  accusers  were  not 
sufficiently  prepared  so  as  to  be  able  fully  to  convince  the  pope  and  his 
coadjutors  with  regard  to  the  charges.  It  was  suggested,  therefore,  that 
both  parties  rest,  until  the  pope  on  his  own  part  could  send  someone  to 
Antioch,  there  to  obtain  witnesses  and  proofs  whereby  the  full  facts  of 
the  case  might  be  ascertained.  Meanwhile,  the  patriarch  resigned  the 
pallium  which  on  his  own  authority  he  had  assumed  from  the  altar  of 
the  church  at  Antioch,  in  despite,  as  it  was  claimed,  of  the  apostolic  see, 
and  gave  it  to  the  cardinals.  Thereupon  another,  taken  from  the  body 
of  the  blessed  Peter,  was  conferred  upon  him  in  the  customary  manner 
by  the  prior  of  the  deacons. 

The  patriarch  remained  for  a  while  at  Rome,  as  long  as  his  affairs 
seemed  to  demand.  He  then  took  leave,  in  full  favor  and  safe  as  far 
as  the  case  was  concerned,  and  returned  to  Sicily.  Duke  Roger  received 
him  with  honor,  and  frequent  colloquies  and  intimate  discussion  over 
many  necessary  matters  took  place  between  the  two.  Then  the  duke 
furnished  him  with  a  number  of  galleys  sufficient  for  the  voyage,  and, 
attended  by  favoring  winds,  he  set  sail  for  Syria.  He  landed  at  the 
place  commonly  called  the  Port  of  St.  Simeon,  about  ten  miles  more 
or  less  from  Antioch,  at  the  mouth  of  the  Orontes  river,  which  flows 
by  that  city. 

This  uncertainty  of  the  papal  court  about  the  obedience  of  the  Latin  patriarchs 
in  the  East  must  be  reckoned  as  a  factor  in  papal  policy  toward  the  Latin  churches 
of  Syria.  Doubtless  it  led  the  popes  more  readily  to  exempt  ecclesiastical  establishments 
in  the  Holy  Land  from  local  patriarchal  jurisdiction  than  mig-ht  otherwise  have  been 
done. 


ii6  EMPEROR  JOHN  AND  THE  LATIN  STATES 


14.  At  the  instigation  of  the  frincey  his  clergy  refuse  to  receive 
him  on  his  return.  He  withdraws  into  the  land  of  the  count  of 
Edessa,  He  is  finally  reconciled  to  the  fi'ince  and  returns  to 
A  ntioch. 

As  soon  as  the  lord  patriarch  arrived  at  Coelesyria,  as  has  been  related, 
and  thus  was  near  his  own  city,  he  wrote  to  his  church  desiring  that 
upon  a  stated  day  he  should  be  met  by  a  solemn  procession  at  a  desig¬ 
nated  place  outside  the  city.  His  people  were  well  aware,  however,  that 
the  prince  was  pursuing  him  with  inexorable  hatred,  in  defiance  of  the 
oath  of  fealty  which  he  had  taken.  Accordingly,  with  a  view  to  the 
princess  favor,  they  flatly  refused  his  request  or  to  obey  their  patri¬ 
arch  at  all.  In  fact,  owing  to  the  violence  of  the  prince,  they  even  for¬ 
bade  him  to  enter  the  city.  When  he  perceived  the  wickedness  of  his 
clergy  and  the  aversion  in  which  he  was  held  by  those  from  whom  he 
had  deserved  far  different  treatment  and  also  the  obstinate  anger  of 
the  prince,  he  withdrew  into  the  hill  country  near  the  city,  known  com¬ 
monly  as  the  Black  mountains.  There  he  remained  for  a  while,  in  the 
monasteries  with  which  the  place  abounds.  It  was  his  hope  that,  when 
the  rancor  of  the  prince  and  his  own  clergy  had  abated  and  kindlier 
feelings  prevailed,  he  might  be  called  back  to  the  city. 

But  the  prince  continued  to  display  his  animosity  even  more  openly 
than  before.  For  Arnulf  had  sent  him  news  from  Sicily  which  strength¬ 
ened  his  hatred  and  gave  it  still  more  impetus.  He  wrote  that  the  patri¬ 
arch  had  concluded  a  secret  alliance  against  the  prince  with  Duke 
Roger,  his  rival,  and  in  proof  of  this  he  alleged  that  the  duke  had 
loaded  the  patriarch  with  gifts  and  honor  on  his  return  through  Sicily. 
He  had  also  provided  the  galleys  necessary  for  the  voyage. All  these 
circumstances  naturally  tended  to  convince  the  prince  that  this  infor¬ 
mation  was  true. 

While  the  patriarch  was  staying  in  the  places  just  mentioned,  special 
messengers  came  to  him  from  Joscelin  the  Younger,  count  of  Edessa. 
Influenced  by  hatred  of  the  prince  and  by  good  will  toward  the  patri¬ 
arch,  the  count  sent  an  urgent  invitation  that  he  come  with  all  his  reti- 

The  troubles  of  Ralph,  which  may  originally  have  been  of  purely  local  ec¬ 
clesiastical  significance,  were  thus  widened  out  to  enter  the  arena  of  political  rivalry 
between  Sicily  and  the  Greek  empire.  Qalanisi  (Gibb,  Chromcle^  pp.  245—46)  notes 
the  dispute  between  Prince  Raymond  and  the  patriarch  under  the  year  1138  and  ex¬ 
plains  it  on  the  ground  that  Raymond  had  agreed  to  Emperor  John’s  demand  for 
the  restoration  of  a  Greek  patriarch  at  Antioch. 


EMPEROR  JOHN  AND  THE  LATIN  STATES  117 

nue  to  make  him  a  visit.  He  might  feel  perfect  confidence  and  security 
in  doing  this,  for  the  bishops  of  that  land,  namely,  the  archbishops  of 
Edessa,  Coritium,  and  Hierapolis,  favored  the  cause  of  the  patriarch 
and  venerated  him  devoutly  as  their  lord  and  father.  The  patriarch 
was  delighted  at  the  invitation.  He  proceeded  thither  and  was  received 
with  high  honor  by  all  the  prelates  of  that  land.  The  count  also  carried 
out  his  promise  and  gladly  welcomed  his  coming  in  a  kindly  and  de¬ 
vout  spirit. 

Through  the  mediation  of  common  friends,  the  prince  at  last  re¬ 
stored  him  to  favor.  It  was  merely  by  the  lips,  however,  and  not  from 
the  heart,  for  it  is  said  that  he  was  led  to  do  so  by  a  monetary  considera¬ 
tion.  Hiding  ulterior  motives  under  conciliatory  words,  he  sent  by 
envoys  a  friendly  invitation  to  the  patriarch  to  return  to  the  city  and  to 
resume  his  office. 

On  receiving  this  message,  the  patriarch  made  preparations  to  re¬ 
turn  at  once.  With  him  he  took  the  bishops  of  that  land,  whose  much- 
needed  devotion  to  him  in  his  adversity  he  had  tested  by  sure  proofs, 
and  repaired  to  Antioch.  He  was  met  on  his  arrival  not  only  by  the 
entire  body  of  clergy  and  people  but  by  the  prince  himself  with  a  large 
following  of  knights.  Then,  to  the  accompaniment  of  hymns  and  spir¬ 
itual  songs,  he  was  solemnly  conducted  in  his  pontifical  robes  into  the 
city,  then  to  the  great  church,  and  thence  to  his  own  palace. 

15.  The  archbishof  of  Lyons y  fafal  legatCy  dies  at  Acre.  Albert-^ 
cuSy  bishof  of  Ostia y  is  dispatched  thither.  A  synod  is  called  at 
Antioch. 

Meanwhile,  Peter,  archbishop  of  Lyons,  arrived  in  Syria  and  landed 
at  Acre.  He  had  been  sent  by  Pope  Innocent  as  legate  of  the  church 
of  Rome,  to  bring  the  patriarch’s  case  to  a  proper  conclusion.  He  was 
a  Burgundian  by  birth,  a  man  of  devout  life,  simple  and  God-fearing, 
but  he  was  already  well  advanced  in  years  and  beginning  to  be  an  old 
man. 

As  soon  as  he  arrived  in  Syria,  he  repaired  to  Jerusalem  for  the  sake 
of  prayer.  Then,  in  response  to  the  urgent  plea  of  Lambert  and  Arnulf 
that  he  would  hasten  to  Antioch  to  end  the  case,  he  left  there  and  re¬ 
turned  by  the  shortest  route  to  Acre.  Before  he  could  proceed  farther, 
however,  he  was  taken  dangerously  ill.  He  sank  rapidly  and  died.  It 
was  rumored  that  his  death  was  brought  about  by  poison  administered 


ii8  EMPEROR  JOHN  AND  THE  LATIN  STATES 

in  his  drink. Thus  the  patriarch’s  enemies,  who  had  hurried  to  An¬ 
tioch,  found  themselves  disappointed  and  utterly  deprived  of  the  aid 
which  they  had  anticipated  from  the  coming  of  the  legate.  Exhausted 
by  the  fatigue  of  their  journey  and  the  hardships  which  they  had  so 
long  endured,  they  supplicated  for  peace  through  mediators  whom 
they  judged  well  fitted  for  that  office.  They  professed  themselves 
ready  to  retract  their  accusations  and  to  show  fealty  and  begged  that 
their  benefices  be  restored.  Lambert  was  given  back  his  office  of  arch¬ 
deacon,  but  Arnulf  found  no  mercy.  Accordingly,  relying  upon  the 
aid  of  the  prince,  with  his  usual  courage  he  prepared  to  undertake 
again  the  hardships  of  a  journey.  He  proceeded  to  Rome  and,  in 
season  and  out  of  season,  renewed  his  accusations.  At  length,  through 
his  bold  persistence,  he  obtained  the  concession  that  the  legate  about 
whom  we  are  now  speaking  should  be  sent  to  Syria.  He  reached  Jerusa¬ 
lem,  as  we  have  related,  and,  after  completing  his  prayers,  summoned 
the  patriarch  and  all  the  bishops  of  the  land  to  a  synod  to  be  held  at 
Antioch  on  December  Thither  he  himself  repaired  with  all  haste. 

1 6.  The  'patriarch  is  accused  in  the  assembly  of  bishops.  He  is 
summoned  but  delays  coming,  Serlo^  archbishop  of  ApameOy 
takes  his  part  and  is  deposed. 

On  the  day  appointed,  there  assembled  from  the  diocese  of  Jerusalem 
William,  the  patriarch,  Gaudentius,  archbishop  of  Caesarea,  and  An¬ 
selm,  bishop  of  Bethlehem.  Fulcher,  archbishop  of  Tyre,  devoutly 
loyal  to  the  church  of  Rome,  was  also  present.  On  the  latter,  the  legate 
placed  his  entire  hope  of  successfully  accomplishing  his  mission,  for 
he  was  a  magnanimous  man  and  very  discreet.  Fulcher  brought  with 
him  two  of  his  suffragan  bishops,  Bernard  of  Sidon  and  Baldwin  of 
Beirut.  All  the  prelates  from  the  province  of  Antioch  were  in  attend¬ 
ance,  for  it  was  near  by,  but  their  sentiments  were  varied  and  not  at  all 

This  was  a  favorite  explanation  of  the  death  of  an  important  principal  in  con¬ 
troversies,  particularly  in  the  Mediterranean  world.  Modern  medicine  might  diagnose 
many  siJch  deaths  as  due  to  typhoid  fever  or  other  abdominal  diseases  with  acute  symp¬ 
toms.  Doubtless,  however,  there  were  enough  cases  of  actual  poisoning  to  lend  plausi¬ 
bility  to  the  more  common  rumors.  His  death  is  dated  May  28,  1139  Rbhricht, 

Geschichte  de$  Konigreichs  Jerusalem^  iioo—j2giy  p.  223). 

The  actions  of  this  council,  dated  November  29  to  December  2,  1139)  are  re¬ 
corded  by  Mansi  (see  J.  D.  Mansi,  Sacrortim  conciliorum  nova  et  amflissima  collection 
XXI,  503—506,  577—80).  The  papacy  must  have  acted  quickly  upon  the  news  of  the 
death  of  the  legate,  Peter,  archbishop  of  Lyons. 


EMPEROR  JOHN  AND  THE  LATIN  STATES  119 

in  accord.  Stephen,  archbishop  of  Tarsus,  Gerard,  bishop  of  Laodicea, 
and  Hugh,  bishop  of  Jabala,  favored  the  cause  of  the  canons  against 
the  lord  patriarch  3  but  Franco  of  Hierapolis  and  Gerard  of  Corice  with 
Serlo  of  Apamea  openly  oifered  their  protection  to  him  as  patriarch. 
The  latter  had  been  against  him  in  the  beginning  but  had  later  come 
over  to  his  side.  Others  quite  plainly  Inclined  toward  neutrality. 

On  the  day  appointed,  archbishops,  bishops,  and  abbots  in  full  pon- 
tifical  state  assembled,  according  to  custom,  in  the  church  of  the  Prince 
of  the  Apostles.  The  pope’s  envoy  presided  as  representative  of  the 
pope,  and  the  papal  mandate  was  publicly  read.  Then,  when  the  con¬ 
tents  had  been  carefully  perused  and  fully  understood,  the  accusers, 
Arnulf  and  Lambert  the  archdeacon,  came  forward  openly.  The  latter, 
although  he  had  formerly  very  shrewdly  become  reconciled  to  the 
patriarch  and  thus  obtained  the  restoration  of  his  benefice,  nevertheless 
now  ^^bent  like  a  bow”  and  a  second  time  presented  himself  as  accuser. 
Many  others  joined  them,  for  it  was  apparent  that  conditions  were  not 
favorable  for  the  patriarch.  Here  was  shown  the  truth  of  that  saying 
of  Ovid,  now  a  proverb : 

As  long  as  you  are  prosperous,  you  will  have  many  friends; 

If  the  weather  becomes  cloudy,  you  will  find  yourself  alone. 

The  accusers  entered  the  public  hall  and  announced  that,  the  docu¬ 
ments  of  accusation  having  been  presented,  they  were  ready  to  proceed 
to  the  accusation  according  to  the  rules  of  law.  If  defeated,  they  were 
prepared  to  suffer  the  penalty.  The  charges  on  which  they  proposed 
to  Indict  the  patriarch  were  written  on  small  sheets  of  paper.  Some  had 
reference  to  his  installation,  which  was  irregular  and  contrary  to  dis¬ 
cipline  and  the  rules  of  the  holy  fathers.  Others  concerned  his  sins  of 
incontinence  and  simony.  Since  the  accusers  insisted  that  he  should 
appear  in  person,  messengers  were  sent  to  summon  him  formally  be¬ 
fore  the  synod  and  to  warn  him  to  come  prepared  to  answer  the  charges 
preferred  against  him.  However,  he  utterly  refused  to  come. 

Accordingly,  nothing  was  accomplished  that  day  except  that  there 
was  general  conversation  and  mutual  exhortation,  as  is  usual  in  such 
gatherings.  On  the  second  day  they  again  assembled  and  took  their 
places  in  order.  Again  the  patriarch  was  formally  summoned  by  an 
edict  of  citation.  As  on  the  day  previous,  he  absolutely  declined  to 
appear. 

20  Ovid  Tristia  i.  viii.  6. 


120  EMPEROR  JOHN  AND  THE  LATIN  STATES 

During  this  time  Serloj  archbishop  of  Apamea,  sat  in  the  assembly 
of  bishops  without  a  wedding  garment  (for  he  was  not  apparelled  in 
his  pontifical  robes,  like  the  other  bishops).  When  asked  by  the  lord 
legate  why  he  was  not  in  accord  with  the  other  brethren  and  why  he 
did  not  proceed  to  the  accusation  as  he  had  done  before,  he  answered, 
“My  former  action,  in  disparagement  of  my  father,  like  that  of  the 
accursed  Ham  who  disclosed  the  shame  of  his  father,  was  taken  in  a 
moment  of  ill-advised  ardor,  to  the  loss  of  my  souPs  salvation.  But 
now,  God  helping  me,  I  renounce  the  error  of  my  ways  and  will  at¬ 
tempt  neither  to  accuse  him  nor  to  judge  him  presumptuously.  On  the 
contrary,  I  stand  ready  to  fight  for  his  safety  and  welfare,  even  unto 
death.” 

Thereupon  he  was  ordered  to  depart  at  once.  Sentence  of  degrada¬ 
tion  and  excommunication  was  pronounced  against  him,  whether  justly 
or  otherwise,  and  he  was  deposed  from  all  priestly  and  pontifical  of¬ 
fice.  Intense  fear  of  the  prince  had  fallen  upon  everyone,  so  that  even 
the  impartiality  of  the  legate  was  affected  and  no  opportunity  of  speak¬ 
ing  in  opposition  was  now  given.  The  prince,  who  was  far  from  wise 
or  discreet,  was  urged  on  to  this  extreme  by  a  certain  Peter  Armoin, 
custodian  of  the  city’s  citadel.  This  man,  wicked  beyond  measure, 
hoped  that  if  the  patriarch  were  deposed  the  prince  might  be  induced 
to  raise  to  that  dignity  Peter  Aimery,  a  nephew  of  his  own,  a  man 
whom  the  patriarch,  to  his  own  destruction,  had  made  a  deacon  of 
that  same  church.  The  result  proved  to  be  as  he  had  hoped. 

Whether  or  not  his  deposition  was  real  or  even  legal,  Serlo  at  once 
left  Antioch  and  set  out  for  his  own  diocese.  When  he  reached  the 
castle  of  Harim,  burdened  with  heavy  cares,  he  fell  ill  and  took  to  his 
bed.  There,  unable  to  endure  his  great  wrongs,  he  turned  his  face  to 
the  wall  and  expired. 

17*  The  patriarch  is  defosed  in  his  absence  for  insubordination. 

He  is  thrown  into  frison  and  shamefully  treated.  Again  he 
refairs  to  Rome  and  obtains  fartial  favor.  On  his  way  homey 
however y  he  dies  by  foison. 

On  the  third  day  the  assembly  again  convened.  When  the  prelates 
had  taken  their  seats,  messengers  were  a  third  time  dispatched  to  sum¬ 
mon  the  patriarch  by  a  peremptory  edict  to  come  and  answer  to  the 
charges.  Again,  as  before,  he  utterly  refused  to  obey.  Whether  he  was 


EMPEROR  JOHN  AND  THE  LATIN  STATES  121 

led  to  this  course  by  the  stings  of  conscience  or  because,  fully  aware 
that  the  entire  synod  was  unanimous  in  their  hostile  attitude  toward 
him,  he  feared  the  violence  of  the  prince  we  have  not  been  able  to  learn 
with  certainty.  He  remained,  however,  with  his  household  in  his  own 
palace,  which  was  thronged  with  an  immense  crowd  of  knights  and  com¬ 
mon  people.  For  the  whole  city  had  flocked  to  his  aid  and,  if  they  had 
not  feared  the  power  of  the  prince,  would  have  been  ready  to  drive  the 
legate  ignominiously  from  the  city  with  all  those  who  had  consented 
to  the  deposition  of  the  patriarch. 

The  legate  perceived  that  the  patriarch  would  not  come  to  him. 
Accordingly,  relying  upon  the  powerful  protection  of  the  prince,  he 
went  himself  to  the  palace.  There  he  pronounced  the  sentence  of  dep¬ 
osition  upon  the  patriarch  and  compelled  him  by  force  to  give  up  the 
ring  and  the  crozier.  He  then  ordered  him  to  be  delivered  to  the  prince. 
Shamefully  bound  and  treated  ignominiously  like  a  man  of  blood,  the 
prelate  was  sent  away  to  a  prison  in  the  monastery  of  St.  Simeon,  situ¬ 
ated  upon  a  lofty  mountain  near  the  sea. 

This  same  Lord  Ralph,  whom  I  myself  saw  in  my  youth,  was  a  tall 
and  handsome  man,  slightly  cross-eyed,  but  not  to  such  an  extent  that 
he  was  uncomely.^ ^  Although  but  little  learned,  he  was  a  very  fluent 
speaker,  graceful  and  agreeable  in  conversation.  His  generous  disposi¬ 
tion  had  won  him  much  favor,  not  only  with  the  knights  but  also  with 
the  common  people.  He  was,  however,  very  forgetful  of  his  promises 
and  agreements.  Changeable  and  inconstant  in  his  words,  subtle  and 
devious  in  all  his  ways,  he  was  yet  provident  and  discreet.  In  one  re¬ 
spect  alone  he  showed  some  lack  of  wisdom,  in  that  he  refused  to  re¬ 
ceive  adversaries  whom  he  had  justly  roused  against  him,  when  they 
wished  to  return  into  favor  with  him.  He  was  called  arrogant  (and  so 
indeed  he  was)  and  presumptuous  beyond  measure.  Hence,  he  fell  into 

this  misfortune,  which  he  could  easily  have  avoided  if  he  had  con- 

■» 

ducted  himself  somewhat  more  discreetly.  He  was  taken  and  for  a  long 
time  held  prisoner  in  that  monastery.  Finally  he  escaped  and  went  to 
Rome,  where  he  obtained  a  certain  degree  of  favor  from  the  pope. 
But  while  he  was  preparing  to  return,  he  died  miserably  from  a  poi- 

This  statement  is  of  importance  in  helping  to  compute  William’s  age.  Where  and 
when  William  saw  him  is  difficult  to  determine,  for  it  must  presumably  have  been  at 
Jerusalem  and  before  the  time  of  his  imprisonment,  .therefore  before  1140.  His  im¬ 
prisonment  must  have  been  less  than  a  year,  for  he  is  reported  to  have  died  in  Rome 
in  1141. 


122  EMPEROR  JOHN  AND  THE  LATIN  STATES 

soned  draught,  administered  by  some  unknown  criminal  hireling.  Like 
another  Marius,  he  experienced  fully  in  his  own  person  all  that  for¬ 
tune,  whether  good  or  bad,  could  do. 

1 8.  The  legate  returns  to  Jerusalem;  he  holds  a  synod;  he  also 
dedicates  the  Temfle  of  the  Lord, 

When  the  papal  envoy  had  deposed  the  patriarch  and  finished  the 
mission  on  which  he  had  come  to  Antioch,  he  returned  to  Jerusalem. 
There  he  remained  until  the  solemnities  of  Easter  were  over.  Then  he 
took  counsel  with  the  prelates  of  the  churches,  and  on  the  third  day 
after  Holy  Easter,  with  the  assistance  of  the  patriarch  and  some  of  the 
bishops,  he  solemnly  dedicated  the  Temple  of  the  Lord. 

There  were  present  on  the  day  of  dedication  many  great  and  noble 
men  from  the  parts  beyond  the  mountains  as  well  as  from  the  lands  on 
this  side  of  the  sea.  Among  them  was  Joscelin  the  Younger,  count  of 
Edessa,  who  was  staying  in  the  city  with  a  great  show  of  magnificence 
during  the  solemn  days  of  Holy  Easter. 

When  the  celebration  was  over,  the  legate  called  together  the  arch¬ 
bishops,  bishops,  and  other  prelates  of  the  church  and,  with  the  pa¬ 
triarch,  held  a  council  in  holy  Sion,  the  primitive  mother  of  churches. 
He  desired  to  confer  with  them  on  matters  which  seemed  especially 
pertinent  at  the  moment.  Maximus,  the  bishop  of  Armenia,  or  rather, 
the  head  over  all  the  bishops  of  Cappadocia,  Media,  Persia,  and  the 
two  Armenias,  a  distinguished  teacher  who  is  called  the  CathoUcoSy 
was  present  at  this  synod.  The  articles  of  faith  in  which  his  people 
seemed  to  differ  from  us  were  discussed  with  him,  and  he  promised 
reform  in  many  respects.^“  As  soon  as  this  business  was  finished  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  usual  form,  the  legate  returned  to  the  city  of  Acre  and  from 
there  set  sail  for  Rome. 

The  clergy  of  Antioch — and  especially  those  who  had  conspired  for 
the  deposition  of  Lord  Ralph — elected  as  patriarch  a  subdeacon  of  the 
same  church,  one  Aimery.  This  they  did  at  the  instigation  and  sugges¬ 
tion  of  the  prince,  greatly  influenced,  it  is  said,  by  lavish  gifts. 

Aimery  was  an  unlettered  man  from  the  province  of  Limousin, 
whose  life  was  far  from  noble.  The  Patriarch  Ralph,  thinking  in  this 
way  to  put  him  under  greater  obligations  and  hence  render  him  more 

The  Armenians,  who  were  usually  friendly  to  the  Latins,  were  on  the  verge  of 
religious  union  with  Rome  on  a  number  of  occasions  (see  Mansi,  XXI,  505-8,  583-84). 


EMPEROR  JOHN  AND  THE  LATIN  STATES  123 

faithful  to  himself,  had  raised  him  to  a  deaconship  in  his  church.  This 
hope  was  vain,  however,  for  from  that  very  day  Aimery  is  said  to  have 
allied  himself  with  the  patriarch’s  enemies  and,  unmindful  of  loyalty, 
to  have  conspired  for  the  deposition  of  his  benefactor.  In  regard  to  the 
matter  of  his  elevation,  it  is  said  that  a  certain  Peter,  surnamed  Armoin, 
castellan  of  the  same  city,  brought  it  about  by  intrigues  and  a  lavish 
use  of  gifts,  for  he  directed  the  attention  of  both  the  prince  and  the 
clergy  toward  Aimery  who  was  his  kinsman. 

19.  Ag  ain  the  emferor  goes  down  Into  Syria,  He  summons  the 
frince  to  carry  out  the  covenant  already  initiated. 

About  this  time,  John,  emperor  of  Constantinople,  once  more  re¬ 
cruited  his  forces,  summoned  his  legions,  and  again  directed  his  cam¬ 
paign  and  his  armies  toward  Syria.  Scarcely  four  years  had  elapsed 
since  he  had  left  Tarsus  of  Cilicia  and  all  Syria,  but  urgent  messages, 
oft  repeated,  from  the  prince  and  the  people  of  Antioch  induced  him 
to  set  forth.  In  the  greatness  of  his  might,  with  horses  and  chariots, 
with  untold  treasure  and  innumerable  forces,  he  started  for  the  land 
of  Antioch. 

Sailing  across  the  Bosphorus,  which  is  the '  well-known  boundary 
between  Europe  and  Asia,  he  crossed  the  intervening  provinces  and 
arrived  at  Attalia,  the  metropolis  of  Pamphilia,  a  large  city  on  the 
seacoast.  While  he  was  lingering  at  that  place,  two  of  his  sons,  Alexius, 
the  first  born,  and  Andronicus,  his  second  son,  fell  sick  of  a  serious  ill¬ 
ness  which  ended  with  their  death. The  emperor  at  once  called  to 
him  his  third  son,  Isaac,  and  sent  him  back  to  Constantinople  with  the 
bodies  of  his  brothers  so  that,  as  humanity  requires,  he  might  cause  the 
last  reverence  to  be  shown  to  the  remains  and  commit  them  to  the  tomb 
as  befitted  imperial  majesty.  When  the  funeral  rites  were  over,  Isaac 
continued,  by  his  father’s  commands,  to  live  in  Constantinople  until 
the  death  of  the  emperor. 

The  monarch  then  took  his  youngest  son,  Manuel,  with  him  and 
continued  his  journey  through  Isauria  into  Cilicia.  This  country  he 
traversed  with  great  speed.  Scarcely  had  the  report  of  his  advance  been 
received  before  he  marched  with  all  his  troops  into  the  land  of  the 
count  of  Edessa  and  encamped  without  warning  before  Turbessel.  This 

Only  one,  Alexius,  died  at  Attalia.  The  other,  Andronicus,  died  on  the  way  back 
to  Constantinople  with  the  funeral  cortege  (see  Chalandon,  hes  ComnenBy  II,  183). 


124  EMPEROR  JOHN  AND  THE  LATIN  STATES 

is  a  very  rich  fortress,  twenty  miles,  or  possibly  a  little  more,  from  the 
Euphrates  river. 

As  soon  as  he  arrived,  he  demanded  hostages  from  Count  Joscelin 
the  Younger.  The  latter  was  filled  with  wonder  and  amazement  at 
the  emperor’s  sudden  arrival.  At  sight  of  the  incomparable  host,  how¬ 
ever,  which  seemingly  no  kingdom  of  the  world  could  withstand,  and 
also  in  view  of  the  fact  that  he  was  wholly  unprepared  and  quite  un¬ 
able  to  resist,  he  made  a  virtue  of  necessity  and  sent  as  hostage  one  of 
his  daughters,  named  Isabella.  The  emperor’s  only  reason  for  making 
this  demand  was  that  he  might  bind  the  count  more  closely  to  himself 
and  render  him  loyal  in  carrying  out  his  orders.  He  then  led  his  en¬ 
tire  army  swiftly  toward  Antioch  and  on  September  25  placed  his 
camp  near  a  certain  town  called  Gastun.-*^ 

From  there  he  sent  messengers  to  the  prince.  In  accordance  with 
the  conditions  of  the  agreement  formerly  concluded  between  them, 
he  demanded  that  the  city  with  the  citadel  and  all  the  fortifications  of 
the  town  without  exception  be  surrendered  to  him,  that  he  might  be 
able  to  wage  war  upon  the  neighboring  cities  of  the  enemy  as  from  a 
convenient  near-by  base.  He  declared  however,  that  he  was  ready,  as 
far  as  lay  in  his  power,  to  fulfil  with  a  wide  interpretation  the  terms 
of  the  written  agreement  and,  in  addition,  to  add  good  measure  and 
overflowing,  according  to  the  nature  of  their  deserts. 


20.  The  atizens  send  envoys  to  the  eynferor  refudlaUng  the 
treaty  and  refusing  him  admittance  to  the  city. 

Many  times  ere  this  Raymond,  prince  of  Antioch,  had  sent  messen¬ 
gers  to  invite  the  emperor  to  come  to  Antioch.-®  He  now  found  himself 
in  a  difficult  position,  however,  and  knowing  that  he  was  bound  by  the 
terms  of  the  treaty,  he  hesitated  as  to  what  he  should  do.  Accordingly, 
he  called  together  the  elders  and  the  leading  men  of  the  city  and  of 
the  whole  land  and  asked  their  advice  as  to  what  course  should  be 
adopted  in  such  a  dangerous  crisis.  After  long  deliberation,  they  unani¬ 
mously  agreed  that  it  was  by  no  means  to  the  best  interests  of  the  land 
that  a  city  so  noble,  so  powerful,  and  so  well  fortified  should  be  given 

Gaston  or  Gastin  was  a  fortress  held  by  the  Templars.  John  arrived  here  Septem¬ 
ber  25,  1 142. 

There  had  been  considerable  correspondence  between  the  prince  of  Antioch  and 
the  emperor.  Recently,  the  advance  of  Zangi  had  led  Raymond  to  invite  and  even 
urge  the  emperor  to  come  (see  Chalandon,  Les  Comnenej  II,  186—87). 


EMPEROR  JOHN  AND  THE  LATIN  STATES  125 

over  into  the  power  of  the  emperor  by  any  agreement  whatsoever. 
The  result  of  such  action  would  be  that  through  the  indolence  of  the 
Greeks  the  city,  together  with  the  whole  region,  would  fall  into  the 
hands  of  the  enemy,  as  had  happened  more  than  once  before. 

Nevertheless,  that  the  prince  might  not  be  charged,  however  justly, 
with  violation  of  faith,  they  sought  for  a  pretext  under  which  they 
might  veil  this  far  from  laudable  act.  For,  on  the  emperor^s  former 
visit,  it  had  been  agreed  between  them,  as  has  been  related,  that  the 
prince  should  surrender  the  city  to  the  monarch  without  difficulty. 
Moreover,  later,  Raymond  had  repeatedly  sent  messengers  urging 
the  emperor  to  come  to  Syria  and  had  promised  that  he  would  keep 
good  faith  with  him.  In  order  to  excuse  their  lord  in  some  measure  for 
this  act,  they  resolved  to  send  representatives  to  the  emperor,  men 
chosen  from  among  the  greatest  nobles  of  the  land,  who,  on  behalf  of 
the  blessed  Peter  and  the  patriarch  and  all  the  citizens,  were  to  forbid 
him  to  enter  the  city.  They  were  instructed  to  say  that  these  former 
acts  of  the  prince  would  not  be  considered  as  in  any  way  valid  ^  that 
he  had  had  no  legal  power  to  make  covenants  in  that  way,  in  the  patri¬ 
mony  of  his  wife  3  and  that  she  also  had  never  had  power  to  transfer 
the  government  to  another  person  without  the  acquiescence  of  the  citi¬ 
zens  and  lords.  Nor  had  either  of  these  rulers  been  authorized  to 
transfer  any  of  the  land.  If  one  or  both  should  obstinately  persist  in 
this  design,  it  would  certainly  result  in  their  being  driven  from  the 
city  and  their  entire  domain.  They  would  be  exiled  from  the  heritage 
which,  to  the  great  disadvantage  of  their  faithful  subjects,  they  had 
illegally  proposed  to  sell.^® 

The  emperor  was  moved  to  anger  at  these  words.  Nevertheless, 
well  knowing  the  hearts  of  the  citizens  and  of  the  provincials  as 
a  whole,  he  commanded  the  army  to  return  to  Cilicia,  that  he 
might  avoid  the  inclemency  of  the  approaching  winter  in  the  milder 
temperature  of  the  seacoast.  For  the  air  in  winter  is  always  softer  on 
the  coast,  and  the  country  is  therefore  better  adapted  to  support  the 
legions  in  comfort. 

The  reference  to  St.  Peter  and  the  patriarch  suggests  that  the  clergy  played  a 
prominent  part  in  opposing  John’s  entrance  into  Antioch.  Their  reason  for  doing  so 
was  their  opposition  to  the  reestablishment  of  the  Greek  hierarchy  in  the  city.  Ray¬ 
mond  might  treat  the  church  problem  with  indifference  and  accede  to  the  emperor’s 
demand,  but  they  refused  to  do  so.  Raymond  was  more  or  less  forced  to  change  his 
attitude  toward  the  emperor  (see  Chalandon,  Les  Comnene^  11,  188—90). 


126  EMPEROR  JOHN  AND  THE  LATIN  STATES 


21.  The  em  feror  sends  messengers  to  the  king  of  Jerusalem,  On 
the  f  retext  of  visiting  the  venerable  f  laces y  he  announces  that 
he  intends  to  come  thither.  The  king^s  answer. 

The  emperor  perceived  that  for  the  present  his  hope  of  entering  An¬ 
tioch  with  his  legions  was  wholly  impossible  of  realization.  Yet  he 
hoped  that  when  the  winter  was  past  and  the  pleasant  spring  weather 
returned  he  might  attain  at  least  a  part  of  his  wishes  in  regard  to  that 
city,  even  against  the  will  of  its  citizens.  He  concealed  his  intention, 
therefore,  in  the  depths  of  his  heart,  and,  the  better  to  disguise  his  real 
purpose,  he  dispatched  an  embassy  of  the  highest  nobility  to  King  Fulk 
of  Jerusalem.  He  announced  that,  if  it  seemed  good  to  the  Christians, 
he  would  like  to  come  thither  for  the  purpose  of  prayer  and  devotion; 
he  would  also  gladly  lend  aid  against  the  enemy  in  those  parts.  The 
king,  however,  after  consulting  with  his  advisers,  sent  an  answer  to  his 
request  by  special  envoys:  namely,  Anselm,  bishop  of  Bethlehem; 
Geoffrey,  abbot  of  the  Temple  of  the  Lord,  a  man  skilled  in  the  Greek 
language;  and  Rohard,  the  castellan  of  the  citadel  of  Jerusalem.  They 
were  charged  with  the  following  message:  “The  kingdom  is  of  very 
limited  extent,  nor  does  it  afford  sufficient  food  for  so  large  a  host.  It 
could  not  sustain  such  an  army  without  the  risk  of  famine  resulting 
from  an  utter  dearth  of  the  necessities  of  life.  Nevertheless,  if  it  pleased 
his  imperial  majesty,  beloved  of  God,  to  come  to  the  Holy  City  with 
a  following  of  ten  thousand  men  to  visit  the  venerable  places  and  to 
dispose  all  things  according  to  his  own  wishes,  the  people  would  go 
forth  to  meet  him  with  the  greatest  delight ;  they  would  welcome  his 
coming  with  joy  and  exultation  and  would  obey  him  as  their  lord  and 
the  mightiest  prince  in  the  world.’’ 

After  listening  to  this  message  the  emperor  withdrew  his  proposal. 
He  did  not  regard  it  as  befitting  his  imperial  glory  that  he  who  was 
ever  wont  to  move  attended  by  many  thousands  should  proceed  with 
such  a  small  escort.  Accordingly,  he  dismissed  the  envoys  with  many 
tokens  of  his  favor  and  bestowed  upon  them  gifts  with  lavish  gener¬ 
osity.  He  then  went  on  to  Cilicia,  where  he  passed  the  winter  season 
near  Tarsus,  to  await  the  coming  of  spring.  In  his  heart,  however,  he 

This  polite  refusal  of  any  but  a  pious  visit  from  John  indicated  the  resistance  of 
Jerusalem  to  John’s  plans  for  a  general  overlordship  of  Christian  Syria,  which  Chalan- 
don  believes  that  he  contemplated  at  this  time  (see  Chalandon,  Les  Comneney  II, 
190-91). 


EMPEROR  JOHN  AND  THE  LATIN  STATES  127 

purposed  that  in  the  following  summer  he  would  accomplish  in  Syria 
great  deeds  worthy  of  remembrance  forever. 

About  this  time  a  certain  nobleman,  Paganus  by  name,“®  built  a 
fortress  in  the  land  of  Arabia  Secunda,  which  received  the  name  of 
Kerak,  Paganus  had  been  at  one  time  butler  to  the  king  and  later  held 
lands  beyond  the  Jordan  (after  Romain  de  Puy  and  Ralph,  his  son, 
for  their  sins  had  been  dispossessed  and  alienated  from  them).  This 
place  was  strongly  fortified  both  by  its  natural  situation  and  by  arti¬ 
ficial  means.  It  was  situated  near  an  ancient  city,  formerly  called  Rabba, 
the  metropolis  of  this  same  Arabia.  It  was  at  the  siege  of  this  place,  as 
we  read,  that  by  the  command  of  David,  though  at  the  hand  of  Joab, 
the  innocent  Uriah  was  killed.  Later  it  was  called  Petra  of  the  Desert  j 
whence  Arabia  Secunda  is  now  called  Arabia  of  Petra.^^ 

22.  While  hunting  during  his  stay  in  Cilicia y  the  emferor  is  fa¬ 
tally  wounded, 

■ 

The  emperor  of  Constantinople  dearly  loved  to  hunt  in  the  woods 
and  glades.  In  the  early  spring,  before  the  season  when  kings  ordi¬ 
narily  lead  forth  their  armies  to  war,  he  went  to  the  forest  attended 
by  his  usual  escort  assigned  for  the  purpose.  It  was  a  custom  of  long 
standing  which  served  to  while  away  the  monotonous  hours.  With  bow 
in  hand  and  quiver  heavy  with  arrows  as  usual,  he  was  pursuing  the 
wild  beasts  with  his  customary  energy.  Suddenly  a  wild  boar  which 
had  been  started  up  by  the  dogs,  infuriated  by  their  shrill  insistent 
barking,  rushed  past  the  hiding  place  of  the  emperor.  With  marvellous 
swiftness  he  seized  an  arrow,  but  he  carelessly  stretched  the  bow  too 
far  and  wounded  himself  in  the  bow  hand  with  the  point  of  the  poi¬ 
soned  arrow.  Thus,  from  so  trivial  a  cause,  he  received  the  summons  of 
death.  The  pain  of  the  wound  soon  compelled  him  to  leave  the  woods 
and  return  to  the  camp.  Physicians  were  summoned  in  numbers.  He 
explained  the  accident  to  them  and  did  not  hesitate  to  say  that  he  had 
caused  his  own  death.  Full  of  solicitude  for  their  lord’s  safety,  they 

The  name  Paganus  (Payens)  occurs  frequently  during  this  period  and  may  in¬ 
dicate  three  different  individuals.  La  Monte  lists  one  as  butler  of  the  kingdom  iizo— 
1136,  another  as  chancellor  1115—1128  (J.  L.  La  Monte,  Feudal  Monarchy  in  the 
Latin  Kingdom  of  Jerusalemy  iioo—i2giy  pp.  256—57).  There  is  also  the  Templar, 
Hugh  de  Payens,  prominent  in  the  crusade  of  1128. 

This,  one  of  the  most  famous  of  the  crusaders’  fortresses,  watched  one  of  the 
main  pilgrim  routes  to  Mecca.  The  incident  is  described  in  II  Sa.  11  j  12:  26—31. 


128  EMPEROR  JOHN  AND  THE  LATIN  STATES 

applied  remedies,  but  the  fatal  poison  had  already  permeated  his  sys¬ 
tem.  The  means  taken  did  not  avail,  and  the  venom  continued  to  creep 
still  further  to  the  internal  parts,  thus  effectually  preventing  all  hope 
of  recovery.  He  was  advised  that  there  was  only  one  course  which 
might  save  his  life:  the  injured  hand,  in  which  as  yet  all  the  potent 
evil  was  concentrated,  might  be  removed  before  the  poison  infected 
the  rest  of  the  body.  But  the  emperor,  a  man  of  lofty  spirit,  although 
suffering  intense  agony  and  convinced  that  death  was  imminent,  still 
steadfastly  preserved  his  imperial  majesty  and  rejected  the  advice.  He 
is  said  to  have  answered,  ‘Ht  would  be  unseemly  that  the  Roman  em¬ 
pire  should  be  ruled  by  one  hand.”  The  army  was  utterly  stunned  and 
prostrated  by  this  sinister  occurrence,  which  was  all  the  more  appalling 
because  there  was  no  possibility  of  preventing  it.  The  death  of  the  great 
monarch  caused  universal  grief  among  the  legions.  Anxious  sorrow 
oppressed  each  heart  and  filled  the  camp  with  unprecedented  woe. 

23.  The  emperor  proclaims  his  younger  son  emperor  and  expires. 

The  army  returns  home  under  the  command  of  Emperor 
Manuel, 

Meanwhile,  the  emperor,  who  was  a  man  of  keen  and  intelligent 
foresight,  perceived  that  the  day  of  his  death  was  at  hand.  He  there¬ 
fore  called  to  him  his  kinsmen  and  his  relatives  by  marriage,  many  of 
whom  always  accompanied  him — the  chiefs  of  the  sacred  palace  and 
the  heads  of  the  armies — and  consulted  with  them  over  the  matter  of 
his  successor.  He  was  in  grave  doubt  as  to  what  he  ought  to  do — 
whether  to  commit  the  reins  of  empire  to  his  elder  son  Isaac,  whom, 
as  was  related,  he  had  sent  back  to  Constantinople  from  Attalia  with 
the  remains  of  his  brothers  and  to  whom,  by  the  law  of  primogeniture, 
the  throne  seemed  to  belong,  or  whether  he  should  give  the  preference 
to  the  younger  son,  who  was  with  him.  The  latter  was  a  youth  of  un¬ 
usual  promise,  who,  in  the  estimation  of  all,  was  destined  to  become 
a  great  man.  Another  reason  also  caused  the  emperor  to  hesitate,  for, 
as  he  remarked,  ^Hf  we  confer  the  scepter  of  empire  upon  this  son,  we 
shall  seem  to  be  acting  contrary  to  the  laws  of  mankind,  which  with 
justice  make  the  elder  the  more  important.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  in 
accordance  with  the  usual  procedure,  we  commit  the  government  of 
the  empire  to  Isaac  there  will  be  no  one  to  lead  safely  home  these 
armies,  the  strength  and  glory  of  the  whole  Roman  empire.”  It  was 


EMPEROR  JOHN  AND  THE  LATIN  STATES  129 

indeed  plain  that  without  a  leader  the  legions  could  not  pass  through 
the  intervening  country  in  safety,  for  it  was  filled  with  enemies  who 
would  lay  ambushes  and  summon  assistance  from  all  the  country 
round  about. 

There  was  amone*  the  other  ffreat  men  of  the  court  an  illustrious 

O  O 

prince,  by  name  John  the  protosebastos.  He,  with  those  of  his  party, 
eai*nestly  tried  to  secure  the  succession  for  Isaac  and  strove  to  reassure 
the  emperor  in  his  anxiety  about  the  safe  return  of  the  troops.  Manuel, 
the  younger  son,  however,  who  was  present  on  the  campaign  with  his 
father,  stood  high  in  the  estimation  and  favor  of  the  entire  army,  par- 
ticulai'ly  with  the  Latins.  Some  of  the  princes  also  worked  diligently 
in  every  way  for  his  interests.  His  father  also  regarded  him  with  more 
affection  and  inclined  toward  him  more  favorably  because  he  seemed 

I 

9 

wiser,  more  valiant  in  arms,  and  more  affable  in  every  way.  Moreover, 

j  j  rf’  •  ' 

the  responsibility  of  conducting  the  army  back  in  safety  weighed  more 
heavily  upon  him. 

After  long  deliberation,  by  the  will  of  God  the  choice  finally  fell 
upon  the  younger  son.  Accordingly,  at  the  command  of  the  emperor 
and  in  his  presence,  imperial  reverence  was  shown  to  Manuel.  Then, 
as  is  the  custom  of  that  empire,  he  was  clad  in  the  purple  hose  and 
enthusiasticalh"  hailed  as  Augustus  by  the  legions. 

After  Manuel  had  been  thus  raised  to  the  supreme  place  of  power 
in  the  empire,  his  distinguished  father  of  famous  memor}’,  generous 
and  pious,  kind  and  merciful,  yielded  to  fate.  John  was  a  man  of  me¬ 
dium  heio;ht,  with  black  hair  and  swai'thy  skin,  and  for  this  reason  is 
still  called  the  Moor.  Though  insignificant  in  appearance,  he  was  dis¬ 
tinguished  for  his  lofty  character  and  famous  for  his  prov^ess  ii\  war. 
He  died  in  a  place  called  the  meadow  of  Mantles,  near  Anavarza,  a 
very  ancient  city,  and  the  metropolis  of  Cilicia  Secunda.  His  death  oc¬ 
curred  in  the  month  of  April,  in  the  year  of  the  Incarnation  of  the 
Lord  1143,  which  was  the  twenty-seventh  }*ear  of  his  reign  and  of  his 
life  the  .  .  . 


VihJt'  vero  was  never  completed.  William  when  writing  these  words  did  not  know 
the  exact  age  of  John  and  left  a  blank,  intending  to  fill  it  in  later.  In  the  haste  of 
closing  his  work  he  either  forgot  this  blank  or  had  been  unable  to  obtain  the  informa- 
tion.  He  is,  of  course,  in  error  about  the  years  of  John’s  reign,  iiiS— 1143,  not  quite 
twenty-five  instead  of  twenty-seven  years.  John  was  born  in  loSS  and  died  in  the 
fiftv-sixth  vear  of  his  life.  The  Greek  historians  are  in  substantial  accord  with  Wil- 
liam’s  account  of  John’s  deatl\  and  the  selection  of  Manuel  as  his  successor  (see  Chal- 
andon,  Les  Comuhjey  II,  192—93). 


130  EMPEROR  JOHN  AND  THE  LATIN  STATES 

When  the  new  emperor  finally  settled  his  affairs  in  that  land,  he 
led  his  armies  back  to  Constantinople  in  safety.  There  he  found  that 
his  elder  brother,  on  the  news  of  his  father’s  death,  had  at  once  taken 
possession  of  the  palace.  Manuel  therefore  sent  a  private  letter  to  the 
official  who  was  in  charge  of  the  palace  and  all  the  treasures  and  or¬ 
dered  that  his  brother,  who  apprehended  nothing  of  the  kind,  be 
seized  at  once  and  thrown  into  prison. 

Later,  however,  after  he  had  made  his  solemn  entry  into  the  city, 
he  became  reconciled  to  his  brother  through  the  friendly  offices  of  kins¬ 
men  of  both  and  of  some  of  the  nobles  of  the  sacred  palace.  Thus, 
peacefully,  Manuel  obtained  possession  of  the  empire,  according  to 
the  last  wish  of  his  father.  As  long  as  he  lived,  however,  he  never 
ceased  to  heap  honors  upon  his  brother  as  the  elder  and  to  show  him 
abundant  favor. 

24.  The  king  and  the  nobles  of  the  realm  build  the  fortress  Ibeltn 
before  Ascalon. 

About  this  time  Fulk,  king  of  Jerusalem,  and  the  other  princes  of  the 
kingdom,  together  with  the  lord  patriarch  and  the  prelates  of  the 
church  felt  the  necessity  of  checking  the  insolent  ravages  of  the  people 
of  Ascalon.  In  order  to  restrain  them  in  some  measure  at  least  from 
overrunning  the  land  freely,  it  was  decided  by  common  consent  to 
build  a  fortress  in  the  country  near  the  city  of  Ramlah  and  not  far  from 
Lydda,  which  is  Diospolis.  There  was  in  that  locality  a  hill  slightly 
raised  above  the  plain.  Here,  according  to  tradition,  there  had  once 
been  a  city  of  the  Philistines  called  Gath.  Near  here,  about  ten  miles 
from  Ascalon,  and  not  far  from  the  coast,  was  once  another  city  be¬ 
longing  to  that  same  people  called  Azot. 

The  Christians  responded  as  with  one  mind  to  the  summons,  and  on 
the  hill  just  mentioned,  they  built  a  fortress  of  very  strong  masonry 
with  deep  foundations  and  four  towers.  From  the  old  buildings  of 
which  many  vestiges  remain  to  the  present  day,  an  abundant  supply 
of  stones  was  obtained.  The  wells  of  olden  times  which  existed  in  large 
numbers  in  the  vicinity  of  the  ruined  city  also  afforded  an  abundance 
of  water,  not  only  for  use  in  the  building  operations,  but  also  for  the 
needs  of  man. 

When  the  fortress  was  finished  and  complete  in  every  detail,  it  was 
by  common  consent  committed  to  a  certain  nobleman  of  great  wisdom, 


EMPEROR  JOHN  AND  THE  LATIN  STATES  131 

Balian  the  Elder.  He  was  the  father  of  Hugh,  Baldwin,  and  Balian 
the  Younger,  all  of  whom  took  the  surname  Ibelin  from  this  place, 
which  had  been  so  called  before  the  fortress  was  built  there.  In  the 
guardianship  of  Ibelin  and  in  the  pursuit  of  the  enemy,  because  of 
whom  this  castle  had  been  built,  Balian  displayed  great  diligence. 
After  the  death  of  their  father,  his  sons,  noble  men,  valiant  in  arms 
and  vigilant  in  every  respect,  maintained  the  same  careful  custody 
over  it  until  the  city  of  Ascalon  was  finally  restored  to  the  Christian 
faith . 

By  the  unanimous  wish  of  the  barons^  another  fortress  is  built 

before  Ascalon  and  given  the  name  of  Blanche  garde. 

This  experiment  convinced  the  nobles  of  the  realm  that  by  establishing 
the  two  strongholds  Beersheba  and  Ibelin  they  had  made  decided 
progress  in  checking  the  audacious  raids  of  the  Ascalonites.  In  large 
measure  through  this  course  the  insolence  of  the  latter  had  been  re¬ 
pressed,  their  attacks  lessened,  and  their  projects  defeated.  Accord¬ 
ingly,  in  the  following  spring,  it  was  resolved  to  build  another  fortress. 
By  increasing  the  number  of  fortified  places  round  about,  they  could 
harass  the  people  of  Ascalon  by  more  extensive  attacks  and  more  often 
cause  them  terror,  attended  by  sudden  danger  as  of  siege. 

Eight  miles  from  Ascalon,  in  that  part  of  Judea  where  the  moun¬ 
tains  end  and  the  level  plain  begins,  near  the  land  of  the  Philistines, 
in  the  tribe  of  Simeon,  there  was  a  place  which,  in  comparison  with  the 
mountainous  country,  seemed  merely  a  hill.  In  contrast  to  more  level 
land,  however,  it  might  well  be  considered  a  high  mountain.  This 
place  was  called  in  the  Arabic  tongue  Telle  Saphi,  which  we  interpret 
as  the  Clear  Hill  or  Mount.  Here  the  wise  men  of  the  realm  resolved 
to  plant  a  fortress  because  it  was  conveniently  near  to  the  other  strong¬ 
holds  which  had  been  built  for  similar  purposes  and  also  to  the  city. 
It  was  a  site,  moreover,  well  fortified  by  nature. 

Accordingly,  when  winter  was  over  and  spring  approached,  the  king 
and  his  nobles,  together  with  the  patriarch  and  the  prelates  of  the 
church,  well  satisfied  with  the  idea,  assembled  as  with  one  accord  at 
that  place.  Workmen  were  called,  the  people  were  furnished  all  neces¬ 
sary  materials,  and  a  stronghold  of  hewn  stone,  resting  on  solid  founda¬ 
tions,  was  built.  It  was  adorned  with  four  towers  of  suitable  height. 
From  the  top  of  this  there  was  an  unobstructed  view  as  far  as  the 


132  EMPEROR  JOHN  AND  THE  LATIN  STATES 

enemy’s  city,  and  it  proved  to  be  a  most  troublesome  obstacle  and  a 
veritable  source  of  danger  to  the  Ascalonites  when  they  wished  to  go 
forth  to  ravage  the  country.  It  was  called  in  the  vernacular  Blanche- 
garde,  which  in  Latin  means  the  White  Watch  tower. 

As  soon  as  this  fortress  was  completely  finished  in  every  respect,  the 
king  took  it  under  his  own  protection.  He  furnished  it  with  an  ade¬ 
quate  supply  of  food  and  weapons  and  committed  it  to  the  care  of  wise 
men  who  had  had  long  experience  in  warfare,  men  whose  fidelity  and 
devotion  were  recognized  as  well  proved.  Often  by  themselves,  more 
often  in  company  with  men  at  arms  from  the  other  fortresses  built 
with  similar  intent,  these  men  used  to  issue  forth  to  encounter  and  de¬ 
feat  the  enemy  when  they  tried  to  make  raids  from  the  city.  Occa¬ 
sionally,  they  even  attacked  the  men  of  Ascalon  on  their  own  initiative, 
wrought  great  havoc  upon  them,  and  frequently  triumphed  over  them. 

The  result  was  that  those  who  dwelt  in  the  surrounding  country 
began  to  place  great  reliance  on  this  castle  as  well  as  on  the  other 
strongholds,  and  a  great  many  suburban  places  grew  up  around  it. 
Numerous  families  established  themselves  there,  and  tillers  of  the 
fields  as  well.  The  whole  district  became  much  more  secure,  because 
the  locality  was  occupied  and  a  more  abundant  supply  of  food  for  the 
surrounding  country  was  made  possible. 

When  the  people  of  Ascalon  saw  that  their  city  was  encircled  by 
impregnable  forts,  they  began  to  feel  less  confidence  than  usual  in 
their  situation.  Accordingly,  they  dispatched  messengers  repeatedly  to 
their  lord,  the  powerful  prince  of  Egypt,  urgently  warning  him  that 
since  he  had  no  more  possessions  in  that  region  he  should  take  measures 
to  protect  Ascalon,  which  was  the  bulwark  of  his  empire. 

26.  The  queen  builds  a  convent  at  Bethany.  She  endows  it  with 
rich  possessions  and  establishes  her  sister  over  it  as  superior. 

The  kingdom  had  at  this  time,  through  the  superabundant  grace  of 
God,  been  reduced  to  a  fairly  satisfactory  state  of  tranquillity.  Accord¬ 
ingly,  the  Lady  Melisend,  that  queen  of  pious  memory,  conceived  the 
idea  of  founding  a  convent  for  religious  women  if  a  place  suited  to  her 
wishes  could  be  found.  She  desired  in  this  way  to  provide  for  the  heal¬ 
ing  of  her  own  soul  and  those  of  her  parents  as  also  for  the  salvation 
of  her  husband  and  children.  Her  youngest  sister  Iveta  had  professed 
the  religious  life  in  the  monastery  of  Saint  Anna,  the  mother  of  the 


EMPEROR  JOHN  AND  THE  LATIN  STATES  133 

blessed  Mother  of  our  Lord.  It  was  consideration  for  this  sister  which 
led  the  queen  to  undertake  this  enterprise,  for  she  felt  that  it  was  un¬ 
fitting  that  a  king’s  daughter  should  be  subject  to  the  authority  of  a 
mother  superior,  like  an  ordinary  person.  Accordingly,  she  mentally 
surveyed  the  whole  country  and  made  a  careful  investigation  to  find 
a  suitable  place  where  she  might  found  a  convent.  After  much  delibera¬ 
tion,  she  finally  decided  upon  Bethany,  the  home  of  Mary  and  Martha 
and  Lazarus  their  brother,  whom  Jesus  loved — Bethany,  the  familiar 
abiding  place  and  home  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour.  This  village  is  fif¬ 
teen  furlongs  from  Jerusalem,  and,  according  to  the  word  of  the  Evan¬ 
gel,  it  lies  beyond  the  Mount  of  Olives,  on  the  eastern  slope  of  that 
hill.  The  property  belonged  to  the  church  of  the  Sepulchre  of  the 
Lord,  but  the  queen  gave  to  the  canons  Tekoah,  the  city  of  prophets, 
and  in  exchange  received  Bethany  as  her  own. 

Since  the  place  lay  on  the  edge  of  the  desert  and  thus  might  be  ex¬ 
posed  to  the  attacks  of  the  enemy,  the  queen  at  great  expense  caused 
to  be  built  a  strongly  fortified  tower  of  hewn  and  polished  stone.  This 
was  devoted  to  the  necessary  purpose  of  defense,  that  the  maidens 
dedicated  to  God  might  have  an  impregnable  fortress  as  a  protection 
against  the  enemy.  When  the  tower  was  finished  and  a  place  prepared, 
after  a  fashion,  for  carrying  on  the  offices  of  religion,  she  established 
consecrated  sisters  there  and  placed  over  them  as  mother  superior  a 
venerable  woman  full  of  years  and  of  ripe  religious  experience.  She 
endowed  the  church  with  rich  estates,  so  that  in  temporal  possessions  it 
should  not  be  inferior  to  any  monastery,  either  of  men  or  women  j  or 
rather,  as  it  is  said,  that  it  might  be  richer  than  any  other  church. 
Among  other  possessions  which  she  generously  bestowed  upon  this 
venerable  place  was  the  famous  city  of  Jericho  with  its  dependencies, 
situated  in  the  plain  of  Jordan  and  very  rich  in  resources  of  every  kind. 
She  also  presented  to  the  convent  a  large  number  of  sacred  vessels  of 
gold  and  silver  adorned  with  gems.  She  likewise  gave  it  silken  stuffs 
for  the  adornment  of  the  house  of  God  and  vestments  of  every  descrip¬ 
tion,  both  priestly  and  levitical,  as  ecclesiastical  rules  required. 

On  the  death  of  the  venerable  woman  to  whom  she  had  entrusted 
the  charge  of  this  convent,  the  queen  put  her  original  intention  into 
effect.  With  the  sanction  of  the  patriarch  and  the  willing  assent  of  the 
holy  nuns,  she  made  her  sister  the  superior  of  the  convent.  On  that 
occasion,  she  made  many  additional  gifts,  such  as  chalices,  books,  and 


134  EMPEROR  JOHN  AND  THE  LATIN  STATES 

other  ornaments  pertaining  to  the  service  of  the  church.  As  long  as  she 
lived  she  continued  to  enrich  the  place  by  her  favor,  in  the  interests  of 
her  own  soul  and  that  of  the  sister  whom  she  so  tenderly  loved. 

I 

27.  The  ktngy  while  fursutng  a  hare  in  the  flatn  of  AcrCy  is 
thrown  headlong  from  his  horse;  he  dies  and  is  buried  at  Je¬ 
rusalem  with  his  predecessors. 

It  happened  in  those  days,  when  autumn  was  over,  that  the  king  and 
queen  were  sojourning  for  a  time  at  the  city  of  Acre.  In  order  to  vary 
the  monotony  by  some  agreeable  recreation,  the .  queen  expressed  a 
desire  to  go  out  of  the  city  to  a  certain  place  in  the  suburbs  where  there 
were  many  springs.  That  she  might  not  lack  the  pleasure  of  his  com¬ 
pany,  the  king  attended  her  with  his  usual  escort.  As  they  were  riding 
along,  the  servants  who  had  preceded  the  train  happened  to  rouse  a 
hare  which  was  lying  in  a  furrow.  It  fled,  followed  by  the  shouts  of  all. 
The  king,  impelled  by  evil  fate,  seized  his  lance  and  joined  the  pursuit. 
In  vigorous  chase,  he  began  to  urge  on  his  horse  in  that  direction. 
Finally,  the  steed,  driven  to  reckless  speed,  stumbled  and  fell.  The 
king  was  thrown  headforemost  to  the  ground.  As  he  lay  there  stunned 
by  the  pain  of  the  fall,  the  saddle  struck  his  head  and  his  brains  gushed 
forth  from  both  ears  and  nostrils.  The  members  of  his  escort,  those  in 
advance  and  those  following  him,  overcome  with  horror  at  the  fright¬ 
ful  accident,  rushed  to  his  aid  as  he  lay  on  the  ground.  They  found 
him  unconscious,  however,  unable  to  speak  or  understand. 

When  the  queen  was  informed  of  her  husband’s  unexpected  death, 
she  was  pierced  to  the  heart  by  the  sinister  disaster.  She  tore  her  gar¬ 
ments  and  hair  and  by  her  loud  shrieks  and  lamentations  gave  proof  of 
her  intense  grief.  Flinging  herself  upon  the  ground  she  embraced  the 
lifeless  body.  Tears  failed  her  through  continual  weeping-  frequent 
sobs  interrupted  her  voice,  as  she  tried  to  give  expression  to  her  grief  j 
nor  could  she  do  justice  to  it,  although  she  cared  for  naught  save  to 
satisfy  her  anguish.  The  people  of  the  household  also  manifested  their 
grief  by  tears,  words,  and  aspect  and  gave  plain  proof  of  great  sorrow. 

The  king’s  deplorable  accident  soon  became  known.  Rumor,  on 
swift  wings,  spread  the  news  throughout  the  city  of  Acre.  Crowds 
flocked  to  the  scene,  all  eager  to  convince  themselves  of  the  unspeak¬ 
able  disaster.  Tearfully  they  bore  him  thence  to  the  city,  where  he 
lived  until  the  third  day,  unconscious  but  still  breathing.  Thus,  on 


EMPEROR  JOHN  AND  THE  LATIN  STATES  135 

November  lo,  in  the  year  1142  of  the  Incarnation  of  our  Lord  and  of 
Folk’s  reign  the  eleventh,  his  life  was  brought  to  a  close  in  a  good  old 
age.^^ 

His  body  was  borne  thence  to  Jerusalem  with  fitting  honors.  The 
entire  body  of  clergy  and  people  went  out  to  meet  the  funeral  train. 
He  was  buried  with  royal  magnificence  among  his  kingly  predecessors 
of  blessed  memory  in  the  church  of  the  Sepulchre  of  the  Lord,  at  the 
foot  of  Mount  Calvary,  by  the  gate  as  one  enters  on  the  right.  William, 
the  venerable  patriarch  of  Jerusalem,  conducted  the  royal  obsequies. 

King  Fulk  left  two  children  who  had  not  yet  attained  the  age  of 
manhood:  Baldwin,  the  eldest,  then  thirteen  years  old,  and  Amaury, 
aged  seven.  The  royal  power  passed  to  the  Lady  Melisend,  a  queen 
beloved  of  God,  to  whom  it  belonged  by  hereditary  right. 

The  Latin  here  is  rather  ambiguous,  quarta  demiim  die^  id'ibus  videlicet  N ovembris. 
It  might  be  read  as  meaning  “on  the  fourth  day  of  his  illness,  i.e,,  on  the  Ides  of  No¬ 
vember”  which  is  November  13,  or  “on  the  fourth  day  of  the  Ides  of  November” 
which  is  November  10.  In  this  instance  it  clearly  has  the  first  meaning,  but  William 
himself  later  read  it  with  the  second  meaning  (Book  XVI,  chap.  3),  The  text  carries 
the  year  1142,  but  all  'the  evidence  points  to  1143  as  the  year  of  Fulk’s  death.  The 
date  of  Fulk’s  death,  so  vital  in  the  chronology  of  the  Latin  kingdom,  has  been  con¬ 
fused  by  William’s  dating.  This  may  be  merely  a  typographical  or  copyist’s  error,  for 
it  is  not  consistent  with  his  other  references  to  the  event.  Mile  Chartrou,  on  the  basis 
of  local  Angevin  records  as  well  as  a  review  of  all  known  evidence,  concludes  that 
it  could  not  have  occurred  before  late  1143,  fixing  the  other  terminal  date  as  March 
26,  1144.  She  prefers  1144  on  the  basis  of  local  western  records  (Josephe  Chartrou, 
U Anjou  de  nog  d  PP*  234—36).  La  Monte,  who  has  reviewed  the  matter  more 

recently,  is  convinced  that  her  evidence  does  not  preclude  November,  1143  (La  Monte, 
Feudal  Monarchy y  pp,  14—15,  note  3).  Normally  there  would  be  no  ship  sailing  from 
Palestine  as  late  as  November,  and  the  West  would  not  have  learned  of  his  death  be¬ 
fore  1 144  even  if  a  special  courier  had  been  dispatched  immediately.  La  Monte  pre¬ 
fers  November  10,  1143,  the  date  of  Fulk’s  death. 


HERE  ENDS  THE  FIFTEENTH  BOOK 


THE  SIXTEENTH  BOOK  BEGINS 


JOINT  RULE  OF  BALDWIN  III  AND  HIS 

MOTHER  MELISEND:  THE 
SECOND  CRUSADE 

I.  A  brief  f  re  face  is  given.  On  the  death  of  Fidky  his  son  Bald¬ 
win  III  succeeds  to  the  throne.  The  personal  affearance  of 
the  latter  is  described. 


The  events  which  have  been  recorded  in  the  present  history  up  to  this 
time  have  been  assembled  from  the  accounts  of  others  who  still  pre¬ 
serve  a  faithful  recollection  of  earlier  times.  It  is,  therefore,  with  much 
difficulty  that  we  have  obtained  reliable  material  and  the  correct  chro¬ 
nology  and  succession  of  events.  As  far  as  possible,  however,  we  have 
given  a  faithful  account  of  these  events  as  received  from  the  narratives 
themselves.  The  things  which  now  follow  we  ourselves  have,  in  part, 
witnessed  with  our  own  eyes  and,  in  part,  learned  from  the  trustworthy 
relation  of  those  who  were  present  when  the  events  occurred.  Relying 
upon  these  two  sources,  therefore,  by  the  will  of  God  we  shall  set 
down  for  the  benefit  of  posterity  with  more  ease  and  accuracy  the  rest 
of  this  history.  For  the  memory  is  ever  wont  to  recall  more  vividly 
recent  occurrences,  and  that  which  the  eye  presents  to  the  mind  is  less 
easily  forgotten  than  that  which  is  conveyed  by  the  ear  alone. ^  These 
words  of  our  Flaccus  express  our  own  feelings:  ^^Things  conveyed 
through  the  ear  affect  the  feelings  less  deeply  than  those  which  come 
from  the  faithful  observation  of  the  eyesj  things  which  the  spectator 
himself  has  transmitted  to  himself.”  “ 

Fulk,  the  third  Latin  king  of  Jerusalem,  was  succeeded  by  Baldwin 


^  These  remarks  of  William  have  been  misunderstood.  They  were  probably  written 
after  1180.  As  has  already  appeared,  he  followed  written  sources  to  1127,  with  a 
minimum  of  oral  tradition.  From  1127  to  1143  dependent  upon  such  ac¬ 

counts  as  he  heard  or  could  gather  from  archives.  In  1143  he  was  presumably  thirteen 
years  of  age,  and  conscious  of  the  drift  of  affairs.  He  had,  of  course,  drawn  some¬ 
thing  from  personal  recollection  in  the  two  previous  books.  He  now  felt  more  secure, 
because  he  had  fuller  conscious  recollection  of  events.  Actually,  however,  his  work  is 
practically  our  primary  source  for  the  history  of  the  kingdom  of  Jerusalem  from  1127 

to  I  I  84. 

^  Horace  Ars  foet.  180—82. 


BALDWIN  III  AND  MELISEND 


137 

III,  his  son  by  Queen  Melisend.  As  has  been  mentioned,  Baldwin  had 
one  brother  named  Amaury,  a  little  boy  seven  years  old.  When  Bald¬ 
win  later  died  without  children,  this  brother  succeeded  him  in  the 
kingdom,  as  will  be  related  in  the  following  chapters.  Baldwin  was 
thirteen  years  old  when  he  came  to  the  throne,  and  he  reigned  twenty 
years. ^  He  was  a  youth  of  excellent  natural  ability  and  even  at  that 
time  gave  plain  evidence  of  that  character  which  later  he  fully  at¬ 
tained.  On  reaching  manhood,  he  was  easily  preeminent  among  all 
others  by  beauty  of  feature  and  form  as  well  as  by  his  general  bearing. 
In  vivacity  of  mind  and  brilliancy  of  speech  he  was  superior  to  all  the 
nobles  of  the  realm.  He  was  taller  than  the  average  man,  but  his  limbs 
were  so  well  proportioned  to  his  height  that  no  feature  seemed  out  of 
harmony  with  the  whole.  His  features  were  comely  and  refined,  his 
complexion  florid,  a  proof  of  innate  strength.  In  this  respect  he  re¬ 
sembled  his  mother  and  was  not  inferior  to  his  maternal  grandfather. 
His  eyes  were  of  medium  size,  rather  prominent  and  sparkling.  He  had 
straight  yellowish  hair  and  wore  a  rather  full  beard  on  cheeks  and 
chin.  He  was  of  somewhat  full  habit,  although  he  could  not  be  called 
fleshy  like  his  brother  or  spare  like  his  mother.  In  short,  it  may  be  said 
that  his  whole  appearance  was  so  superior  by  reason  of  a  certain  re¬ 
markable  dignity  which  shone  forth  from  him  that  even  strangers 
could  not  fail  to  recognize  his  innate  kingly  majesty. 

2.  Concerning  his  Uje  and  habits, 

Baldwin’s  habit  of  mind  was  equally  well  constituted  and  was  in  com¬ 
plete  accord  with  his  great  physical  beauty.  He  had  an  unusually  keen 
intellect  and  was  gifted  by  nature  with  the  rare  advantage  of  eloquent 
speech.  Nor  did  he  appear  inferior  to  any  other  prince  in  his  dignified 
and  agreeable  manners.  He  was  extremely  affable  and  tender-hearted, 
and,  although  he  was  liberal  to  almost  everyone,  far  beyond  his  means, 
yet  he'  was  not  at  all  desirous  of  the  money  of  others.  He  did  not 
trouble  the  patrimony  of  the  churches,  nor  did  he,  like  a  prodigal,  lie 


®  It  is  necessary  to  keep  in  mind  the  fact  that  William’s  chronolog*ical  framework, 
constructed  in  1182,  becomes  a  complicating  factor  in  determining  dates.  His  state¬ 
ment  of  the  age  of  Baldwin  III  and  the  number  of  years  of  his  reign  is  consistent 
throughout.  On  that  basis,  Baldwin  was  born  in  1130,  began  his  reign  in  1143,  and 
died  in  1163.  This  accords  with  the  marriage  of  his  parents  (see  Book  XIV,  note  10), 
which  under  normal  conditions  would  make  February,  1130,  the  earliest  possible  date 
for  his  birth. 


BALDWIN  III  AND  MELISEND 


138 

in  wait  for  the  riches  of  his  subjects.  He  had  one  characteristic  that  is 
usually  very  rare  in  youth.  Even  at  that  time  of  life  he  feared  God  and 
felt  great  reverence  for  ecclesiastical  institutions  and  the  prelates  of 
the  church.  He  was  gifted  with  a  vivacious  disposition  and  had,  be¬ 
sides,  the  advantage  of  an  accurate  memory.  He  was  fairly  well  edu¬ 
cated,  much  more  so  than  was  his  brother  Amaury,  who  succeeded  him. 
Whatever  leisure  he  could  snatch  from  his  public  duties  he  delighted 
to  devote  to  reading.  He  particularly  enjoyed  listening  to  the  reading 
of  history  and  inquired  with  great  diligence  into  the  deeds  and  habits 
of  the  noblest  kings  and  princes  of  former  times.  With  men  of  letters 
and  wise  laymen  he  loved  above  all  to  converse.  His  gracious  affability 
led  him  to  greet  even  the  most  lowly  by  name,  much  to  their  surprise. 
He  voluntarily  offered  an  opportunity  of  conversing  with  him  to  any¬ 
one  who  wished  it  or  whom  he  casually  met.  If  an  audience  was  re¬ 
quested,  he  did  not  refuse  it. 

In  this  way,  he  gained  the  favor  of  both  fathers  and  people  so  that 
he  was  more  popular  with  men  of  both  classes  than  any  of  his  predeces¬ 
sors  had  been.  He  endured  hardships  with  patience  and,  after  the  ex¬ 
ample  of  the  best  princes,  displayed  great  wisdom  and  foresight  in  the 
uncertain  issues  of  war.  In  the  midst  of  difficult  situations  which  he  en¬ 
dured  for  the  sake  of  extending  the  realm,  he  showed  royal  steadfast¬ 
ness  and  at  no  time  lost  the  presence  of  mind  befitting  a  brave  man.  He 
was  fully  acquainted  with  the  customary  law  by  which  the  kingdom  of 
the  East  was  governed,  so  that  in  difficult  questions,  even  the  older 
nobles  were  wont  to  consult  his  knowledge  and  marvel  at  the  erudition 
of  his  trained  mind. 

His  conversation  was  witty  and  jovial.  Since  he  had  unusual  facility 
in  adapting  himself  easily  to  everyone,  he  mingled  acceptably  with 
every  age  and  condition.  He  was,  moreover,  a  man  of  unusual  courtesy, 
and  this  was  the  more  remarkable  because  he  permitted  himself  great 
freedom  of  speech.  If  he  observed  any  reprehensible  or  striking  faults 
in  his  friends,  he  corrected  them  in  public  regardless  of  whether  his 
words  pleased  or  offended.  Yet  these  rebukes,  since  they  were  made 
more  in  jollity — or,  rather,  in  lightness  of  heart — than  with  any  in¬ 
tent  to  hurt,  did  not  greatly  lessen  his  popularity  with  the  victims  of 
his  blunt  remarks.  His  frankness  was  readily  pardoned,  in  fact,  because 
he  bore  with  equanimity  the  cutting  words  which  were  directed  against 
him  in  retaliation.  In  such  things  and  in  the  pernicious  games  of  chance 


BALDWIN  III  AND  MELISEND 


139 

and  dice  he  indulged  more  than  befitted  royal  majesty.  In  pursuit  of 
the  desires  of  the  flesh,  also,  he  is  said  to  have  dishonored  the  marriage 
ties  of  others.  This  was  in  his  youth,  however,  for  when  he  became  a 
man,  like  the  apostle  he  ^^put  away  childish  things.”  Thus  by  the 
practice  of  the  virtues  he  atoned  for  the  faults  of  earlier  years.  For  after 
he  took  a  wife,  he  is  said  to  have  been  entirely  faithful  to  her.  The 
reprehensible  faults,  displeasing  to  God,  which  he  had  contracted  in 
his  youth,  under  the  impulse  of  that  critical  period,  he  later  with  wise 
counsel  abandoned  and  became  changed  for  the  better. 

He  was  extremely  temperate  in  taking  bodily  refreshment^  in  fact 
he  was  abstemious  beyond  the  requirements  of  that  age.  He  abom¬ 
inated  excess  either  in  food  or  in  drink  and  used  to  say  that  it  was  touch- 
wood  for  the  worst  crimes.® 

3.  Concerning  his  elevation  to  the  throne  and  of  how  long  he 
reigned  under  the  guardianshif  of  his  mother. 

King  Fulk  died  on  the  tenth  day  of  November.®  On  the  day  of  the 
Lord’s  Nativity  following,  in  the  year  of  the  Incarnation  of  the  Lord 
1142,  Baldwin  was  solemnly  anointed,  consecrated,  and  crowned,  to¬ 
gether  with  his  mother,  in  the  church  of  the  Sepulchre  of  the  Lord. 
The  ceremony  was  conducted  by  William,  patriarch  of  Jerusalem,  be¬ 
fore  the  customary  assemblage  of  the  princes  and  all  the  prelates  of 
the  church.  The  head  of  the  holy  Roman  church  at  that  time  was  Eu- 
genius  Illj  Aimery  was  patriarch  of  Antioch,  and  William,  patriarch 
of  Jerusalem.  Archbishop  Fulcher  presided  over  the  church  at  Tyre.*^ 

Melisend,  the  king’s  mother,  was  a  woman  of  great  wisdom  who  had 
had  much  experience  in  all  kinds  of  secular  matters.  She  had  risen  so 
far  above  the  normal  status  of  women  that  she  dared  to  undertake  im¬ 
portant  measures.  It  was  her  ambition  to  emulate  the  magnificence  of 
the  greatest  and  noblest  princes  and  to  show  herself  in  no  wise  inferior 

^  I  Co.  13 :  II. 

®  Doubtless  William  has  idealized  Baldwin  III  somewhat  but  in  so  doing  has  given 
expression  to  his  own  ideas  of  virtues  in  a  king.  The  great  intimacy  of  this  description 
would  imply  a  close  personal  knowledge.  William  and  Baldwin  III  were  probably 
of  about  the  same  age  and  may  have  been  schoolfellows  at  some  time,  since  both  spent 
their  boyhood  in  Jerusalem.  However,  William  nowhere  makes  a  direct  statement  to 
that  effect. 

®  See  Book  XV,  note  3 1 . 

^  Eugenius  III  became  pope  in  1145.  William  is  overlooking  Celestine  II  and  Lu¬ 
cius  II,  whose  very  short  reigns  filled  the  two  years  between  Innocent  II  and  Eu- 
genius  III. 


BALDWIN  III  AND  MELISEND 


140 

to  them.  Since  her  son  was  as  yet  under  age,  she  ruled  the  kingdom  and 
administered  the  government  with  such  skilful  care  that  she  may  be 
said  truly  to  have  equalled  her  ancestors  in  that  respect.  As  long  as  her 
son  was  willing  to  be  governed  by  her  counsel,  the  people  enjoyed  a 
highly  desirable  state  of  tranquillity,  and  the  affairs  of  the  realm  moved 
on  prosperously.  But  the  more  frivolous  elements  in  the  kingdom  soon 
found  that  the  queen’s  wise  influence  hindered  their  attempts  to  draw 
the  king  into  their  own  pursuits.  They  therefore  persuaded  their  royal 
master,  who,  like  others  of  his  age,  was  “pliable  as  wax  in  being 
bent  toward  vice,  but  rough  toward  those  who  rebuked  him,”  ®  to 
withdraw  from  the  guardianship  of  his  mother  and  to  rule  the  kingdom 
of  his  fathers  himself.  It  was  unseemly,  they  said,  that  a  king  who 

r 

ought  to  rule  all  others  should  constantly  be  tied  to  the  apron  strings 
of  his  mother  like  the  son  of  a  private  person.  Although  this  intrigue 
originated  in  the  thoughtless  levity  or  malice  of  certain  individuals,  it 
came  near  being  the  ruin  of  the  whole  kingdom,  as  will  be  explained 
in  more  detail  later  when  this  subject  is  discussed. 

4.  Zangi  lays  siege  to  Edessa,  "The  location  of  this  city  is  de¬ 
scribed. 

That  same  year,  during  the  interval  between  the  death  of  King  Fulk 
and  the  elevation  of  Baldwin  to  the  throne,  the  accursed  Zangi  with  a 
mighty  host  laid  siege  to  Edessa.  This  city,  also  more  commonly 
known  as  Rohas,  was  the  great  and  famous  capital  of  the  land  of  the 
Medes.  Zangi  was  a  powerful  Turk,  lord  and  ruler  of  the  city  once 
called  Nineveh,  but  now  known  as  Mosul,  the  metropolis  of  the  region 
formerly  known  as  the  land  of  Assur.  His  reliance  lay  not  only  in  the 
numbers  and  strength  of  his  people  but  also  in  the  fact  that  a  serious 
feud  had  arisen  between  Raymond,  prince  of  Antioch,  and  Joscelin, 
count  of  Edessa.  This  latter  city  was  situated  a  day’s  journey  beyond 
the  Euphrates.  Its  lord  and  master,  the  count  just  mentioned,  had, 
contrary  to  the  custom  of  his  predecessors,  given  up  his  home  there  and 
established  his  permanent  residence  near  the  Euphrates  at  a  castle 
called  Turbessel.  The  fertility  of  the  country  in  that  vicinity  and  the 
leisure  afforded  by  that  place  had  led  him  to  make  this  change.  At 
Turbessel,  he  was  far  from  the  disturbance  caused  by  his  enemies,  he 

®  Horace  Ars  foet.  163. 


BALDWIN  III  AND  MELISEND 


141 

had  time  for  luxurious  pleasures  of  every  kind^  and  he  felt  no  responsi¬ 
bility,  as  he  should  have  done,  for  the  noble  city. 

The  inhabitants  of  Edessa  were  native  Chaldeans  and  peaceful  Ar¬ 
menians.  They  were  utterly  ignorant  of  the  use  of  arms  and  familiar 
only  with  the  business  of  trading.  Latins  also  came  hither  occasionally, 
but  citizens  of  that  race  were  few  in  number.  The  protection  of  the  city 
was  entirely  in  the  hands  of  mercenaries.  These  did  not  receive  wages 
according  to  the  time  or  kind  of  service  rendered  but  often  had  to  wait 
a  year  or  more  before  they  could  collect  what  was  due  them.® 

Both  Baldwin  and  Joscelin  the  Elder,  as  soon  as  they  came  into  pos¬ 
session  of  this  countship,  had  established  their  permanent  residence  at 
Edessa.  They  saw  to  it  carefully  that  adequate  supplies  of  arms  and 
food  and  all  else  necessary  for  some  length  of  time  should  be  brought 
thither  from  the  surrounding  places.  By  this  means  perfect  security 
for  Edessa  was  obtained,  and  it  also  became  justly  formidable  to  the 
other  cities  in  the  vicinity.  But  as  has  been  said,  there  was  now  enmity 
between  the  prince  of  Antioch  and  the  count,  and  this  was  no  longer 
concealed  but  had  already  reached  the  stage  of  open  hatred.^®  Conse¬ 
quently,  neither  felt  any  concern  for  the  troubles  or  unlucky  disasters 
of  the  other 5  rather,  each  rejoiced  in  the  distress  of  the  other  and  ex¬ 
ulted  over  any  untoward  mischance. 

The  great  prince  Zangi  seized  the  opportunity  offered  by  these  dis¬ 
sensions.  He  levied  a  countless  number  of  cavalry  forces  from  all  over 
the  East,  summoned  also  the  people  of  the  neighboring  cities,  and  laid 
siege  to  Edessa.  He  blocked  all  the  entrances  to  the  city  so  closely  that 
the  besieged  could  not  issue  forth,  nor  could  anyone  enter  from  outside. 
The  people  shut  up  within  the  city  were  soon  driven  to  extremities  by 
the  shortage  of  food  and  provisions  of  all  kinds.  Edessa  was  surrounded 
by  a  massive  wall  and  protected  by  lofty  towers  in  the  upper  part  of 
the  city.  There  was  another  stronghold  lower  down,  to  which,  even  if 
the  city  should  be  taken,  the  citizens  could  flee  for  refuge.  All  such  de- 

®  The  use  of  paid  troops,  including  even  knights,  was  probably  more  extensive  in 
Edessa  than  elsewhere,  owing  to  the  fact  that  the  large  Armenian  and  other  native 
Christian  population  had  not  been  dispossessed  by  Western  nobles.  Doubtless  the  mer¬ 
cenaries  at  times  included  Muslims. 

The  basis  for  this  trouble  probably  lay,  first,  in  the  fact  that  Joscelin  was  a 
vassal  of  the  prince  of  Antioch  for  some  of  his  land  and,  secondly,  that  Raymond  was 
a  relative  newcomer  whereas  Joscelin  had  been  born  in  the  East  and  was  half  Armenian 
in  blood.  Prejudice  and  political  rivalry  were  at  the  bottom  of  their  antagonism. 


BALDWIN  III  AND  MELISEND 


142 

fenses  may  avail  against  the  foe  if  there  are  fighters  who  will  put  up  a 
valiant  fight  for  liberty,  but  they  are  useless  when  there  are  none 
among  the  besieged  willing  to  undertake  the  part  of  defenders.  For 
walls,  towers,  and  ramparts  avail  but  little  if  there  are  none  to  man 
them. 

Hence,  when  Zangi  found  that  the  city  was  without  defenders  his 
hope  of  taking  it  was  greatly  increased.  He  placed  his  troops  in  a  cir¬ 
cle  round  about,  stationed  the  chiefs  of  the  legions  in  advantageous 
positions,  and  invested  the  city.  Stones  and  missiles  hurled  from  the 
engines  battered  the  walls  without  ceasing  and  showers  of  arrows 
allowed  the  citizens  no  respite. 

Meanwhile,  swiftly  flying  rumor  spread  the  news  abroad  that 
Edessa,  faithful  worshipper  of  God,  was  undergoing  the  horrors  of 
siege  at  tfie  hand  of  enemies  of  the  Christian  faith  and  name.  The 
hearts  of  all  true  believers,  far  and  near,  were  appalled,  and  the  zeal¬ 
ous  began  to  arm  themselves  to  take  vengeance  upon  the  wicked  foe. 
The  tidings  of  this  critical  situation  roused  the  count  to  action,  and  he 
began  assiduously  to  assemble  his  forces.  Mindful  too  late  of  the  noble 
city,  he  began,  as  it  were,  ‘^to  prepare  funeral  rites  for  the  dead,  for 
those  whom,  when  sick  and  suppliant,  he  had  neglected  to  aid.”  He 
went  about  among  the  Christians  and  besought  aid  from  his  friends. 
He  dispatched  messengers  to  his  lord,  the  prince  of  Antioch,  and 
begged  him  with  most  humble  and  earnest  prayers  that  he  would  sym¬ 
pathize  with  him  in  his  trouble  and  deliver  Edessa  from  the  threatened 
fate  of  slavery.  News  of  the  dire  calamity  also  reached  the  king  of 
Jerusalem.  Rumors  of  the  siege  of  Edessa  and  the  straits  which  her 
citizens  were  enduring  were  confirmed.  After  a  conference  with  her 
nobles,  the  queen,  who  held  the  reins  of  government,  ordered  her  kins¬ 
man,  Manasses,  the  royal  constable,  Philip  of  Nablus,  and  Elinandus 
of  Tiberias  to  march  thither  with  a  strong  force  at  once  to  assist  the 
count  and  the  afflicted  citizens.  The  prince  of  Antioch,  however,  re¬ 
joiced  in  the  count’s  misfortune.  Without  regard  for  his  own  responsi¬ 
bility  for  the  general  welfare  and  the  fact  that  “personal  hatred  should 
not  be  permitted  to  injure  the  common  interest,”  he  offered  excuses  to 
delay  giving  the  aid  which  had  been  asked. 

m 

An  Elinandus  is  mentioned  as  bishop  of  Tiberias  at  this  time  (R.  Rohricht,  Regesta 
regni  Hierosolym'itaniy  no.  245).  Elsewhere,  however,  William  indicates  that  a  lay¬ 
man  is  meant  (Book  XVII,  chap.  1). 


BALDWIN  III  AND  MELISEND 


143 


5*  Edessa  h  caftured  and  her  feofle  slain. 

In  the  meantime  Zangi  continued  to  attack  the  city  without  intermis¬ 
sion  and  ran  through  the  whole  gamut  of  injuries.  No  method  was  left 
untried  which  might  tend  to  increase  the  woes  of  the  citizens  and  help 
him  to  take  the  city.  Through  subterranean  passages  he  sent  in  miners 
who  dug  tunnels  under  the  wall.  These  were  supported  overhead  by 
beams  which  were  then  set  on  fire.  When  the  props  burned  away,  a 
great  part  of  the  wall  fell  and  left  a  breach  which  afforded  the  enemy 
an  entrance  more  than  a  hundred  cubits  wide.  The  desired  approach 
thus  obtained,  the  legions  rushed  together  from  all  directions,  entered 
the  city,  and  put  to  the  sword  all  whom  they  encountered.  Neither 
age,  condition,  nor  sex  was  spared.  To  them  might  this  saying  well  be 
applied:  “They  slay  the  widow  and  the  stranger,  and  murder  the  fa¬ 
therless.” 

Thus  the  city  was  captured  and  delivered  over  to  the  sword  of  the 
enemy.  As  soon  as  this  happened,  the  more  sensible  and  alert  among 
the  citizens  fled  with  their  wives  and  children  to  the  citadel,  which,  as 
has  been  said,  was  in  the  city.  Here  they  hoped  that  their  lives  at  least 
might  be  safe,  if  only  for  a  short  time.  But  the  inrush  of  such  a  crowd 
of  people  caused  a  panic,  and  many  perished  miserably  in  the  strug¬ 
gling  mob.  Among  others  who  died  in  this  way  are  said  to  have  been 
the  Very  Reverend  Hugo,  archbishop  of  Edessa,  and  some  of  his 
clergy.  Those  who  were  present  at  the  time  felt  that  the  prelate  was  in 
some  measure  to  blame  for  this  catastrophe.  Although  he  was  said  to 
have  amassed  great  riches,  which  he  might  have  used  to  pay  troops 
for  defending  the  city,  he  preferred,  like  a  miser,  to  store  up  his  wealth 
rather  than  to  consider  his  perishing  people.  As  a  result,  he  reaped  the 
fruits  of  his  avarice  and  shared  the  fate  of  the  populace.  Unless  the 
Lord  in  His  mercy  should  come  to  his  aid,  an  unsavory  reputation  will 
ever  attend  his  memory.  For  terrible  are  the  words  of  Scripture  con¬ 
cerning  men  of  his  sort:  “Thy  money  perish  with  thee.” 

Thus,  while  the  prince  of  Antioch,  influenced  by  foolish  hatred,  put 

Ps.  94:  6. 

Ac.  8 :  20.  This  criticism  o£  Hugo,  archbishop  of  Edessa,  for  refusing  to  use  the 
wealth  of  the  church  for  secular  purposes  is  in  marked  contrast  to  William’s  attitude 
toward  Daimbert,  who  had  been  accused  of  a  similar  policy  (see  Books  IX  and  X 
fassim  ) . 


I 


144  BALDWIN  III  AND  MELISEND 

off  rendering  the  aid  due  to  his  brethren  and  the  count  was  waiting 
for  help  from  strangers,  the  ancient  city  felld^  Edessa,  devoted  to  the 
Christian  name  from  the  times  of  the  apostles,  the  city  which  was  res¬ 
cued  from  the  superstitions  of  the  infidels  by  the  words  and  preaching 
of  the  Apostle  Thaddeus,  suffered  the  undeserved  yoke  of  servitude. 

Tradition  says  that  the  holy  Apostle  Thomas  was  buried  in  this  city, 
as  was  also  the  Apostle  Thaddeus  and  blessed  King  Abgar.  This  is  that 
Abgar,  the  illustrious  ruler  of  the  city  whose  letter  to  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  is  mentioned  by  Eusebius  of  Caesarea  in  his  work  called  the 
Ecclesiastical  History,  He  says  also  that  Abgar  was  deemed  worthy 
to  receive  an  answer  from  the  Lord.  He  gives  the  letter  of  each  one 
and  adds  the  following:  ^Tn  the  public  archives  of  the  city  of  Edessa 
over  which  Abgar  ruled,  we  found  these  letters  so  transcribed  in  the 
documents  which  contain  the  records  of  the  deeds  of  King  Abgar,  pre¬ 
served  from  ancient  times.” 

But  so  much  on  this  matter  j  now  let  us  resume  the  history. 

6.  A  fortress  beyond  the  Jordan^  called  the  Valley  of  Moses y  is 
taken  by  the  king. 

During  the  first  year  of  this  King  Baldwin’s  reign,  the  Turks,  with 
the  consent  and  at  the  invitation  of  certain  people  dwelling  in  that 
vicinity,  seized  one  of  our  strongholds  called  the  Valley  of  Moses,  in 
Syria  Sobal  beyond  the  Jordan.  This  place  is  located  near  the  waters 
of  Strife,  where  Moses,  when  the  people  of  Israel  were  murmuring 
and  dying  from  thirst,  struck  water  from  the  rock  and  the  whole  people 
and  their  beasts  drank  thereof. 

When  it  became  known  that  the  enemy  had  seized  this  fortress  and 
had  killed  the  Christians  dwelling  there,  the  king,  although  still  very 
young,  levied  forces  from  all  over  the  land  and  set  forth  thither.  With 
his  troops  he  crossed  the  famous  valley  now  occupied  by  the  Dead  sea, 

William  has  overlooked  the  fact  that  Raymond  was  involved  in  difficulties  with  the 
new  emperor,  Manuel.  He  sought  to  free  himself  from  the  vassalage  to  the  Greeks 
when  he  heard  of  the  death  of  John.  But  his  efforts  to  extend  his  sway  in  Cilicia 
brought  swift  retribution  from  Manuel.  There  was  actual  warfare  between  Raymond 
and  the  Greeks  (i  143“'!  144),  and  Raymond  was  not  in  a  position  to  give  any  real  aid 
to  Joscelin  (see  F.  Chalandon  Les  ComnenCy  II,  241—43). 

The  capture  of  Edessa  by  Zangi  is  dated  December  23,  1144,  the  citadel  two 
days  later  (R.  Rohricht,  Geschichte  des  Konigreichs  Jerusalemy  z/oo—iapr,  p.  234, 
note  4). 

See  Book  IV,  chap.  2,  and  note  5. 


BALDWIN  III  AND  MELISEND 


145 

which  is  also  called  the  lake  of  Asphalt,  and  went  up  into  the  hill  coun¬ 
try  of  Arabia  Secunda  or  Arabia  Petra,  in  the  land  of  Moab.  From 
there  he  traversed  Syria  Sobal,  or  Arabia  Tertia,  now  commonly  called 
the  land  of  Montreal,  and  came  to  his  destination.  The  inhabitants  of 
the  country  had  already  had  news  of  our  approach  and  with  their  wives 
and  children  had  fled  into  the  fortress,  the  defenses  of  which  seemed 
to  render  it  impregnable.  For  several  days  our  forces  exerted  them¬ 
selves  in  vain  before  the  place.  Volleys  of  stone  missiles,  repeated 
showers  of  arrows,  and  other  methods  of  assault  were  tried  with  no 
result.  Finally  the  Christians  became  convinced  that,  because  of  its 
fortifications,  the  place  could  not  be  taken.  They  therefore  turned  to 
other  plans. 

The  entire  region  was  covered  with  luxuriant  olive  groves  which 
shaded  the  surface  of  the  land  like  a  dense  forest.  From  these  trees  the 
dwellers  in  that  land  derived  all  their  living,  as  their  fathers  had  done 
before  them.  If  these  failed,  then  all  means  of  livelihood  would  be 
taken  away.  It  was  determined,  therefore,  to  root  out  the  trees  and 
burn  them.  It  was  thought  that  the  terrified  inhabitants,  rendered 
desperate  by  the  destruction  of  their  olive  groves,  would  either  give  up 
or  drive  out  the  Turks  who  had  taken  refuge  in  the  citadel  and  sur¬ 
render  the  fortress  to  us.  This  plan  was  entirely  successful.  As  soon 
as  they  saw  their  beloved  trees  cut  down,  the  people  changed  their 
tactics  and  adopted  others.  On  condition  that  the  Turks  whom  they  had 
called  in  should  be  allowed  to  depart  unharmed  and  that  they  them¬ 
selves  with  their  families  should  not  be  punished  by  death  for  their 
wicked  conduct,  they  restored  the  stronghold  to  the  king. 

The  castle  was  thereupon  received,  a  garrison  appointed,  and  sup¬ 
plies  of  food  and  arms  sent  in.  Thus  the  king  successfully  finished  the 
first  campaign  after  his  accession  to  the  throne  and,  with  his  whole 
army  safe  and  sound,  returned  victorious  to  his  own  land.^'^ 

7.  Xangi  is  killed  while  besieging  Calogenbar,  His  son  Nureddin 
succeeds  him. 

Zangi  was  greatly  elated  by  his  brilliant  success  in  subjugating  the  city 
of  Edessa.  He  immediately  applied  himself  to  besieging  Calogenbar, 
a  fortified  place  on  the  river  Euphrates.  While  he  was  carrying  on  the 

This  expedition  must  have  occurred  in  the  spring  or  summer  of  1 144.,  before  the 
events  in  the  north  had  become  critical. 


BALDWIN  III  AND  MELISEND 


146 

siege  of  this  place,  however,  the  lord  of  the  town  entered  into  a  con¬ 
spiracy  with  some  of  the  chamberlains  and  eunuchs  of  Zangi’s  own 
household.  One  night,  as  the  prince,  gorged  with  wine  and  unusually 
drunk,  was  lying  in  his  tent,  he  was  slain  by  some  of  his  own  servants. 
When  the  news  of  his  death  arrived,  one  of  our  people  remarked 
apropos  of  his  assassination,  ^What  a  happy  coincidence!  A  guilty 
murderer,  with  the  bloody  name  Sanguinusy  has  become  ensanguined 
with  his  own  blood.” 

The  murderers  were  received  within  the  walls  by  the  lord  of  the  be¬ 
sieged  city,  according  to  agreement,  and  thus  escaped  the  vengeance  of 
the  dead  man’s  kin.  Zangi’s  entire  army  fled  when  deprived  of  the 
support  and  protection  of  their  lord;  His  sons  succeeded  him,  the  one 
at  Mosul  in  the  Orient,  and  the  other,  Nureddin  by  name,  at  Aleppo. 
The  latter  was  a  wise  and  prudent  man  and,  according  to  the  supersti¬ 
tious  traditions  of  his  people,  one  who  feared  God.  He  was  fortunate 
also  in  that  he  greatly  increased  the  heritage  which  was  left  him  by  his 
father. 

8.  A  certain  noble  of  Damascus y  governor  of  the  city  of  Bos- 
trumy  enters  Into  an  alliance  with  the  king.  The  army  of  the 
realm  Is  sent  to  that  city.  A  nary  governor  of  Damascus  y  tries 
to  f revent  these  flans. 

Not  long  after  this,  in  the  second  year  of  King  Baldwin’s  reign,  a 
certain  noble  Turkish  satrap  came  with  a  noble  retinue  to  Jerusalem, 
For  some  reason  he  had  incurred  the  anger  of  Mejeredin  [Mujir 
al-Din],  king  of  Damascus.  He  had,  moreover,  fallen  under  the  dis¬ 
pleasure  of  the  governor,  Mehen-Eddin  [Mu’in  al-Din],  or  Anar,  a 
man  whose  authority  throughout  the  land  of  the  Damascenes  was  far 
greater  than  that  of  the  king  himself.  This  satrap  assured  the  king  and 
his  mother  that,  if  an  honorable  compensation  worthy  of  his  considera¬ 
tion  were  granted  him,  he  would  surrender  to  them  the  city  of  Bos- 
trum,  over  which  he  ruled,  and  also  the  stronghold  of  Selcath.  Bostrum 
is  the  metropolis  of  Arabia  Prima,  which  today  is  called  in  the  common 

The  siege  of  Qalat  Jabar  in  the  region  of  Edessa  occurred  in  September,  1146. 
According  to  Qalanisi,  the  murderer  was  a  personal  favorite  of  Zangi,  a  man  of 
Frankish  origin.  Zangi’s  drunkenness  is  acknowledged.  His  death  is  dated  September 
14,  1146.  William  evidently  could  not  resist  the  temptation  to  indulge  in  a  pun  at 
Zangi^s  death  (see  H.  A.  R.  Gibb,  trans.,  The  Damascus  Chronicley  p.  271), 


BALDWIN  III  AND  MELISEND 


147 

speech  Bussereth.  This  same  nobleman,  Tantais  by  name,  was  said  to 
be  an  Armenian  by  birth.  He  was  tall  of  stature,  of  agreeable  coun¬ 
tenance,  and  his  entire  bearing  gave  evidence  of  a  manly  spirit. 

Accordingly,  a  general  conference  of  the  nobles  was  called.  The 
reasons  for  the  visit  of  this  great  man  were  explained  and  every  aspect 
of  his  proposition  carefully  considered.  It  was  finally,  unanimously  re¬ 
solved  that  he  be  granted  an  honorable  and  satisfactory  compensa¬ 
tion,  that  an  army  be  levied,  and  an  expedition  sent  to  Bostrum.  All 
agreed  that,  if  through  the  agency  of  this  man,  Bostrum  could  be 
brought  under  our  jurisdiction  and  added  to  the  Christian  name  with 
perpetual  right,  such  an  increase  of  the  kingdom  would  be  most  ac¬ 
ceptable  to  God.  An  agreement  satisfactory  to  both  parties  was  there¬ 
upon  concluded,  and  the  heralds  were  ordered  to  call  together  all  the 
people  of  the  realm  immediately.  After  imploring  aid  from  on  high, 
the  king  and  his  nobles  took  with  them  the  Life-giving  Cross  of  Salva¬ 
tion  and  proceeded  to  Tiberias.  Camp  was  established  near  the  bridge 
where  the  waters  of  the  Jordan  separate  from  the  sea. 

There  was  an  alliance  and  a  temporary  peace  between  Anar  and 
King  Baldwin  which  had  existed  also  in  the  time  of  the  king’s  father. 
Accordingly  it  was  necessary  that  the  governor  be  formally  notified, 
in  order  that  he  might  have  a  legitimate  time,  following  the  custom  of 
the  land,  to  assemble  an  army  and  make  preparations  for  resistance. 
Otherwise  the  king  would  appear  to  have  entered  his  territory  sud¬ 
denly  and  without  official  notice,  which  is  contrary  to  the  law  of  treaties. 
Messengers  had  accordingly  been  sent  to  Anar,  but  he,  as  a  shrewd 
man,  had  wisely  deferred  sending  an  answer.^^  A  month  had  already 
passed.  During  this  time,  he  had  been  actively  engaged  in  calling  to  his 
aid  both  by  entreaties  and  by  money  all  the  neighboring  chiefs  of  his 
own  race  from  far  and  near.  When  large  numbers  had  assembled  from 
all  parts,  Anar  sent  the  following  message  to  the  king  and  his  nobles : 
‘^Contrary  to  the  terms  of  the  treaty  into  which  you  entered,  you  are 

This  episode,  which  occurred  in  the  spring  of  1147,  is  evidently  derived  from 
Arabic  as  well  as  Latin  sources.  It  is  not  difficult  to  recognize  in  “Mejeredin”  Mujir 
al-Din,  the  “king”  of  Damascus,  nor  in  “Mehen-Eddin,”  Mu’in  al-Din,  or  Anar,  who 
really  ruled  it.  “Tantais”  is  Altuntash,  “Selcath”  is  Sarkhad,  “Bostrum”  is  Bostra  of 
ancient  times. 

William  here  displays  again  his  interest  in  diplomatic  exchange.  Note  his  evident 
conviction  that  treaty  obligations  with  Muslims  were  to  be  kept  as  scrupulously  as 
those  with  Christians. 


BALDWIN  III  AND  MELISEND 


148 

preparing  to  march  into  the  land  of  my  lord  and  you  are  endeavoring 
to  protect  with  undeserved  patronage  his  rebellious  servant,  who  is 
acting  against  the  allegiance  which  he  has  sworn.  We  humbly  beseech 
the  lord  king  to  desist  from  this  unjust  purpose  and  to  preserve  intact 
the  substance  of  the  agreements  previously  concluded  between  us.  We 
are  ready  in  all  sincerity  to  refund  to  the  king  all  the  expense  to  which 
he  has  been  put  for  this  expedition.” 

To  this  the  king  responded  by  the  advice  of  all  as  follows:  ‘^We  do 
not  intend  to  violate  in  any  way  the  provisions  of  the  treaty  which  we 
have  made  with  you.  But  as  this  nobleman  came  to  discuss  matters  with 
us  in  a  friendly  way,  we  cannot  honorably  fail  a  man  who  has  placed  all 
his  hope  in  our  kingdom.  It  will  be  satisfactory  to  us,  however,  if  we 
are  permitted  to  conduct  him  back  in  safety  to  the  city  which  he  aban¬ 
doned  for  our  benefit.  After  he  has  withdrawn  into  his  own  castle,  let 
his  lord  deal  with  him  according  to  the  laws  of  the  land  and  recom¬ 
pense  him  as  he  deserves.  As  for  us,  both  in  coming  and  going  we  will 
wholly  refrain  from  inflicting  any  injury  upon  our  friend,  the  king 
of  Damascus,  as,  by  the  will  of  God,  we  are  bound  to  do.” 

This  same  Anar  was  a  man  of  much  wisdom  and  a  lover  of  our  peo¬ 
ple.  He  had  three  daughters,  one  of  whom  he  had  married  to  the  king 
of  the  Damascenes,  just  mentioned  j  another  to  Nureddin,  the  son  of 
Zangij  and  the  third  to  a  distinguished  knight,  Margar.  He  had, 
therefore,  the  good  of  the  realm  at  heart,  not  only  because  he  was  the 
father-in-law  of  the  king,  but  also  because  of  his  own  great  discretion. 
The  king,  however,  was  indolent  by  nature  and  devoted  to  drinking 
and  revelry.  He  cared  only  for  pleasure  and  gave  himself  up  entirely 
to  dissolute  practices. 

Anar,  as  has  been  mentioned,  made  great  efforts  to  gain  the  favor  of 
the  Christians  by  all  possible  complaisance  j  he  made  use  of  every  art 
by  which  friends  are  won.  But  whether  this  proceeded  from  the  heart 
and  from  sincerity  of  purpose  or  was  forced  upon  him  by  necessity  con¬ 
trary  to  his  own  wishes  may  well  be  questioned  by  the  wise.  Doubtless 
either  might  be  the  case,  for  he  regarded  his  son-in-law,  Nureddin, 
with  the  same  distrust  that  he  had  formerly  felt  toward  the  latter’s  fa¬ 
ther,  Zangi.  He  ever  feared  that  Nureddin  might  drive  the  king,  who 
was  also  his  son-in-law,  but  a  most  worthless  and  grossly  ignorant  man. 

The  marriage  of  Anar’s  daughter  to  Nureddin  occurred  in  the  early  spring  of 
this  year  (Gibb,  Chronicle^  pp.  275— 76), 


BALDWIN  III  AND  MELISEND  149 

from  the  kingdom.  He  himself  would  then  lose  the  reins  of  govern- 
ment.^^ 

This  was  the  principal  reason  why  he  regarded  our  favor  as  most 
essential  to  his  interests  and  in  every  possible  way  endeavored  to  secure 
it.  This  wise  man  seems  to  have  had  almost  prophetic  foresight,  for  the 
situation  that  he  feared  actually  came  to  pass.  After  his  death,  Nured- 
din,  with  the  consent  of  the  people  of  Damascus,  drove  out  the  reign¬ 
ing  king  by  force  and  seized  the  throne. 

It  was  for  this  reason,  therefore,  that  he  exerted  himself  faithfully 
to  make  good  the  expense  to  which  the  king  had  been  put  in  raising  the 
expedition  and  to  send  him  back  to  his  own  land  unharmed.  Doubtless 
he  would  have  adopted  an  even  less  hostile  attitude  toward  the  king 
and  his  forces  in  this  matter  if  he  could  have  restrained,  as  he  would 
have  liked,  the  allies  whom  he  had  summoned  from  without.  For  we 
have  found  many  reliable  proofs  which  give  definite  testimony  to  his 
loyalty,  sincerity,  and  steadfastness  in  various  matters. 

9.  The  army  exferiences  countless  ferils  while  on  the  march. 

Among  the  envoys  who  brought  this  report  was  a  certain  Bernard 
Vacher,  who  stood  in  very  close  relation  to  the  king.  When  these  facts 
were  announced,  the  people  at  once  began  to  cry  out  that  Bernard  was 
a  traitor,  that  anyone  who  would  seek  to  dissuade  them  in  this  matter 
and  put  obstacles  in  their  way  was  not  loyal  to  the  Christians.  With 
loud  shouts,  the  irresponsible  mob  began  to  demand  that  the  march  be 
resumed,  that  the  effort  to  obtain  possession  of  that  noble  city  be  not 
so  readily  abandoned.  Thanks  were  due  to  the  nobleman  who  had 
offered  a  service  to  Christianity  that  would  be  remembered  throughout 
the  agesj  his  proposal  should  be  carried  out  in  every  detail  faithfully 
and  devotedly  5  for  this  purpose  they  ought  to  strive  even  to  the  death. 

Amid  tumultuous  uproar  the  will  of  the  crowd  prevailed,  and  the 
advice  of  saner  minds  was  rejected.  The  baggage  was  accordingly 
arranged,  the  camp  broken  up,  and  the  march  directed  toward  the 
city.  After  passing  Cavea  Roab,  they  entered  the  plain  called  Medan, 
where  the  Arabs  and  other  Eastern  people  are  wont  to  hold  yearly 
fairs.  At  this  point  our  army  began  to  encounter  the  enemy  in  such  vast 

This  accurate  analysis  of  the  motives  of  Anar  in  his  almost  consistent  policy  of 
friendship  with  Jerusalem  is  supported  by  Qalanisi,  the  historian  of  Damascus,  who 
was  living  and  writing  there  at  this  time. 


BALDWIN  III  AND  MELISEND 


150 

numbers  that  even  those  who  had  formerly  been  most  insistent  that 
the  campaign  be  continued  would  gladly  have  turned  back,  had  that 
been  possible.  Yet  the  troops,  although  astounded  at  the  magnitude 
of  the  enemy’s  array,  prepared  to  go  into  battle  at  once.  On  the  advice 
of  those  experienced  in  the  art  of  warfare,  however,  the  king  ordered 
that  camp  be  made  first.  This  was  done,  and  the  troops  took  thought 
for  their  bodily  refreshment  as  far  as  was  possible  in  the  critical  situa¬ 
tion.  The  night  passed  in  sleepless  vigilance.  The  enemy’s  hosts,  now 
increased  beyond  number,  closed  in  on  all  sides  about  our  legions, 
confident  that  on  the  morrow  the  Christians,  bound  like  the  lowest 
slaves,  would  become  their  prey.  Our  people,  however,  wisely  kept 
constant  watch  and  attended  most  carefully  to  their  duties,  as  behooved 
brave  men.  When  morning  came,  a  conference  was  held,  and  it  was 
determined  to  advance,  for  to  retreat  seemed  not  only  disgraceful  but 
practically  impossible.  In  fact,  the  enemy  now  encircled  them  on  every 
side  and  effectually  hindered  either  course. 

Nevertheless,  our  men  pressed  on  courageously.  A  path  was  finally 
opened  by  the  sword  through  the  enemy’s  midst,  and  our  forces,  as 
with  one  accord,  advanced  toward  their  destination.  Burdened  as  they 
were,  however,  with  breastplates,  helmets,  and  shields,  they  moved  at 
a  slow  pace.  Their  progress  was  hindered  also  by  the  great  numbers 
of  the  foe  around  them.  The  cavalry  squadrons,  being  without  bag¬ 
gage,  could  have  proceeded  more  rapidly,  but  it  was  necessary  that  they 
adapt  their  movements  to  the  pace  of  the  infantry  companies,  that  the 
ranks  might  not  be  broken  and  the  enemy  be  given  a  chance  to  break  in 
upon  the  formations.  So  the  cohorts  suffered  with  each  other,  and  the 
entire  Christian  company  was  as  one.  The  knights  showed  such  care  for 
the  people  on  foot  that  they  often  dismounted  from  their  horses  and 
shared  like  hardships.  They  even  offered  to  carry  the  weary,  that  the 
difficulties  of  the  march  might  be  made  lighter. 

Meanwhile,  the  enemy  continued  to  harass  the  army  with  ceaseless 
showers  of  arrows  and  strove  to  break  our  lines  by  increasing  their 
efforts.  But  the  more  the  Christians  were  menaced,  the  more  closely 
they  massed  themselves  together.  Fearlessly  and  ardently  they  con¬ 
tinued  on  their  way. 

As  a  culminating  point  of  troubles,  they  were  assailed  by  terrible 
thirst,  which  was  intensified  by  the  difficulty  of  the  march  and  by  the 
heat  of  summer.  Their  route  was  through  an  arid  and  waterless  coun- 


BALDWIN  III  AND  MELISEND 


151 

try,  for  that  entire  region  is  without  springs.  In  winter  the  natives 
collect  the  rain  water  in  reservoirs,  both  natural  and  artificial.  At  this 
time,  however,  these  had  become  useless,  for  the  province  had  recently 
suffered  from  a  pest  of  locusts  of  extraordinary  extent,  so  that  all  the 
pools  of  this  kind  had  been  spoiled  and  the  water  corrupted  by  the 
dead  insects  therein. 

The  region  through  which  our  road  lay  is  called  Trachonitis.  Luke 
mentions  it  in  his  Gospel  as  follows :  “Philip  tetrarch  of  Ituraea  and  of 
the  region  of  Trachonitis.’^  The  name  seems  to  us  to  be  derived 
rather  from  the  tracones.  For  the  hidden,  subterranean  caves  in  which 
that  region  abounds  are  called  tracones.  Nearly  all  the  people  of  that* 
locality  live  in  grottos  and  caves  and  have  their  homes  in  these  tracones. 

10.  On  arriving  at  their  destinationy  they  find  the  city  occufied 
by  the  enemy »  A ccordingly y  they  return  home  without  ac- 
comflishing  their  end. 

The  Christians  traversed  a  part  of  that  country  under  conditions  of 
extreme  danger.  About  the  last  hour  of  the  day,  they  came  to  a  place 
which  was  called  Adratum  in  earlier  days,  but  which  is  now  generally 
known  as  the  city  of  Bernard  d’Estampes.  It  is  one  of  the  suffragan 
cities  of  the  metropolis  of  Bostrum.  The  inhabitants  of  this  place  had 
joined  the  enemy’s  forces,  and  therefore  our  people  had  to  suffer  even 
worse  hardships  than  before.  For  when  they  tried  to  obtain  water  from 
the  cisterns  which  lay  open,  they  lost  even  the  buckets  which  had 
been  let  down.  The  foe,  hidden  in  the  subterranean  caverns,  cut  the 
ropes  by  which  these  had  been  lowered,  and  sent  them  back  dangling. 
The  frustration  of  this  hope,  for  the  sake  of  which  they  had  so  long 
labored  in  vain,  intensified  the  agony  of  their  thirst. 

For  four  successive  days  our  people  never  indulged  in  rest  j  indeed, 
they  were  so  continually  persecuted  that  they  scarcely  had  leisure,  even 
during  the  night,  to  satisfy  their  bodily  needs.  Day  by  day  the  enemy’s 
numbers  increased,  while  our  forces  as  steadily  decreased.  Some  were 
killed,  others  fatally  wounded.  Still  others,  panic-stricken  and  despair¬ 
ing  of  their  lives,  swelled  the  throng  around  the  baggage,  skulked 
among  the  horses  and  pack  animals,  and  feigned  weakness,  that  they 
might  not  be  compelled  to  come  out  and  bear  the  brunt  of  the  enemy’s 
attacks.  Dense  showers  of  arrows  and  other  missiles  fell  like  rain  or 


23  Lu.  3:  I. 


BALDWIN  III  AND  MELISEND 


152 

hail  upon  our  forces  so  incessantly  that  the  host  of  men  and  beasts 
seemed  covered  with  weapons.  Well  might  a  spectator  marvel  at  the 
continued  perseverance  of  the  foe  in  attacking  and  the  invincible  en¬ 
durance  of  the  Christians  in  resisting.  Nonetheless,  our  people  con¬ 
tinued  to  let  fly  showers  of  arrows  and  darts,  but  as  the  enemy  were 
able  to  move  about  freely,  our  missiles  rarely  injured  them. 

The  Christians  continued  their  march  under  many  perils,  and  at 
last,  in  the  fourth  day  they  drew  near  their  destination  and  saw  the 
city  at  a  distance.  With  great  difflculty  they  drove  off  the  enemy  by 
force  and  took  possession  of  the  waters  which  flowed  forth  in  modera¬ 
tion  from  the  rocks.  Camp  was  made  near  by,  and  the  forces  devoted 
themselves  for  a  short  period  to  bodily  refreshment  and  relaxation. 
That  night  the  Christians  enjoyed  some  degree  of  rest  and  were  eagerly 
looking  forward  to  the  morrow.  But  in  the  silence  of  midnight,  a  bearer 
of  ill  tidings  stealthily  left  the  city  and  made  his  way  through  the  en¬ 
emy’s  lines  to  our  camp.  He  announced  that  he  had  private  messages 
for  the  king  and  begged  to  be  led  to  him  at  once.  He  was  admitted.  The 
nobles  were  summoned  and  also  the  noble  lord,  the  former  governor  of 
the  city,  who  had  led  us  into  the  present  predicament.  The  messenger 
then  disclosed  the  fact  that  the  wife  of  this  same  lord  had  betrayed  the 
city  and  surrendered  it  to  the  Turks.  They  had  introduced  their  forces 
and  taken  possession  of  all  the  strongholds,  including  the  citadel  itself. 
Everyone  else  had  been  driven  out. 

Our  people  were  overwhelmed  by  the  news  of  this  disaster.  They 
held  a  conference  and  finally  decided  that  their  best  course  was  to  re¬ 
turn  speedily  to  their  own  land  at  whatever  risk.  Some  of  the  chief 
men  of  the  kingdom,  however,  privately  counselled  the  king  to  mount 
the  horse  of  John  Gomani,  which  was  reputed  to  excel  all  other  army 
steeds  in  swiftness  and  endurance,  and,  with  the  Cross  of  Salvation  in 
his  hand,  to  look  out  for  his  own  safety  alone.  This  advice  was  given 
in  despair  of  the  possibility  of  return  and  in  anticipation  that  the  entire 
army  would  shortly  be  destroyed.  The  king,  however,  although  still 
very  young,  rejected  this  counsel  with  royal  magnificence  and  clearly 
showed  what  his  character  would  be  in  later  years.  He  declared  that 
he  would  scorn  to  save  his  own  life  if  a  people  consecrated  to  God  were 
to  perish  so  wretchedly. 

Although  these  admonitions  proceeded  from  loyal  affection,  the 
king  declined  to  heed  them,  and  other  plans  were  adopted.  To  ad- 


BALDWIN  III  AND  MELISEND 


153 

vance  farther  meant  utter  destruction  j  therefore  measures  for  the 
retreat  were  taken.  Now  for  the  first  time  the  Christians  felt  the  hard¬ 
ship  of  their  situation  in  double  measure,  for  their  great  hope  now 
was  gone,  and  they  realized  that  their  efforts  had  been  all  in  vain. 
Their  troubles  up  to  this  time  had  been  serious  enough — in  fact,  almost 
unendurable — and  they  had  suffered  miseries  equal  to  any  they  might 
encounter  afterward.  Yet  as  they  struggled  on,  they  were  supported 
by  the  confident  hope  of  taking  the  city,  and  these  pleasurable  anticipa¬ 
tions  enabled  them  to  hold  out.  Now,  however,  this  hope  had  failed 
them,  and  they  realized  that  their  project  must  be  abandoned.  Accord¬ 
ingly,  the  herald  proclaimed  the  return,  and  all  prepared  for  the 
homeward  march. 

II.  The  army  encounters  untold  ferils  on  the  return  march.  The 
Turks  are  amaxed  at  the  ferseverance  of  our  troofs. 

At  dawn  on  the  following  day,  Nureddin  arrived  from  the  city  men¬ 
tioned  above  and,  with  an  infinite  number  of  Turks,  joined  the  co¬ 
horts  of  the  enemy.  His  father-in-law  had  appealed  to  him  for  aid.  The 
Christians,  however,  started  out  on  the  return  march,  as  had  been  ar¬ 
ranged.  As  soon  as  the  Turks  perceived  this  movement,  they  hastened 
against  them  and,  with  a  great  clamor,  tried  to  prevent  the  retreat.  But 
the  very  difficulties  that  beset  our  people  on  every  side  strengthened 
their  courage.  With  their  swords  they  broke  through  the  opposing 
ranks  and,  although  with  extreme  danger  and  at  the  cost  of  many  lives, 
forced  their  way  through. 

General  orders  had  been  given  that  the  bodies  of  all  the  dead  in  the 
Christian  ranks  be  placed  upon  camels  and  other  pack  animals,  that 
the  knowledge  of  the  massacre  of  our  forces  might  not  tend  to 
strengthen  the  enemy.  The  weak  and  wounded  were  also  to  be  placed 
on  beasts  of  burden  so  as  to  give  the  impression  that  not  a  single  Chris¬ 
tian  had  been  killed  or  wounded.  Even  these  disabled  ones  were  di¬ 
rected  to  draw  their  swords,  that  they  might  present  at  least  a  sem¬ 
blance  of  strength.  It  was  a  source  of  amazement,  therefore,  to  the 
wiser  heads  among  the  enemy  that,  after  such  volleys  of  arrows,  such 
repeated  conflicts,  such  torture  of  thirst,  dust,  and  unbearable  heat,  not 
a  single  dead  or  disabled  Christian  could  be  found.  This  people  must 
indeed  be  made  of  iron,  they  thought,  for  otherwise  they  could  not 
sustain  so  persistently  such  continuing  pressure.  Accordingly,  as  all 


BALDWIN  III  AND  MELISEND 


154 

their  efforts  were  in  vain,  the  enemy  turned  to  other  tactics.  The  entire 
country  thereabout  was  covered  with  a  dense  growth  of  brambles,  dry 
thistles  and  other  weeds,  old  stubble  and  crops  now  ripe.  To  this  they 
set  fire,  and  a  strong  wind  soon  carried  it  furiously  toward  us.  Our 
misfortunes  were  now  doubled  by  the  encroaching  flames  and  the  dense 
clouds  of  smoke  which  attended  them.  With  cries  of  woe  the  people 
turned  as  one  body  to  the  venerable  Robert,  archbishop  of  Nazareth, 
and  tearfully  begged  him:  ^Tray  for  us,  father j  through  the  Life- 
giving  Cross  which  you  bear  in  your  hands,  the  Cross  upon  which  we 
believe  that  the  Author  of  our  salvation  hung,  rescue  us  from  these 
evils,  for  we  can  no  longer  endure  them.’^  The  wind  had  borne  the 
smoke  toward  them  so  that  the  faces  and  the  general  aspect  of  the 
people  were  black,  like  that  of  smiths  when  working  at  the  forge.  The 
heat  from  the  fires  in  addition  to  the  usual  heat  of  summer,  together 
with  extreme  thirst,  had  raised  their  suffering  to  a  point  beyond  en¬ 
durance. 

The  beloved  man  of  God  was  deeply  moved  by  their  cries  and  sup¬ 
plications.  In  humility  of  spirit,  he  raised  the  Cross  of  Salvation  toward 
the  flames,  which  were  rushing  against  him  in  all  their  violence,  and 
invoked  aid  from  on  high.  Immediately  divine  favor  attended  themj 
in  a  moment  the  wind  veered  about  and  sent  the  reeking  volume  of 
cloud  and  flame  against  the  enemy.  Thus  the  evil  which  the  Turks  had 
prepared  for  our  undoing  was  turned  to  their  own  destruction.  They 
stood  amazed  at  the  wondrous  miracle;  unique  indeed  must  be  that 
faith  of  the  Christians  which  through  prayer  could  bring  about  so  swift 
an  answer  from  their  Lord  God.  For  a  time  entirely  engrossed  by  their 
own  danger,  they  perforce  gave  our  troops  some  peace  and  allowed 
them  a  short  respite. 

12.  An  envoy  is  dispatched  to  the  enemy  on  behalf  of  peace.  A 
noble  knight  in  the  enemy^s  ranks  falls.  The  Turkish  army 
is  dispersed^  and  our  forces  proceed  without  further  hin^- 
drance. 

Thus  our  army  was  hard  pressed  by  these  intolerable  evils.  Mean¬ 
while,  the  great  nobles  and  those  of  wider  experience  began  to  realize 
that  the  endurance  of  the  people  could  not  last  much  longer.  Accord¬ 
ingly,  they  went  to  the  king  and  persuaded  him  to  send  an  envoy  to 
Anar  concerning  peace.  Any  terms  would  be  accepted,  provided  only 


BALDWIN  III  AND  MELISEND 


155 

that  the  Christian  army  be  allowed  to  return  home.  For  this  mission 
was  selected  a  man  of  rather  doubtful  repute,  who,  once  before  on  a 
similar  errand,  had  acted  disloyally  toward  the  people  of  Christ.  Yet 
because  of  his  familiarity  with  the  language  of  the  Turks,  this  mission 
also  was  entrusted  to  him.  In  response  to  the  injunction  that  he  should 
faithfully  perform  the  duty  laid  upon  him,  he  is  reported  to  have  said, 
‘‘The  suspicions  against  me  are  unjust  and  far  beyond  anything  that  I 
have  deserved;  yet  I  will  go.  But  if  I  am  guilty  of  the  charges  brought 
against  me,  may  I  not  be  permitted  to  return ;  or  rather,  may  I  perish 
by  the  sword  of  the  enemy.” 

The  wretched  man  had  pronounced  his  own  sentence  of  death  and 
soon  experienced  the  judgment  of  God,  for  before  he  reached  the 
Turks  and  accomplished  his  mission  he  perished  at  the  hand  of  the 
enemy. 

Four  distinguished  Arab  chiefs,  followed  by  a  host  of  their  people, 
took  part  in  this  campaign.  They  were  brothers,  sons  of  the  mighty 
and  distinguished  Arab  satrap  Morel.  These  troops  kept  making  per¬ 
sistent  and  very  spirited  attacks  upon  the  flanks  of  our  army.  Yet  our 
soldiers  under  the  commands  given  them  did  not  dare  to  break  out  of 
line  against  them.  For  if,  contrary  to  the  discipline  of  war,  they  should 
break  the  ranks,  they  would  be  exposed  to  a  harsh  sentence  as  deserters 
from  their  places.  In  the  retinue  of  that  Turk  who  was  with  us,  how¬ 
ever,  there  was  a  certain  knight  who  could  not  endure  this  situation  and 
longed  to  relieve  us  of  the  annoyance.  Regardless  of  the  rules  imposed 
and  reckless  of  his  life,  he  spurred  his  horse  forward  with  great  cour¬ 
age.  He  threw  the  spear  which  he  was  carrying  against  one  of  the  four 
brothers,  then  ran  him  through  with  his  sword  in  the  midst  of  his 
ranks,  and  hurled  the  lifeless  body  to  the  ground.  Then  he  returned 
without  injury  to  our  lines. 

An  immense  throng  at  once  gathered  round  the  body  of  the  dead 
chief.  When  it  became  evident  that  he  had  already  breathed  forth  his 
luckless  spirit,  the  assembled  crowd  broke  into  loud  lamentations  and 
gave  expression  to  their  intense  grief  in  floods  of  tears. 

But  our  people  rejoiced  greatly.  Eagerly  they  demanded  to  know 
the  name  of  the  man  who  had  exposed  himself  to  such  peril  and  thereby 
wrought  a  feat  worthy  of  eternal  fame.  It  was  discovered  that  he  was 
an  alien  who  might  readily  be  pardoned  for  transgressing  the  rules, 
especially  as  he  did  not  know  the  language  and  had  not  understood 


BALDWIN  III  AND  MELISEND 


156 

the  public  edict.  Accordingly,  although  he  had  undoubtedly  acted  con¬ 
trary  to  the  rules  of  military  discipline,  yet,  since  he  had  been  unaware 
of  the  command,  he  was  mercifully  pardoned,  and  his  deed  was  re¬ 
garded  as  praiseworthy,  rather  because  of  the  result  than  because  it 
was  right. 

In  this  way  the  enemy’s  battle  line  on  that  side  was  broken.  Our 
army  was  now  able  to  spread  out,  and  accordingly,  in  the  more  open 
country  they  soon  secured  compensation  for  the  straits  which  they  had 
suffered.  After  an  uninterrupted  march  of  several  days,  they  again 
came  to  Cavea  Roab.  Since  the  passage  was  very  narrow  and  it  might 
be  dangerous  to  cross  here,  the  leaders  purposely  ordered  that  it  be 
avoided.  But  Anar,  the  procurator  of  Damascus,  observed  that  the 
king  was  leading  his  army  toward  the  valley  just  mentioned.  Accord¬ 
ingly,  he  sent  messengers  to  say  that  if  the  king  pleased  he  would  cause 
a  meal  to  be  prepared  for  him  in  all  good  faith  beyond  Cavea,  for  he 
knew  that  now  for  several  days  the  army  had  been  suffering  from  lack 
of  provisions.  Whether  this  was  a  sincere  offer,  made  out  of  good  will 
toward  the  Christians,  or  whether  it  was  simply  a  ruse  to  force  the 
Christian  army  into  the  narrow  defiles  of  still  more  dangerous  valleys 
we  have  not  been  able  to  ascertain.  Nevertheless,  the  traditional  belief 
is  that  the  gifts  of  an  enemy  should  rightly  be  distrusted.  Conse¬ 
quently,  by  unanimous  decision,  it  was  determined  to  proceed  by  the 
upper  road  which  was  more  level  and  less  dangerous. 

There  was  no  one  to  guide  them,  however,  through  the  country 
which  they  must  traverse.  But  suddenly  there  appeared  ahead  of  the 
ranks  an  unknown  knight  mounted  upon  a  white  horse.  He  wore  a 
breastplate  and  short  gauntlets  reaching  to  the  elbow  and  carried  a  red 
standard.  Like  an  angel  of  the  Lord,  this  man  led  them  by  the  short¬ 
est  routes  to  waters  hitherto  unknown  and  showed  them  the  best  and 
most  convenient  places  to  make  camp.  It  had  taken  the  expedition 
practically  five  days  to  reach  Cavea,  but  under  the  guidance  of  this 
leader  they  arrived  at  Gadara  in  three. 

13.  Our  legions  reach  Gadara,  T he  'place  is  described.  The  troops 
return  home. 

Gadara  is  situated  in  the  region  called  Decapolis,  of  which  it  is  writ¬ 
ten  in  the  Gospel  of  Mark,  “and  again,  departing  from  the  coasts  of 
Tyre  and  Sidon,  he  came  unto  the  sea  of  Galilee,  through  the  midst  of 


BALDWIN  III  AND  MELISEND 


157 

the  coasts  of  DecapoHs.”  As  its  name  indicateSj  this  land  contains 
ten  cities,  namely,  Hippus,  Pella,  Gadara,  the  place  just  mentioned, 
and  seven  others.  This  last-named  city  is  situated  on  the  borderland 
between  the  enemy’s  country  and  our  own.  When  our  first  legions 
reached  it,  the  Turks  once  more  began  to  harass  our  rear  ranks,  as  if 
again  seized  by  their  former  evil  fury.  They  soon  perceived,  however, 
that  their  efforts  were  of  no  avail,  for  the  Christians  had  already  en¬ 
tered  their  own  land.  Accordingly,  exhausted  under  the  burden  of 
smoke,  extreme  hot  weather,  and  fatigue,  they  broke  ranks  and  began 
to  return  in  throngs  to  their  own  country.  That  night  passed  in  unusual 
tranquillity.  Our  men  allowed  their  wearied  bodies  the  rest  and  re¬ 
freshment  so  much  needed,  and  on  the  following  day  they  proceeded 
to  Tiberias. 

Those  who  still  preserve  an  accurate  memory  of  this  occurrence  all 
agree  that  the  leader  of  this  march  was  known  to  no  one.  When  the 
army  made  camp,  he  always  disappeared  immediately.  He  was  never 
seen  anywhere  in  the  camp,  but  in  the  morning  he  again  went  on  ahead 
of  the  troops.  No  one  now  living  can  remember  any  equally  perilous 
expedition  during  the  period  of  the  Latins  in  the  Orient  which  did  not 
result  in  a  decisive  victory  for  the  enemy. 

When  the  king  returned  to  the  realm  and  the  Cross  of  the  Lord  was 
restored  to  Jerusalem,  there  was  great  rejoicing  among  the  people  who 
had  remained  at  home,  because  their  friends  had  now  returned.  Well 
might  they  cry,  “For  this  my  son  was  dead,  and  is  alive  again  j  he  was 
lost,  and  is  found.” 

Shortly  after  this,  that  same  noble  Turk  was  summoned  with  pacific 
words  under  pretense  of  reconciliation  by  the  subtle  Anar.  He  met  with 
most  shameful  treatment,  however.  The  wretched  man  was  blinded 
and  spent  the  rest  of  his  life  in  the  utmost  poverty  and  misery.^® 

14.  The  citvz.ens  of  Edess a  affeal  to  the  count.  He  hurries  thither 
andj  without  the  knowledge  of  the  enemy ^  receives  the  city. 

While  these  events  were  transpiring  in  our  vicinity,  a  deplorable 
thing  which  should  be  recorded  happened  in  the  county  of  Edessa.  In 

Mar.  7:31.  Lu.  15:24. 

This  episode  is  also  told  at  some  length  by  Qalanisi.  According  to  him,  Altuntash 
came  to  Damascus,  was  taken  prisoner,  tried,  and  condemned  to  blinding  as  he  had 
blinded  a  brother.  He  was  allowed  to  live  out  his  life  in  a  house  in  Damascus  (Gibb, 
Chronicle^  pp.  276—79). 


BALDWIN  III  AND  MELISEND 


158 

order  that  the  details  of  this  occurrence  may  be  fully  understood  it  is 
necessary  to  go  back  somewhat  earlier  in  the  story. 

After  the  death  of  Zangi,  that  greatest  persecutor  of  the  Christian 
faith,  his  son  Nureddin  was  detained  at  Mosul  for  a  time  on  the  matter 
of  his  succession  to  his  father’s  principate.  Only  a  few  of  his  retainers 
were  left  to  keep  guard  at  Edessa.  All  the  rest  of  the  population  was 
strong  in  the  Christian  faith.  Realizing  this  fact,  the  inhabitants  of 
Edessa  secretly  sent  messengers  to  Count  Joscelin  and  announced  that, 
with  the  exception  of  a  few  Turks  who  were  guarding  the  citadel,  their 
city  was  practically  abandoned  to  the  citizens.  Now  the  people  of 
Edessa  were,  and  had  been  from  the  time  of  the  apostles,  rooted  and 
grounded  in  the  Christian  faith  so  that,  as  has  been  mentioned  else¬ 
where,  there  were  very  few,  practically  none,  of  other  faiths  dwelling 
among  them.  Most  earnestly,  they  begged  the  count  that  he  would 
assemble  military  forces  and  hasten  to  the  city,  which  the  citizens 
would  at  once  surrender  to  him  without  danger  or  obstacle. 

Joscelin  hastily  assembled  all  the  troops  of  that  country,  both  in¬ 
fantry  and  cavalry.  Then,  accompanied  by  Baldwin  of  Marash,  a 
noble  and  powerful  man,  he  quickly  crossed  the  river  and  appeared 
suddenly  at  night  before  Edessa  with  all  his  followers.  While  the 
Turks  who  had  been  left  as  guards  were  sleeping,  in  the  silence  of  the 
night,  the  citizens  admitted  some  of  the  count’s  people  by  ropes  and 
ladders.  These  opened  the  gates  to  the  rest  who  were  waiting  outside. 
All  rushed  in  at  the  same  time  pell-mell;  they  spread  through  the 
city  in  every  direction  and  put  to  the  sword  every  foe  whom  they  en- 
countered.  Some  of  the  latter,  however,  succeeded  in  escaping  death 
and  reached  the  citadel. 

In  this  manner,  the  count  and  his  army  of  Christians  held  the  city 
for  several  days.  They  did  not  succeed  in  taking  the  citadel,  however, 
for  that  was  carefully  fortified  and  well  equipped  with  provisions, 
weapons,  and  soldiers.  The  lack  of  success  in  this  respect  was  largely 
due  to  the  fact  that  the  count’s  forces  had  brought  with  them  neither 
engines  nor  anything  with  which  to  build  them.  Nor  could  any  material 
suitable  for  the  purpose  be  found  in  the  city. 


BALDWIN  III  AND  MELISEND 


159 


1 5 .  Nureddin  attacks  E  dess  a.  He  f  laces  the  city  under  siege »  He 
causes  the  C hristians  extreme  distress. 

Messengers  were  now  sent  forth  to  inform  Christian  people  every¬ 
where  of  this  success  and  to  invite  those  in  the  vicinity  to  hasten  thither 
to  assist  in  holding  and  preserving  for  the  Christian  religion  forever 
the  city  which  had  been  received  through  the  grace  of  God.  Christians 
everywhere  rejoiced  over  this  news,  and,  in  proportion  to  the  deep  sor¬ 
row  which  they  had  felt  over  the  captivity  of  Edessa,  they  received 
consolation  in  like  measure.  Mourning  soon  took  the  place  of  extreme 
joy,  however,  and  the  sound  of  the  zither  was  changed  into  strains  of 
grief.  Sorrow,  even  more  intense  than  before,  revived.  For  as  soon  as 
Nureddin  learned  that  the  inhabitants  had  surrendered  Edessa  to  the 
count,  he  levied  troops  from  all  parts  of  the  Orient  and  ordered  the 
herald  to  direct  the  people  of  the  neighboring  cities  to  assemble  at  one 
place.  Suddenly  he  appeared  before  Edessa,  placed  his  legions  in  a 
circle  about  it,  and  began  siege  operations.  Thus  it  was  with  our  people 
as  it  is  written,  ^^The  sword  without,  and  terror  within.”  For  out¬ 
side,  the  enemy’s  lines  being  made  ready  for  battle  prevented  all  exit 
and  threatened  death  to  the  Christians,  while  within,  the  Turks  in  the 
citadel  also  inspired  them  with  fear  and  harassed  them  with  constant 
attacks. 

Beset  by  so  many  difficulties,  the  Christians  knew  not  what  to  do. 
They  took  frequent  counsel  together  and  as  frequently  changed  their 
plans.  But  to  whatever  course  of  action  they  turned,  they  found  no 
path  which  led  to  safety,  no  escape  without  danger  of  death.  At  last, 
in  view  of  all  the  exigencies  of  place  and  time,  it  was  unanimously 
resolved  that  they  must  leave  the  city,  even  at  the  risk  of  death.  Un¬ 
questionably,  it  would  be  better  to  encounter  the  enemy  and  force  a 
path  to  safety  with  the  sword  than  to  endure  a  siege.  In  the  latter  case, 
either  all  without  distinction  would  perish  by  the  sword,  or,  through 
lack  of  food,  be  enslaved  by  the  Turks  and  forced  to  endure  the  bitter 
yoke  of  servitude,  a  fate  worse  than  any  form  of  death.  This  decision 
was  approved  by  all  5  the  plan  was  extremely  perilous,  yet,  in  view  of 
other  possible  fates  that  might  befall  them,  it  seemed  to  be  the  only 
course. 

The  citizens,  by  whose  zealous  efforts  the  count  and  his  soldiers  had 

2’’  De.  32:  25. 


i6o  BALDWIN  III  AND  MELISEND 

been  introduced  into  the  city,  heard  with  dismay  that  all  hope  of  re¬ 
sistance  had  fled  and  that  every  path  to  safety  was  closed.  If  they 
should  remain  in  Edessa,  after  the  departure  of  the  count,  they,  as  the 
authors  of  the  attempt,  would  certainly  be  punished  by  death  in  its 
most  dreadful  form.  They  preferred,  therefore,  to  depart  with  their 
wives  and  children  and  to  share  uncertain  fortune  with  their  brethren 
of  the  Christian  army,  rather  than  to  fall  by  certain  death,  or,  a  still 
more  fearful  fate,  to  suifer  servitude  under  an  infidel  enemy. 

1 6.  The  count  leaves  the  city  zuith  his  army  and  endeavors  to  re- 
turn  to  his  ozvn  country.  He  is  'pursued  by  Nureddin.  The 
ai'iny  is  massacred^  but  the  count  escapes  by  flight. 

As  soon  as  the  gates  were  opened,  all  rushed  eagerly  forth  as  if  thereby 
lay  the  only  path  to  safety.  Although  they  well  knew  that  a  way  must 
be  cut  through  the  enemy’s  lines  with  the  sword,  yet  whatever  might 
happen  after  they  had  once  left  the  city  seemed  of  little  consequence. 
Meanwhile,  the  Turks  in  the  citadel  had  unbarred  the  entrances  and 
let  some  of  their  number  into  the  city.  These  pressed  hard  on  the 
Christians  from  behind  and  forced  them  to  hasten  their  departure.  At 
the  same  time  the  Turks  outside  the  gates  heard  that  some  of  their 
people  were  already  in  the  city  and  were  fighting  with  the  Christians. 
Anxious  to  join  them,  they  forcibly  seized  the  gates  which  had  been 
opened  to  allow  our  people  to  depart.  Thus  a  great  multitude  of  all 
ranks  and  classes  was  massed  at  that  point,  as  one  party  tried  to  issue 
forth  and  the  other  endeavored  to  force  an  entrance.  A  fierce  struggle, 
serious  in  its  consequences  to  both  sides,  ensued  in  the  narrow  space. 
The  foe  outside  fought  furiously  to  push  in,  but  the  strength  and  de¬ 
termination  of  the  Christians  finally  prevailed  against  them.  A  pas¬ 
sage  was  opened  by  the  sword,  at  the  cost  of  many  lives  on  both  sides, 
and  our  people  spread  out  over  the  plain. 

There  might  have  been  seen  a  most  piteous  spectacle,  deplorable 
even  to  describe!  A  helpless  throng  of  unwarlike  citizens,  old  men  and 
sick  people,  matrons  and  tender  maidens,  aged  women  and  little  ones, 
even  babes  at  the  breast,  all  crowded  together  in  the  narrow  gateway. 
Some  were  trodden  under  the  feet  of  the  horses  j  others,  crushed  by 
the  on-pressing  multitude,  were  stifled  to  death  j  while  still  others  fell 
under  the  merciless  sword  of  the  Turks.  The  greater  part  of  the  citi¬ 
zens,  both  men  and  women,  who  had  elected  to  follow  the  departing 


BALDWIK  III  AND  MELISEND 


i6i 


army  perished  miserably  at  that  time.  A  few  escaped  because  of  their 
own  strength  and  vigor  or  by  the  assistance  of  the  horses  and  were  able 
to  accompany  the  army  as  it  retreated. 

Nureddin,  on  perceiving  that  the  Christians  were  preparing  to  re¬ 
turn  home,  summoned  his  cohorts  for  pursuit.  He  drew  up  his  troops 
ready  for  battle  and  arranged  his  lines  in  good  order  3  then,  ever  press¬ 
ing  close  on  their  rear,  he  kept  up  a  series  of  continual  attacks.  The 
Christians  directed  their  march  toward  the  Euphrates,  which  was 
about  fourteen  miles  from  Edessa.  Constant  fighting  and  ever-present 
danger  attended  the  count  and  his  army  upon  the  entire  march  thither. 
At  almost  every  step  there  were  engagements,  now  of  many,  again  of 
individuals,  which  resulted  in  great  loss  on  both  sides.  There  died  that 
noble  man  whom  we  mentioned  before,  Baldwin  of  Marash,  a  warrior 
distinguished  for  his  military  achievements.  Many  other  excellent 
men  perished  also  at  this  time  who  were  well  worthy  of  being  remem¬ 
bered.  May  their  souls  enjoy  everlasting  rest!  Their  names  are  for¬ 
gotten  but  are  surely  written  in  heaven,  for  they  died  with  a  glorious 
end  for  the  sake  of  the  faith  and  liberty  of  the  people  of  Christ! 

The  count’s  strength  was  entirely  unequal  to  that  of  the  enemy.  He 
had  lost  the  greater  part  of  his  forces  and  could  no  longer  withstand 
the  continual  onslaughts  of  the  Turks.  In  order  to  save  his  life,  there¬ 
fore,  he  crossed  the  Euphrates  and  retired  to  Samosata.  The  others  fled 
in  different  directions  as  seemed  best  to  each  3  the  baggage  and  equip¬ 
ment  was  abandoned,  and  all  thought  only  of  life  and  safety. 

The  news  of  the  disaster  spread  far  and  wide  through  all  the  neigh¬ 
boring  lands,  and  those  who  had  rejoiced  over  the  capture  of  Edessa 
were  now  all  the  more  cruelly  depressed  by  the  second  loss  of  the  city, 
the  massacre  of  the  nobles,  and  the  discomfiture  of  the  Christian 
people.^® 

17.  Wtllmniy  fatriarch  of  J erusalemy  dies,  Fulcher y  archbishof  of 
TyrCy  succeeds  to  that  chair y  and  Ralfhy  the  king^s  chancel¬ 
lory  is  imfosed  upon  the  church  of  Tyre  by  royal  power. 

About  this  time,  William,  patriarch  of  Jerusalem,  of  precious  mem¬ 
ory,  a  simple  and  God-fearing  man,  went  the  way  of  all  flesh.  He  died 
on  September  27,  in  the  fifteenth  year  of  his  rule.  On  January  25  of  the 

This  recapture  and  second  loss  of  Edessa  occurred  late  in  1146  (November- 
December) . 


i62 


BALDWIN  III  AND  MELISEND 


following  year,  Fulcher,  archbishop  of  Tyre,  was  chosen  in  his  place, 
the  third  in  the  number  of  our  predecessors.^® 

About  the  time  of  the  feast  of  Epiphany,  a  thunderbolt  sent  from 
on  high  struck  the  church  of  the  Sepulchre  of  the  Lord  on  Mt.  Sion 
and  exposed  it  to  great  danger.  The  omen  terrified  the  entire  city  and 
was,  as  we  believe,  a  portent  of  disaster.  A  comet  also  was  visible  for 
many  days,  and  certain  other  unusual  signs,  prophetic  of  future  events, 
appeared. 

Since  the  church  at  Tyre  was  without  a  head,  the  king  and  his 
mother,  on  whom  the  responsibility  of  the  realm  and  the  entire  govern¬ 
ment  rested,  met  at  Tyre  with  the  lord  patriarch  who  had  formerly 
occupied  that  church  and  the  suffragan  bishops  of  that  same  church. 
Their  object  was  to  appoint  someone  to  the  archbishopric.  The  choice 
of  a  bishop  was  duly  discussed,  as  is  customary  in  such  cases,  but  the 
views  of  the  electors  differed.  One  party  demanded  the  appointment 
of  Ralph,  the  royal  chancellor,  a  man  undoubtedly  learned  but  too 
worldly.  He  was  English  by  birth,  a  very  handsome  man,  and  most 
acceptable  to  the  king  and  the  queen — and,  indeed,  to  all  of  the 
court.  The  king  and  his  mother  approved  and  strongly  supported  him 
as  their  choice. 

The  chief  patrons  of  the  other  party  were  John  of  Pisa,  archdeacon 
of  Tyre  and  later  a  cardinal  of  the  church  of  Rome,  with  title  Saints 
Sylvester  and  Martin,  Bernard  of  Sidon,  and  John,  bishop  of  Beirut. 
These  prelates,  following  the  lord  patriarch,  opposed  the  choice  of 
Ralph.  They  made  an  appeal  against  the  other  party,  which  relied  on 
the  pressure  exerted  by  the  king,  and,  with  the  patriarch  as  their  pa¬ 
tron,  they  put  forth  every  effort  to  defeat  it. 

The  result  was  that  the  Chancellor  Ralph  succeeded  by  violence  in 
usurping  the  church  and  its  possessions  and  for  two  years  maintained 
his  position.  Finally  the  case  was  appealed  to  Rome  and,  in  the  pres¬ 
ence  of  the  parties.  Pope  Eugenius  rendered  the  decision  that  the  elec¬ 
tion  of  the  chancellor  was  null  and  void.**^®  Later,  this  same  Ralph, 

William,  who  became  patriarch  in  1130,  died  September  27,  1145.  Fulcher  be¬ 
came  patriarch  January  25,  1 146. 

The  detailed  account  of  this  election  affords  an  insight  into  the  variety  of  in¬ 
terests  involved  in  important  ecclesiastical  elections.  Just  when  this  decision  was  ren¬ 
dered  is  not  certain.  Ralph^s  successor,  Peter,  was  still  prior  of  the  canons  of  the  Holy 
Sepulchre  in  May,  1148,  and  Ralph  was  perhaps  referred  to  as  electus  of  Tyre  as  late 
as  1 15 1  (see  R.  Reg.^  nos.  249,  258). 


BALDWIN  III  AND  MELISEND  163 

through  the  favor  of  Pope  Hadrian  IV,  his  compatriot,  obtained  the 
church  at  Bethlehem  and  was  ordained  as  bishop  of  that  city.®^ 

But  in  the  chair  of  Tyre  was  placed  with  the  consent  and  approval 
of  all,  Peter,  prior  of  the  church  of  the  Holy  Sepulchre,  a  native  of 
Barcelona  in  Hither  Spain.  He  was  a  man  of  rare  simplicity  and  gen¬ 
tleness,  who  feared  God  and  kept  himself  apart  from  all  evil,  one 
whose  memory  is  held  in  benediction  both  by  God  and  man.  He  was 
noble  according  to  the  flesh  but  still  nobler  in  spirit.  His  life  and  deeds 
deserve  a  far  longer  and  more  careful  treatment,  but  our  story  must 
pass  over  special  details  and  return  to  the  discussion  of  general  topics.^^ 

18.  The  feofle  of  the  West  are  aroused.  Conrad^  emferor  of  the 
Romans y  and  Louis y  king  of  France y  with  many  other 
frincesy  set  forth  on  the  way  to  aid  the  Christians  of  the  East. 

When  the  city  of  Edessa  was  captured,  as  has  been  related,  the  story  of 
the  ominous  disaster  was  carried  by  rumor  throughout  the  entire  West. 
It  was  said  that  the  impious  race  of  Turks  had  not  only  overwhelmed 
the  city  of  Edessa  but  was  also  laying  waste  the  cities,  villas,  and  forti¬ 
fied  places  of  our  people  and  overrunning  the  entire  East  unchecked. 
Thus  the  people  of  Christ  were  suffering  extraordinary  trials  because 
of  constant  combats  and  repeated  invasions. 

Messengers  went  about  to  peoples  and  nations  everywhere  spread¬ 
ing  these  reports  j  provinces  which  had  become  lazy  and  enervated  by 
long  periods  of  peace  were  visited  and  their  aid  besought  to  avenge 
these  great  wrongs.  Pope  Eugenius  III,  a  devout  man  of  God,  also 
felt  the  solicitude  of  a  father  for  his  sons  of  the  East,  it  was  said,  and 
was  in  full  and  affectionate  sympathy  with  them.  He  dispatched 
throughout  the  various  regions  of  the  West  religious  men,  eloquent 
in  exhortation,  powerful  both  in  word  and  deed,  to  inform  princes 

Hadrian  IV,  the  only  Eng'lishman  to  hold  the  papal  olSBce,  became  pope  in  De¬ 
cember,  1154.  The  first  notice  of  Ralph  as  bishop  of  Bethlehem  appears  in  June,  1156 
(see  R.  Reg.y  no.  321).  Hadrian  IV  was  named  Nicholas  Breakspear  and  is  known 
in  English  history,  but  Ralph  of  Bethlehem  is  known  to  have  been  an  Englishman 
only  through  William  (see  Beatrice  Siedschlag,  English  Particifation  in  the  CrusadeSy 
1 1  ^o—i220y  p.  no). 

It  is  interesting  to  speculate  as  to  the  connection  between  William  and  Peter, 
prior  of  the  Holy  Sepulchre,  which  this  warm  reference  to  the  latter  implies.  Peter 
had  been  prior  since  1130  and  was  therefore  in  Jerusalem  during  all  of  William’s 
youth.  He  may  have  directed  the  education  of  William  and  been  instrumental  in  start¬ 
ing  him  on  his  career  in  the  church. 


BALDWIN  III  AND  MELISEND 


and  people,  tribes  and  tongues  everywhere  of  the  intolerable  sufferings 
of  their  brethren  in  the  East  and  to  rouse  them  to  go  forth  to  avenge 
these  terrible  wrongs.  Among  these  envoys  was  Bernard,  abbot  of 
Clairvaux,  of  immortal  memory,  beloved  of  God,  a  man  whose  honora¬ 
ble  life  was  an  example  to  all  and  in  every  respect  worthy  of  remem¬ 
brance.  He  was  chosen  as  the  leader  for  carrying  out  this  mission  so 
pleasing  to  God,  and  with  all  diligence  he  executed  the  task  laid  upon 
him.  Although  weak  of  body  because  of  approaching  old  age,  almost 
constant  fasting,  and  a  too  meager  diet,  he  went  about  through  the 
kingdom  and  through  the  country  everywhere  with  his  colaborers  be¬ 
loved  of  God,  zealously  and  indefatigably  preaching  the  kingdom  of 
God.  With  all  due  care  he  described  the  affliction  of  the  people  of  the 
East  and  the  woes  by  which  they  were  continually  oppressed.  He  set 
forth  clearly  that  the  cities  of  the  faithful,  once  devoted  to  the  Chris¬ 
tian  profession,  were  now  suffering  the  direst  servitude  under  the  per¬ 
secutors  of  the  name  of  Christ.  Bound  with  chains  and  shackles,  con¬ 
sumed  by  hunger,  confined  in  horrible  prisons,  in  filth  and  squalor, 
clothed  with  bitterness,  those  brethren  for  whom  also  Christ  was  will¬ 
ing  to  die  were  sitting  in  beggary  and  irons.  To  the  task  of  liberating 
their  oppressed  brethren  he  invited  them  and  stirred  their  hearts  with 
longing  to  avenge  such  wrongs  j  he  promised  that  aid  from  on  high 
and  eternal  rewards  with  the  elect  awaited  all  who  would  undertake 


this  pious  work. 

As  with  devoted  perseverance  he  spread  this  message  among  na¬ 
tions,  principalities,  and  kingdoms,  he  won  instant  favor  with  great 
and  small.  Voluntarily  they  gave  a  ready  assent  to  his  preaching  and 
vowed  to  take  the  road  to  Jerusalem.  Fitting  upon  their  shoulders  the 
sign  of  the  quickening  cross,  they  prepared  for  the  journey.  Not  alone 
with  the  throngs  of  common  people  were  his  persuasive  words  effec¬ 
tive,  but  even  with  the  supreme  rulers  of  the  world  and  those  who 


occupied  the  highest  pinnacle  of  kingdoms.  The  most  powerful  and 
illustrious  kings  of  the  land,  namely,  Conrad,  emperor  of  the  Romans, 
and  Louis,  king  of  the  Franks,  with  many  princes  of  both  kingdoms, 
embraced  the  word  with  equal  desire  for  the  same  end.  Upon  their 
shoulders  and  garments  they  impressed  the  saving  token  of  the  revivi¬ 
fying  cross  in  all  devotion  as  a  sign  that  they  too  would  undertake  the 


pilgrimage. 


This  expedition  is  usually  called  the  Second  Crusade.  Eugenius  III,  like  Bernard 


BALDWIN  III  AND  MELISEND 


165 


19.  The  emferor  sets  out  first  with  his  army  and  arrives  at  Con- 
stantinofle.  The  sultan  of  Iconium  sets  ambuscades  for  him. 

The  two  monarchs  made  all  due  arrangements  for  the  government 
of  their  kingdoms  and  joined  to  their  number  those  who  in  fervent 
longing  had  taken  upon  themselves  the  vows  of  salvation.  When  all 
necessary  preparation  for  the  march  had  been  completed  as  befitted 
royal  dignity,  they  set  out  upon  the  pilgrimage  pleasing  to  God,  in  the 
month  of  May.  They  departed  under  unlucky  auspices,  however,  and 
with  sinister  omens.  For  they  started  on  the  way  as  if  contrary  to  the 
will  of  an  angry  God,  and,  in  punishment  for  the  sins  of  man,  they 
accomplished  nothing  pleasing  to  Him  on  that  entire  pilgrimage.  Nay^, 
they  even  rendered  worse  the  situation  of  those  to  whom  they  intended 
to  bring  succor.^"* 

The  leaders  had  decided  to  advance  separately,  each  one  conducting 
his  own  army,  so  that  disagreements  and  contentions  might  not  arise 
among  the  people.  In  this  way,  also,  the  necessaries  of  life  for  the 
legions  might  more  easily  be  procured,  and  fodder  for  the  horses  and 
pack  animals  would  be  more  abundant. 

They  traversed  Bavaria,  crossed  the  mighty  river  Danube  at  Ratis- 
bon,  and  descended  into  Austria  with  the  river  on  their  left.  They  then 
entered  the  land  of  Hungary,  where  they  received  honorable  treatment 
from  the  king  of  that  country.  Passing  through  that  kingdom  and  the 
two  Pannonias,  they  went  through  the  provinces  of  the  Bulgarians, 
namely,  Moesia  and  Dacia  Mediterranea,  with  Dacia  Ripensis  on  the 
left.  They  reached  Thrace,  passed  through  the  famous  cities  of  Philip- 
popolis  and  Adrianople,  and  finally  arrived  at  the  royal  city.^^  They 


of  Clairvaux,  was  a  Cistercian,  and  Cistercian  leadership  of  this  crusade  was  as  pro¬ 
nounced  as  the  Cluniac  leadership  had  been  in  the  First.  St.  Bernard  is  usually  credited 
with  the  persuasion  of  Conrad  and  Louis  VII  to  enlist  for  the  crusade  despite  the  advice 
of  leading"  ministers  of  the  two  monarchs.  Eugenius  III  had  sent  out  his  first  call  for 
a  crusade  in  December,  1145,  which  he  repeated  in  March,  1146.  The  most  complete 
study  of  this  crusade  is  still  that  of  Kugler,  contained  in  his  several  works  on  the 
subject  (see  B.  Kugler,  Studien  zur  Geschichte  des  z^eiten  Kreuzzugs ;  Analecten  zur 
Geschichte  des  zweiten  Kreuzzugs;  Neue  Analecten  ztir  Geschichte  des  zvjeiten 
Kreuzzugs;  Geschichte  der  Kreuzziige).  These  should  be  supplemented  by  biographies 
of  St.  Bernard  of  Clairvaux  (see  especially  E.  Vacandard,  Vie  de  Saint  Bernard  abhe 
de  Clairvaux^  and  Byzantine  histories  of  the  period. 

This  judgment  was  based  on  the  ultimate  failure  of  the  enterprise  and  not  upon 
any  specific  errors  or  wrongdoing  at  the  outset. 

William  presents  a  very  summary  account  of  this  journey  along  the  old  pilgrim 
and  crusaders’  trail  to  Constantinople  in  contrast  to  the  detailed  account  of  the  earlier 


1 66 


BALDWIN  III  AND  MELISEND 


had  a  friendly  interview  with  Manuel,  emperor  of  Constantinople, 
and  enjoyed  a  few  days  of  rest,  most  necessary  for  the  refreshment 
and  relaxation  of  the  armies  after  so  many  hardships.^®  Then  they 
crossed  the  Hellespont,  whose  waters  lave  the  banks  of  Constantinople 
and  form  the  boundary  between  Europe  and  Asia,  and  entered  Bithynia, 
the  first  province  of  Asia  which  one  reaches.  All  the  legions  encamped 
in  the  village  of  Chalcedon,  whence  the  city  they  had  just  left  could  be 
seen  not  far  away.  It  was  in  this  ancient  city  that  the  fourth  holy  synod 
of  six  hundred  and  thirty-six  fathers  convened  in  the  time  of  the  Em¬ 
peror  Martian  and  Pope  Leo  to  combat  the  heresy  of  Eutyches,  the 
monk  and  abbot  who  declared  that  there  was  but  one  nature  in  our 
•Lord  Jesus  Christ.^'^ 

The  sultan  of  Iconium  had  known  for  a  long  time  that  these  great 
princes  were  on  the  march  and,  in  great  fear  of  their  coming,  he  had 
already  called  for  aid  from  the  most  remote  parts  of  the  Orient.  Full 
of  anxiety  as  to  ways  and  means  by  which  he  might  ward  off  the  im¬ 
minent  dangers  arising  from  the  presence  of  so  many  enemies,  he 
fortified  cities,  restored  ruined  strongholds,  and  implored  aid  from  the 
neighboring  peoples.  With  constant  anxiety  he  awaited  the  arrival  of 
the  enemy  who  were  said  to  be  at  his  gates  and,  from  day  to  day,  looked 
forward  with  apprehension  to  the  destruction  of  his  people  and  the 
desolation  of  his  country.  Rumor  said  that  the  approaching  host  had 
never  been  equalled  in  number,  that  their  cavalry  forces  alone  would 
cover  the  whole  surface  of  the  land  j  the  largest  rivers  would  not  suf¬ 
fice  to  furnish  them  drink,  nor  could  the  most  fertile  countries^ 
them  with  food.  Although  these  reports  were  greatly  exaggerated,  yet 
the  actual  facts  might  well  strike  terror  to  the  hearts  of  great  chiefs 
who  were  not  followers  of  the  Christian  faith.  For,  according  to  the 

expedition.  However,  the  Second  Crusade  was  better  planned  and  executed  with  much 
less  trouble.  Otto,  bishop  of  Freising",  accompanied  Conrad  on  the  journey  and  wrote 
an  account  of  the  crusade,  which,  however,  William  did  not  see. 

The  relations  of  Emperor  Manuel  with  Emperor  Conrad  III  and  with  King 
Louis  VII  were  neither  as  simple  nor  as  pleasant  as  William  here  summarizes  them. 
Both  of  the  latter,  as  soon  as  they  decided  to  go  on  the  crusade,  had  begun  an  inter¬ 
change  of  letters  and  envoys  with  Manuel.  When  they  neared  Constantinople,  Man¬ 
uel’s  worries  were  even  greater  than  had  been  those  of  Alexius.  He  was  actually  at 
war  with  Roger  of  Sicily  at  the  time.  His  recently  acquired  possessions  in  Cilicia  would 
be  endangered  by  the  crusaders,  once  they  reached  eastern  Asia  Minor.  Chalandon  has 
treated  this  problem,  or  series  of  problems,  more  fully  than  any  other  recent  historian, 
and,  though  he  is  disposed  to  be  more  sympathetic  towards  Manuel  than  the  facts  fully 
justify,  his  account  deserves  great  respect  (see  Chalandon,  Les  Comnene^  II,  262—315). 

See  earlier  reference  to  the  council  in  Book  II,  chap.  12,  note  16. 


BALDWIN  III  AND  MELISEND  167 

uniform  statement  of  men  who  took  part  in  this  expedition,  there  were 
in  the  army  of  the  emperor  alone  about  seventy  thousand  mailed 
knights,  besides  the  people  on  foot,  women  and  children,  and  light¬ 
armed  cavalry.  In  the  army  of  the  king  of  France  also  it  was  estimated 
that  there  were  seventy  thousand  valiant  men  wearing  the  breastplate, 
in  addition  to  those  on  foot.'^®  If  God  in  His  good  pleasure  had  deigned 
to  attend  them  and  had  granted  them  His  mercy  and  saving  grace, 
doubtless  they  might  have  subdued  to  the  Christian  faith  not  only 
the  sultan  but  indeed  all  the  provinces  of  the  Orient.  But  the  Lord 
in  His  just,  although  secret,  judgment  rejected  their  service  and  did 
not  regard  it  as  an  acceptable  offering,  perchance  because  it  was  offered 
with  unworthy  hands. 

20.  After  crossing  the  Hellesfonty  the  army  of  Emferor  Conrad 
Is  led  astray  by  the  malice  of  the  Greeks  and  drawn  into  very 
dangerous  flaces. 

As  soon  as  all  the  legions  had  been  moved  across  the  Hellespont,  Em¬ 
peror  Conrad  with  some  of  the  principal  nobles  of  his  suite  took  leave 
of  the  emperor  and  also  sailed  across  the  sea.  The  legions,  each  under 
command  of  its  own  leader,  were  then  ordered  to  advance.  Leaving 
Galatia,  Paphlagonia,  and  the  two  provinces  of  Pontus  on  the  left  and 
Phrygia,  Lydia,  and  Asia  Minor  on  the  right,  Conrad  marched  straight 
through  the  center  of  Bithynia  to  Nicomedia,  the  metropolis  of  that 
land.  On  the  right  he  passed  Nicaea,  the  city  where,  in  the  time  of 
Emperor  Constantine,  the  synod  of  three  hundred  and  eighteen  holy 
fathers  convened  to  combat  the  wicked  doctrine  of  the  unhappy  Arius.®^ 
From  here  the  entire  army,  in  battle  array,  followed  the  shortest  route 
to  Lycaonia,  the  capital  of  which  is  Iconium. 

At  this  place,  the  sultan  had  assembled  large  forces  of  armed  men  - 
and  also  an  immense  body  of  Turks  from  the  neighboring  lands.  He 
was  awaiting  a  favorable  time  and  place  to  attack  the  Christians  as  they 
tried  to  pass  and  thus  to  prevent  their  advance.  By  bribes  and  entreaties 
he  had  roused  against  our  people  all  the  kings,  leaders,  and  chiefs  of 
every  degree,  even  in  the  most  remote  provinces  of  the  East.  By  a 
constant  succession  of  messengers,  he  had  prayed  them  to  consider  that 
if  such  a  mighty  host  of  armed  men  were  permitted  to  pass  through 

Here  ag^ain  the  numbers  must  be  considered  impressionistic  rather  than  accurate. 

See  earlier  reference  to  the  council  of  Nicaea  in  Book  III,  chap,  i,  note  i. 


i68 


BALDWIN  III  AND  MELISEND 


the  country  without  opposition,  they  would  reduce  the  entire  East  to 
their  sway  by  force  of  arms.  A  great  number  of  nations  responded 
quickly  to  his  call  and  from  the  two  Armenias,  Cappadocia,  Isauria, 
Cilicia,  Media,  and  Parthia  a  vast  multitude  assembled.  With  the  as¬ 
sistance  of  all  these  nations,  he  hoped  that  he  might  be  able  to  resist 
with  somewhat  equal  forces  the  mighty  host  which  was  said  to  be  ap¬ 
proaching. 

On  departing  from  Constantinople,  Conrad  had  requested  the  em¬ 
peror  to  furnish  him  with  guides  who  knew  the  country  and  were 
well  informed  about  the  neighboring  provinces.  These  men,  however, 
proved  to  be  far  from  trustworthy.  It  was  understood  that  they  had 
been  furnished  to  lead  the  armies  in  all  good  faith  so  that  the  troops 
following  them  might  not  be  exposed  imprudently  to  dangers  and 
difficulties  or  to  lack  of  food  while  on  the  march.  As  soon  as  they  had 
conducted  the  army  into  the  land  of  the  enemy,  however,  these  guides 
informed  the  leaders  that  in  order  to  take  advantage  of  a  shorter  route, 
which  led  through  unoccupied  country,  necessary  food  for  a  certain 
number  of  days  must  be  carried  with  them.  Within  a  few  days  there¬ 
after,  they  faithfully  promised  that  the  armies  would  arrive  at  the  far- 
famed  city  of  Iconium  and  would  find  themselves  in  a  most  fertile 
country  full  of  all  kinds  of  provisions.  Obedient  to  this  injunction, 
the  Christians  loaded  pack  animals,  carts,  and  all  kinds  of  vehicles  with 
provisions,  for  they  trusted  their  guides  and  followed  them  in  simple 
good  faith. 

The  guides,  however,  led  by  the  malice  inherent  in  the  Greek  race 
and  also  by  their  customary  hatred  of  the  Christians,  acted  treacher¬ 
ously.  Either  because  commanded  by  their  master  or  because  bribed 
by  the  Turks,  they  purposely  led  the  legions  by  unfrequented  routes 
and  drew  them  into  places  which  offered  the  enemy  favorable  op¬ 
portunities  to  attack  and  overcome  a  credulous  people.^® 

21.  The  guides  jurmshed  by  the  Greek  em  feror  to  lead  Emferor 
Conrad^ s  army  wickedly  defart  and  leave  the  troofs  exposed 
to  great  danger. 

When  the  allotted  number  of  days  had  passed  and  the  expedition  had 
not  reached  the  destination  so  eagerly  desired,  the  emperor  ordered 

Chalandon,  of  course,  discredits  this  charge  of  treachery  and  explains  the  disaster 
to  Conrad’s  army  on  the  theory  that  the  people  had  become  so  enfeebled  through  thirst 


BALDWIN  III  AND  MELISEND 


169 

the  Greek  guides  to  be  brought  before  him.  In  the  presence  of  his 
nobles  he  began  to  put  searching  questions  to  them:  Why  was  it  that 
the  army  had  already  been  upon  the  march  longer  than  had  been 
stipulated  in  the  beginning  and  yet  had  not  reached  its  destination? 
The  guides  as  usual  resorted  to  falsehoods  and  asserted  steadfastly 
that,  with  the  help  of  God,  all  the  legions  would  arrive  at  Iconium 
within  three  days.  The  emperor,  a  man  without  guile,  readily  believed 
their  words  and  answered  that  he  would  endure  these  three  days  also, 
since  he  had  faith  in  their  promises.  On  the  following  night,  camp  was 
made  in  the  usual  manner,  but  while  all  were  resting  after  their  labors, 
these  treacherous  guides  secretly  fled  in  the  dead  of  night  and  left 
the  people  who  had  been  confided  to  their  faithful  care  without  leaders. 
At  length  the  light  of  day  returned  and  the  time  for  resuming  the 
march  approached,  but  those  who  usually  led  the  lines  could  not  be 
found.  The  treachery  of  the  deserters  was  finally  reported  to  the 
emperor  and  the  chiefs  of  the  army,  and  their  perfidy  became  known 
to  all. 

Moreover,  these  men  of  Belial,  in  order  to  add  to  their  wickedness 
and  heap  crime  upon  crime,  hastened  to  the  army  of  the  king  of  France, 
which  was  reported  to  be  in  the  vicinity.  There  they  falsely  declared 
that  Emperor  Conrad,  who  had  gone  on  ahead  under  their  guidance, 
had  been  entirely  successful  and  had  gained  an  important  victory  over 
the  enemy.  He  had  seized  Iconium  by  force  of  arms  and  had  destroyed 
it  from  the  very  foundations. 

It  seems  evident  to  us  that  they  made  this  assertion  either  to  induce 
the  king  to  follow  the  same  route  and  thus  fall  into  the  same  perils, 
or,  possibly,  by  leading  him  to  believe  that  Conrad  had  been  entirely 
successful,  to  prevent  him  from  hurrying  to  the  assistance  of  his  im¬ 
perilled  brethren.  It  may  be,  however,  that  they  invented  this  story 
to  avert  punishment  from  themselves.  For  if  they  had  reported  that 
the  army  had  perished,  they  would  have  been  seized  as  traitors,  since 
it  was  by  their  wickedness  that  the  people  had  rushed  to  their  destruc¬ 
tion.  Whatever  their  intentions  may  have  been,  it  is  certain  that  it  was 
their  perfidy  which  led  the  betrayed  army  to  descend  into  that  abyss  of 
death. 

As  soon  as  the  emperor  realized  that  the  army  was  without  guides, 


and  hunger  that  they  fell  an  easy  prey  to  the  fleet  mounted  Turks  who  hovered  about 
(Chalandon,  Les  Co7itnene^  II,  285—88). 


BALDWIN  III  AND  MELISEND 


he  called  a  council  of  all  the  chiefs  to  consider  what  course  of  action 
must  be  taken.  An  utter  lack  of  harmony  was  immediately  disclosed  3 
some  declared  that  they  must  turn  back,  while  others  advised  that 
they  continue  on  their  way.  Well  might  it  have  been  said  of  them  in 
this  crisis,  ^^He  poureth  contempt  upon  princes  and  causeth  them  to 
wander  in  the  wilderness  where  there  is  no  way.” 

While  they  were  in  this  state  of  uncertainty,  anxious  over  their 
ignorance  of  the  country  and  concerned  about  the  lack  of  provisions 
(for  fodder  for  the  horses  and  pack  animals  as  well  as  all  kinds  of 
food  supplies  for  the  troops  had  entirely  given  out),  there  came  a  report 
that  the  enemy’s  army,  a  vast  multitude  of  Turks,  was  near  at  hand. 
This  proved  to  be  true.  The  Christians  were  in  a  sterile  wilderness, 
far  from  all  cultivated  land  3  they  had  been  purposely  led  there,  as 
we  have  said  before,  by  their  traitorous  guides.  They  should  have 
marched  through  Lycaonia,  which  they  had  left  on  the  right.  By  this 
route  they  would  have  passed  through  a  cultivated  land  full  of  all 
kinds  of  supplies  and  would  have  arrived  at  their  destination  in  far 
less  time.  Instead,  the  Greeks  led  them  to  the  left  and  forced  the 
entire  army  to  turn  aside  into  the  wilderness  of  Cappadocia,  far  from 
Iconium. 

It  was  common  talk,  and  probably  quite  true,  that  these  perilous 
wanderings  were  devised  with  the  knowledge  and  at  the  command 
of  the  Greek  emperor,  who  has  always  envied  the  successful  advance 
of  the  Christians.  For  it  is  well  known  that  the  Greeks  have  always 
looked  with  distrust  on  all  increase  of  power  by  the  Western  nations 
(as  they  still  do),  especially  by  that  of  the  Teutonic  nation,  as  rivals 
of  the  empire.  They  take  it  ill  that  the  king  of  the  Teutons  calls  him¬ 
self  the  emperor  of  the  Romans.  For  thereby  he  seems  to  detract  too 
much  from  the  prestige  of  their  own  emperor,  whom  they  themselves 
call  monarch,  that  is,  the  one  who  rules  supreme  over  all  and  there¬ 
fore  is  the  one  and  only  emperor  of  the  Romans. 


Ps.  107  :  40. 

There  was  some  foundation  to  this  theory  of  jealousy.  The  inability  of  the  two 
emperors  to  decide  which  should  call  upon  the  other  when  Conrad  arrived  at  Con¬ 
stantinople  caused  not  only  embarrassment  but  actual  trouble  (see  Chalandon,  Les^ 
Comnine^  II,  277). 


BALDWIN  III  AND  MELISEND 


171 


22.  The  Turks  make  a  sudden  attack  upon  the  Teutonic  hostj 
the  legions  are  destroyedy  but  the  emperor  escapes. 

During  this  timCj  the  emperor’s  army  was  suifering  from  hunger, 
from  ignorance  of  the  country,  from  long-continued  privations,  as  well 
as  from  the  difficulties  of  the  roads,  the  lack  of  horses,  and  the  burden 
of  the  baggage.  Meanwhile,  the  Turkish  satraps  and  officers  of  various 
ranks,  well  aware  of  the  situation,  assembled  their  forces  and  made  a 
sudden  attack  upon  the  Christian  camp.  This  unexpected  action  threw 
the  legions  into  utter  confusion,  for  they  had  not  foreseen  anything  of 
the  kind.  The  strength  of  the  Turks  lay  in  their  swift  horses,  which 
had  suffered  from  no  lack  of  food,  and  in  their  light  equipment  of 
bows  and  arrows.  With  loud  cries,  they  surrounded  the  camp  and  with 
their  usual  agility  fell  furiously  upon  our  soldiers,  who  were  retarded 
by  their  heavy  armor.  The  Christians  were  superior  to  the  foe  in 
strength  and  practice  in  arms,  yet,  weighed  down  as  they  were  with 
breastplates,  greaves,  and  shields,  they  could  not  combat  the  Turks, 
nor  could  they  pursue  them  very  far  from  the  camp.  Their  horses 
also,  emaciated  by  hunger  and  the  long  marches,  were  utterly  unable 
to  gallop  hither  and  yon.  The  Turks,  on  the  contrary,  charged  en  masse  j 
while  still  at  a  distance  they  let  fly  countless  showers  of  arrows  which 
fell  like  hail  upon  the  horses  and  their  riders  and  brought  death  and 
wounds  from  afar.  When  the  Christians  tried  to  pursue,  however,  the 
Turks  turned  and  fled  upon  their  swift  horses  and  thus  escaped  the 
sword  of  their  foes.  Our  army,  hemmed  in  on  all  sides,  was  in  mortal 
danger  from  the  constant  showers  of  darts  and  arrows.  They  had  no 
chance  to  retaliate  or  to  engage  the  foe  at  close  quarters,  nor  could 
they  lay  hold  of  the  enemy.  As  often  as  they  tried  to  make  a  counter¬ 
attack,  the  Turks  broke  ranks,  eluded  all  their  attempts,  and  galloped 
off  in  different  directions.  Then,  when  the  Christians  returned  to  their 
camp,  the  Turks  reconstructed  their  lines,  again  surrounded  our  forces, 
and  attacked  even  more  furiously,  as  if  they  were  besieging  a  town. 

Thus,  by  the  hidden,  though  just,  purposes  of  God,  the  valor  of 
these  great  Christian  princes,  whose  arms  and  strength,  courage  and 
numbers  had  seemed  incomparable,  suddenly  collapsed  under  the 
pressure  of  a  rather  mild  warfare.  Scarcely  a  vestige  of  their  former 
glory  remained,  and  merely  a  remnant  of  their  vast  forces.  Of  seventy 
thousand  mailed  knights  and  many  companies  of  foot  soldiers,  countless 


BALDWIN  III  AND  MELISEND 


172 

in  number,  barely  a  tenth  part  escaped,  according  to  the  statement  of 
those  who  were  on  this  expedition.^^  Some  perished  by  hunger,  others 
were  cut  down  by  the  sword,  and  still  others  fell  into  the  hands  of  the 
enemy  as  prisoners.  The  emperor  escaped,  however,  with  a  few  of  his 
nobles.  After  several  days,  he  succeeded  with  great  difficulty  in  reach¬ 
ing  the  vicinity  of  Nicaea  with  the  remnant  of  his  followers. 

But  the  victorious  Turks,  laden  with  spoils  and  enriched  by  count¬ 
less  treasures,  with  horses  and  arms  even  to  superabundance,  retired 
to  their  own  fortresses.  There,  since  they  knew  the  country  well,  they 
eagerly  awaited  the  coming  of  the  king  of  France,  for,  according  to 
report,  he  had  reached  practically  these  same  parts.  Since  they  had 
vanquished  the  superior  forces  of  Emperor  Conrad,  they  hoped  even 
more  easily  to  rout  the  army  of  the  king  of  France.  The  result  was, 
in  fact,  as  they  had  anticipated. 

The  sultan  of  Iconium  did  not  participate  in  this  great  adventure. 
Because  God  permitted  it,  a  noble  and  powerful  Turkish  satrap  called 
Paramus,  who  commanded  the  sultan’s  troops,  accomplished  this  almost 
unhoped-for  feat.  The  event  took  place  in  the  month  of  November,  in 
the  year  of  the  Incarnation  1 146. 

23.  The  king  of  the  Franks  crosses  the  Hellespont  and  arrives 
with  his  host  at  Nicaea  in  Bithynia.  The  two  sovereigns  con¬ 
fer  with  one  another.  Emperor  Conrad  returns  to  Constan¬ 
tinople. 

Meanwhile  the  king  of  the  Franks,  following  almost  the  same  route 
with  his  army,  had  arrived  at  Constantinople.  There  he  remained  for 
a  short  time.  He  held  several  private  interviews  with  the  emperor,  who 
showed  him  great  honor  and,  on  his  departure,  presented  him  with 
bountiful  gifts.  The  nobles  of  his  suite  also  were  treated  with  marked 
favor.  From  Constantinople  the  king  passed  into  Bithynia  with  all  his 
legions.  At  a  point  between  the  royal  city  and  the  Black  Sea  (which 
are  distant  from  each  other  thirty  miles),  he  crossed  the  Hellespont. 
Here  it  is  at  its  narrowest,  barely  a  mile  in  width.  He  then  marched 
round  the  Nicomedian  gulf  which  is  so  named  from  the  adjacent  city 
of  Nicomedia,  capital  of  Bithynia,  and  which  also  forms  part  of  the 

William,  then  eighteen  years  old,  probably  talked  with  some  of  the  survivors 
whom  he  met  later  at  Jerusalem.  His  statement  of  the  date  of  this  disaster  should  be 
corrected  to  October  26,  1147.  The  proportion  of  the  losses  is  probably  fairly  accurate. 


BALDWIN  III  AND  MELISEND 


173 

Bosphorus  or  Hellespont.  In  the  village  of  Nicaea,  not  very  far  from 
the  city  itself,  the  king  established  his  camp  until  he  should  determine 
by  what  route  to  advance.  He  made  careful  inquiries  about  the  em¬ 
peror  of  the  Romans,  who  had  preceded  him,  and  was  told  that  the 
emperor  had  lost  his  army,  but  that  he  himself,  a  wanderer  and  a 
fugitive,  had  made  his  escape  with  a  few  of  his  nobles.  At  first  this 
was  merely  a  doubtful  rumor,  without  trustworthy  foundation.  As 
time  went  on,  however,  it  received  definite  confirmation.  For  a  little 
later  Frederick,  duke  of  Swabia, came  to  the  army  of  the  king  of 
the  Franks  from  the  emperor’s  camp.  He  brought  full  and  detailed 
information  about  the  disaster,  which  up  to  that  time  had  been  known 
merely  through  vague  and  unreliable  rumors. 

The  duke,  a  young  man  of  admirable  qualities,  later  succeeded  his 
uncle,  Emperor  Conrad,  as  ruler  of  the  Roman  Empire,  which  he  now 
governs  with  vigor  and  success.  He  had  come  to  invite  the  king  to  a 
conference  with  the  emperor,  that  they  might  consult  together,  albeit 
too  late,  over  the  route  to  be  followed.  On  hearing  of  the  tragic  dis¬ 
aster  which  had  befallen  the  emperor  and  the  perils  and  destruction  of 
their  brethren,  the  entire  army  was  moved  with  righteous  indignation 
and  pity.  The  king,  deeply  stirred  by  the  duke’s  report,  held  counsel 
with  his  people.  Then,  under  the  duke’s  escort,  he  set  out  with  some 
of  his  nobles  to  confer  with  the  emperor,  whose  camp  was  not  far  away. 

The  two  monarchs  exchanged  the  customary  salutations  with  the 
kiss  of  peace.  They  then  engaged  in  a  friendly  conference,  during 
which  they  decided  to  persevere  in  the  accomplishment  of  their  pur¬ 
pose  and  to  join  their  forces  for  the  advance  march.  Many  from  both 
hosts,  however,  and  especially  from  that  of  the  Teutons,  disregarded 
their  vows  and  returned  to  Constantinople.  Their  travelling  money 
was  exhausted,  and  the  extreme  hardships  of  the  march  and  the  neces¬ 
sary  outlay  terrified  them. 

After  consulting  with  the  chief  commanders  of  both  armies,  the 
two  monarchs  abandoned  the  route  which  the  emperor  had  previously 
taken  on  the  left  and  directed  the  line  of  march  toward  Asia  Minor. 
On  their  right  were  the  two  Phrygias  and  behind  them  Bithynia.  They 
marched,  now  by  the  inland  route,  now  by  the  road  along  the  shore, 
with  Philadelphia  on  the  left,  and  came  first  to  Smyrna.  From  there 

This  was  the  future  Frederick  Barbarossa,  king'  of  Germany  and  emperor  of  the 
Holy  Roman  Empire,  1152— 1190. 


BALDWIN  III  AND  MELISEND 


174 

they  proceeded  to  Ephesus,  the  capital  of  Asia  Minor,  famous  for  the 
life  and  preaching  of  John  the  Evangelist,  and  also  the  place  of  his 
burial.  At  Ephesus,  the  emperor  commanded  the  legions  which  had 
survived  to  march  back  overland.  He  himself  took  ship  and  returned 
to  Constantinople.  The  reasons  for  this  action  are  unknown  5  perchance 
he  was  chagrined  over  the  depleted  numbers  of  the  great  host  which 
he  had  led  forth  j  perchance  he  found  the  arrogance  of  the  Franks  un¬ 
endurable.^^  He  was  received  by  the  emperor  with  even  more  marked 
distinction  than  before  and  remained  at  Constantinople  with  his  nobles 
until  the  beginning  of  the  following  spring.  The  two  sovereigns  were 
closely  united  by  marriage  j  for  their  wives  were  sisters,  daughters  of 
the  elder  Berengar,  count  of  Sulzbach,  a  great  and  noble  prince,  very 
powerful  in  the  kingdom  of  the  Teutons."^®  Hence  the  emperor  showed 
Conrad  very  great  favor  and,  at  the  special  request  of  the  empress, 
lavished  gifts  upon  him  and  his  nobles  most  liberally. 

24.  The  king  of  the  Franks  proceeds  by  a  different  route  to 
Efhesus,  Here  Guy  of  Ponthieu  dieis.  In  sfite  of  the  efforts 
of  the  foey  the  Franks  cross  the  river  Meander. 

Meanwhile  the  king  of  the  Franks,  much  engaged  with  his  nobles 
over  preparations  for  the  march,  was  tarrying  at  Ephesus  to  allow  his 
army  to  recuperate.  During  this  time,  Count  Guy  of  Ponthieu,  a  noble 
distinguished  for  his  military  skill  and  prowess,  fell  ill  and  died.  He 
was  buried  with  all  due  honor  in  the  vestibule  of  the  church  at  Ephesus. 
From  here  the  king  set  out  with  the  whole  army  and  marched  with  all 
the  speed  possible  toward  the  east.  After  a  few  days’  march  he  reached 
the  fords  of  the  river  Meander,  beloved  of  swans.  This  is  the  river  of 
which  our  Naso  writes  in  the  Heroides: 

So  when  destiny  calls,  cast  down  in  the  wet  grass, 

The  white  swan  sings  at  the  shoals  of  the  Meander. 

The  difference  in  speech,  manners,  and  customs  no  doubt  caused  considerable  fric¬ 
tion.  There  was  also  the  illness  of  Conrad.  Manuel  and  his  wife  had  come  by  ship 
to  Ephesus,  where  Conrad  was  staying,  and  invited  him  to  return  with  them  to  Con¬ 
stantinople,  where  Manuel  himself  looked  after  him  (Chalandon,  Les  Comnene^  II, 
308). 

Bertha  of  Sulzbach  had  been  betrothed  to  Manuel  in  1142  before  the  death  of 
Emperor  John.  Her  name  was  changed  to  Irene  and  she  was  trained  in  Greek  manners 
before  her  marriage  in  1146  (Chalandon,  Les  Comnene^  II,  210,  260). 

Ovid  Her.  vii.  1—2, 


BALDWIN  III  AND  MELISEND 


175 

Amid  the  green  meadows  on  the  banks  of  this  river  the  king  made  his 
camp.  Here  for  the  first  time,  the  longing  of  the  Franks  to  see  their 
foe  was  gratified,  for  as  the  Christians  tried  to  approach  the  river, 
great  numbers  of  Turks  appeared  on  the  opposite  bank  and  prevented 
them  from  using  the  water.  At  last  they  found  the  fords,  however,  and, 
despite  the  enemy’s  efforts,  forced  a  passage  across  the  river  and  rushed 
upon  the  Turks.  They  killed  many  of  them  and  took  numerous  pris¬ 
oners.  The  rest  turned  and  fled.  The  victorious  Franks  at  once  seized 
the  Turkish  camp,  which  was  filled  with  spoils  of  the  richest  kind  and 
supplies  of  every  description,  and  by  vigorous  action  made  themselves 
masters  of  the  farther  bank.  Filled  with  joy  over  the  victory  and  the 
rich  spoils  which  they  had  seized,  the  Christians  passed  a  quiet  night 
and,  at  dawn,  prepared  to  resume  the  march. 

Thence  they  advanced  to  Laodicea,  a  city  of  that  same  locality.  Here 
they  supplied  themselves  with  provisions  for  several  days,  as  was  their 
custom,  and  again  set  forth  as  with  one  mind. 

25.  The  Frankish  army  suffers  a  most  disastrous  defeat.  The 
vanguard  which  had  gone  on  ahead  escafes, 

A  PRECIPITOUS  mountain,  very  difficult  of  ascent,  blocked  the  path  of 
the  advancing  army.  According  to  the  plan  of  march,  it  must  be  sur¬ 
mounted  that  day.  It  was  customary  upon  this  campaign  to  designate 
each  day  a  certain  number  of  distinguished  men  to  act  as  leaders — some 
to  conduct  the  advance  guard  and  others  to  bring  up  the  rear  as  protec¬ 
tion  for  the  non-militant  throng  and  especially  for  the  crowd  of  people 
on  foot.  On  these  men  also  devolved  the  duty  of  planning  with 
the  nobles  the  route  to  be  followed,  the  length  of  the  march,  and 
the  location  of  the  camp  for  the  next  day.  On  this  particular  day,  the 
choice  fell,  in  the  order  of  his  turn,  upon  a  certain  nobleman  from 
Aquitaine  named  Geoffrey  de  Rancogne.  Accordingly,  he  went  on 
ahead  with  the  standard  of  the  king  and  ascended  the  mountain  with 
the  vanguard.  His  orders  were  that  the  vanguard  should  make  camp 
on  the  heights.  When  he  reached  the  summit,  however,  the  greater 
part  of  the  day  still  remained,  and  Geoffrey  decided,  notwithstanding 
his  orders,  to  advance  a  little  farther,  for  he  felt  that  the  march  had 
been  too  short  that  day.  The  guides  assured  him  that  there  was  a 
better  spot  for  the  camp  near  by.  Accordingly,  he  went  on  farther.  The 


BALDWIN  III  AND  MELISEND 


176 

people  who  were  following  the  vanguard  supposed  that  the  camp  was 
to  be  placed  on  the  summit  of  the  mountain,  and,  in  the  belief  that 
the  day’s  march  was  nearly  completed,  they  began  rather  carelessly  to 
lag  behind.  Thus  the  army  was  divided;  some  had  already  crossed  the 
ridge,  while  others  were  still  loitering  upon  it.  The  Turks,  ever  on  the 
alert  for  an  opportunity  to  attack,  immediately  recognized  the  situa¬ 
tion;  they  were,  in  fact,  ever  following  alongside  the  army  with  this 
very  end  in  view,  and  from  a  distance  they  kept  close  watch  on  the 
movements  of  the  Christians.  The  way  was  narrow  and  the  ranks  were 
separated,  because  the  larger  and  stronger  force  had  gone  on  ahead; 
the  Turks  knew  that  the  situation  of  the  rear  ranks  could  not  easily 
become  known,  nor  could  help  be  sent  to  them  in  their  extremity.  They 
took  advantage  of  the  favorable  opportunity  and  seized  the  summit 
of  the  mountain,  so  as  to  cause  still  greater  confusion  between  our 
van  and  the  rear  guard.  Then  in  battle  array,  they  fell  upon  our  forces, 
and  before  the  latter  could  seize  arms  the  Turks  had  broken  up  their 
lines  by  force.  No  longer  was  the  fight  carried  on  with  bows  and 
arrows;  it  was  fought  at  close  quarters  with  the  sword  and  brought 
death  and  destruction  to  the  Christians.  All  who  tried  to  flee  were  most 
cruelly  pursued.  Our  people  were  hindered  by  the  narrow  defiles,  and 
their  horses  were  exhausted  by  the  long  marches  and  the  difficulty  of 
the  roads.  In  addition,  they  were  hindered  by  the  enormous  amount  of 
baggage.  Yet  they  resisted  as  with  one  accord  and  with  unflinching 
courage  fought  valiantly  on  behalf  of  life  and  liberty  and  in  defense 
of  their  companions  of  the  way.  They  carried  on  the  combat  with 
swords  and  lances  and  by  both  words  and  example  cheered  each  other 
to  continued  effort. 

The  Turks,  inspired  by  the  hope  of  victory,  likewise  endeavored 
to  animate  each  other;  they  called  to  mind  how,  only  a  few  days  be¬ 
fore,  they  had  routed  a  much  greater  army  with  less  danger  and  had 
easily  triumphed  over  forces  more  numerous  and  far  stronger. 

The  battle  was  long  fought  and  of  doubtful  outcome.  Finally,  how¬ 
ever,  in  punishment  for  our  sins,  the  infidels  conquered.  Many  Chris¬ 
tians  were  killed  and  large  numbers  made  prisoners;  our  army  was 
reduced  to  a  very  few.  Many  noble  and  illustrious  men  perished  that 
day,  men  notable  for  their  military  deeds  and  well  worthy  of  pious 
remembrance.  Among  the  number  were  the  count  of  Varennes,  a  man 
preeminent  even  among  great  lords,  Gauchiers  de  Montjoy,  Evrard 


BALDWIN  III  AND  MELISEND 


177 

de  Breteuil,  Itiers  de  Meingnac,  and  many  others.  Their  names  we 
do  not  remember,  but  we  believe  that  they  are  written  in  heaven  and 
their  memory  will  be  held  in  benediction  forever.*^® 

That  day  the  glorious  reputation  of  the  Franks  was  lost  through  a 
misfortune  most  fatal  and  disastrous  for  the  Christians  j  their  valor, 
up  to  this  time  formidable  to  the  nations,  was  crushed  to  earth.  Hence¬ 
forward  it  was  as  a  mockery  in  the  eyes  of  those  unclean  races  to  whom 
formerly  it  had  been  a  terror. 

Why  was  it,  O  blessed  Lord  Jesus,  that  this  people,  so  devoted  to 
Thee,  who  longed  to  adore  the  traces  of  Thy  footprints  and  to  kiss 
the  venerated  places  which  Thou  hadst  consecrated  by  Thy  bodily 
presence,  suffered  defeat  at  the  hand  of  those  who  hated  Thee?  Truly, 
Thy  judgments  are  as  a  bottomless  pit  and  there  is  no  one  who  can 
understand  them.  For  Thou,  alone,  O  Lord,  art  able  to  do  all  things 
and  there  is  no  one  who  can  resist  Thy  will. 

26.  T'he  king  es cafes  by  chance  and  joins  the  advance  guard. 

The  remnant  of  the  army  reaches  Attalia  and  from  there 
crosses  over  into  ^yria. 

Meanwhile,  the  king,  rather  by  chance  than  by  his  own  efforts, 
escaped  amid  the  great  peril  and  confusion.  In  the  silence  of  midnight, 
without  a  guide,  he  climbed  the  slope  of  the  mountain  so  often  men¬ 
tioned  and,  with  a  few  attendants,  reached  the  camp  which  had  been 
placed  somewhat  farther  on.  As  has  been  said,  the  vanguard,  follow¬ 
ing  the  royal  standard,  had  traversed  the  narrow  passes  of  the  moun¬ 
tain  without  difficulty  and  had  established  camp  without  opposition 
in  a  suitable  location.  They  were  utterly  unaware  of  all  that  had  hap¬ 
pened  to  the  army  in  their  rear.  Yet  when  they  found  that  the  arrival 
of  the  troops  was  interrupted  and  great  delay  ensued,  an  ominous  fore¬ 
boding  of  some  disaster  prevailed,  an  inkling  that  all  was  not  as  could 
be  desired.  But  when  those  who  had  escaped  with  the  king  arrived  at 
the  camp,  the  sad  disaster  became  known  with  certainty.  Then  sorrow 
fell  upon  the  army,  and  grievous  anxiety  seized  the  hearts  of  all.  With 
tremulous  voice  and  tearful  sighs,  each  sought  for  those  most  dear  to 

William’s  information  about  the  French  army  is  more  complete  and  accurate 
than  about  the  German  army,  a  portion  of  which,  under  the  leadership  of  Otto, 
bishop  of  Freising,  had  preceded  the  French  on  this  road  and  had  likewise  met  dis¬ 
aster  at  this  pass. 


BALDWIN  III  AND  MELISEND 


178 

him,  and  when  they  were  found  missing,  grief  was  redoubled.  The 
camp  resounded  with  lamentations,  and  the  troops  were  torn  with 
anguish.  Throughout  the  entire  camp  there  was  not  a  place  which  was 
not  filled  with  mourning  for  friends  and  household  companions.  One 
sought  his  father,  another  his  master.  Here  a  woman  was  searching 
everywhere  for  her  son,  there  another  for  her  husband.  Those  whose 
search  was  fruitless  passed  a  sleepless  night,  burdened  with  anxious 
fear  lest  the  worst  had  happened  to  the  absent  ones.  During  the  night, 
however,  there  arrived  at  the  camp  some  of  each  class.  These,  rather 
by  chance  than  by  their  own  wisdom,  had  escaped  death  by  hiding 
among  the  bushes  and  rocks  or  in  underground  caverns  under  the  pro¬ 
tection  of  the  kindly  darkness.  This  disaster  occurred  in  January  in 
the  year  of  the  Incarnation  of  our  Lord  1146.^^ 

From  this  time,  there  began  to  be  a  shortage  of  bread  and  all  other 
provisions  in  the  camp.  Moreover,  for  many  days  thereafter,  they 
had  no  market  of  any  kind.  But  there  was  an  even  worse  trouble.  They 
had  no  guides  to  lead  them  and  they  were  wandering  now  here,  now 
there,  without  knowledge  of  the  locality.  Finally,  however,  they  en¬ 
tered  Pamphylia,  over  steep  mountain  passes  and  through  deep  valleys, 
and  with  great  difficulty,  although  without  conflict  with  the  enemy, 
succeeded  in  reaching  Attalia,  the  capital  of  that  district.  Attalia  lies 
upon  the  seacoast  and  is  subject  to  the  emperor  of  Constantinople.  It 
possesses  very  rich  fields,  which  are,  nevertheless,  of  no  advantage  to 
the  townspeople,  for  they  are  surrounded  by  enemies  on  all  sides  who 
hinder  their  cultivation.  Therefore,  the  fertile  soil  lies  fallow,  since 
there  is  no  one  to  work  it.  Yet  the  place  has  many  other  advantages 
which  it  offers  freely  to  visitors.  It  is  most  delightfully  situated,  it 
abounds  in  clear  and  healthful  waters,  and  it  is  planted  with  fruit¬ 
bearing  trees.  The  grain  supply  is  brought  from  overseas  in  ample 
quantities,  so  that  those  resorting  there  are  well  supplied  with  the  neces¬ 
saries  of  life. 

It  borders  very  closely,  however,  on  the  land  of  the  enemy,  and 
since  it  was  found  impossible  to  endure  their  continual  attacks,  it  be¬ 
came  tributary  to  them.  Through  this  connection,  Attalia  maintains 
trade  in  necessaries  with  the  enemy.  Our  soldiers,  unacquainted  with 
the  Greek  language,  corrupted  the  name  of  this  city  to  Satalia.  Ac¬ 
cordingly  that  entire  portion  of  the  sea,  from  the  promontory  of  Lissi- 

This  may  be  a  copyist’s  error,  for  the  year  was  1148. 


BALDWIN  III  AND  MELISEND 


179 

dona  to  the  island  of  Cyprus,  is  called  the  Attalic  sea  and  is  known  in 
common  parlance  as  the  Satalian  gulf. 

At  Attalia  the  king  of  the  Franks  and  his  people  suffered  from  a 
serious  shortage  of  food  brought  on  by  the  great  number  of  people 
who  had  come  thither 3  in  fact,  the  survivors  of  the  army,  and  above  all 
the  poor,  nearly  perished  of  famine.  Here  the  king  left  the  people 
on  foot  and  \rith  his  nobles  went  on  board  ship.  Isauria  and  Cilicia  were 
passed  on  the  left,  and  the  island  of  C}'prus  on  the  right.  After  a 
short  sea  voj^age  with  favorable  winds,  the)'  sailed  into  the  mouth  of 
the  Orontes  river,  which  flows  by  Antioch,  and  landed  at  the  place 
which  is  now  called  the  Port  of  St.  Simeon,  near  the  ancient  cits'  of 
Seleucia,  ten  miles  from  Antioch. 

■ 

27.  Raymond y  prince  of  A ntiochy  receives  the  kmg  of  the  Franks 
.  with  great  honor  at  the  Port  of  St.  Simeon  and  conducts  him 
to  Antioch.  Later y  hoiuevery  they  are  zuickedly  alienated. 

For  many  days  Raymond,  prince  of  x\ntioch,  had  eagerly  awaited 
the  arrival  of  the  king  of  the  Franks.  When  he  learned  that  the  king 
had  landed  in  his  domains,  he  summoned  all  the  nobles  of  the  land 
and  the  chief  leaders  of  the  people  and  went  out  to  meet  him  with 
a  chosen  escort.  He  greeted  the  king  with  much  reverence  and  con¬ 
ducted  him  with  great  pomp  into  the  cits'  of  Antioch,  where  he  was 
met  by  the  clergy  and  the  people.  Long  before  this  time — in  fact,  as 
soon  as  he  heard  that  Louis  was  coming — ^Ra^'mond  had  conceived  the 

o  « 

idea  that  by  his  aid  he  might  be  able  to  enlarge  the  principalits'  of 
Antioch.  With  this  in  mind,  therefore,  even  before  the  king  started 
oh  the  pilgrimage,  the  prince  had  sent  to  him  in  France  a  large  store 
of  noble  gifts  and  treasures  of  great  price  in  the  hope  of  winning  his 
favor.  He  also  counted  greatls"  on  the  interest  of  the  queen  with  the 
lord  king,  for  she  had  been  his  inseparable  companion  on  his  pilgrimage. 
She  was  Raymond’s  niece,  the  eldest  daug^hter  of  Count  William  of 
Poitou,  his  brother.^^ 

His  arrival  here  is  dated  March  19,  1148. 

This  is  the  famous  Eleanor  of  Aquitaine,  prominent  in  the  history  of  both  France 
and  England.  Her  betrothal  to  Louis  had  been  brought  about  larsrelv  throusfh  the  ef- 
forts  of  Sugfer,  abbot  of  St.  Denis  and  \drtually  prime  minister  of  the  kingdom.  He 
anticipated  the  death  of  William  X,  duke  of  Aquitaine,  without  male  heir  and  hoped 
throus’h  the  marriage  to  enlarge  the  kins’dom.  William  X  died  about  the  time  of  the 

O  O  w  w 

marriage. 


i8o 


BALDWIN  III  AND  MELISEND 


As  we  have  said,  therefore,  Raymond  showed  the  king  every  atten¬ 
tion  on  his  arrival.  He  likewise  displayed  a  similar  care  for  the  nobles 
and  chief  men  in  the  royal  retinue  and  gave  them  many  proofs  of  his 
great  liberality.  In  short,  he  outdid  all  in  showing  honor  to  each  one 
according  to  his  rank  and  handled  everything  with  the  greatest  mag¬ 
nificence.  He  felt  a  lively  hope  that  with  the  assistance  of  the  king 
and  his  troops  he  would  be  able  to  subjugate  the  neighboring  cities, 
namely,  Aleppo,  Shayzar,  and  several  others.  Nor  would  this  hope 
have  been  futile,  could  he  have  induced  the  king  and  his  chief  men  to 
undertake  the  work.  For  the  arrival  of  King  Louis  had  brought  such 
fear  to  our  enemies  that  now  they  not  only  distrusted  their  own  strength 
but  even  despaired  of  life  itself.^^ 

Raymond  had  already  more  than  once  approached  the  king  privately 
in  regard  to  the  plans  which  he  had  in  mind.  Now  he  came  before 
the  members  of  the  king’s  suite  and  his  own  nobles  and  explained  with 
due  formality  how  his  request  could  be  accomplished  without  difficulty 
and  at  the  same  time  be  of  advantage  and  renown  to  themselves.  The 
king,  however,  ardently  desired  to  go  to  Jerusalem  to  fulfil  his  vows, 
and  his  determination  was  irrevocable.  When  Raymond  found  that 
he  could  not  induce  the  king  to  join  him,  his  attitude  changed.  Frus¬ 
trated  in  his  ambitious  designs,  he  began  to  hate  the  king’s  ways;  he 
openly  plotted  against  him  and  took  means  to  do  him  injury.  He  re¬ 
solved  also  to  deprive  him  of  his  wife,  either  by  force  or  by  secret 
intrigue.  The  queen  readily  assented  to  this  design,  for  she  was  a 
foolish  woman.^-^  Her  conduct  before  and  after  this  time  showed  her 
to  be,  as  we  have  said,  far  from  circumspect.  Contrary  to  her  royal 

The  prestige  of  the  king  of  the  Franks  is  attested  by  Qalanisi,  who  mentions  Con¬ 
rad  as  though  he  were  merely  a  noble  in  the  former’s  army  (see  Gibb,  Chronicle^  pp. 
280—8 1 ) . 

It  must  be  borne  in  mind  that,  when  William  wrote  this,  Eleanor  had  been  long 
separated  from  Louis  VII  and  had  taken  her  inheritance  from  Louis  of  France  to 
Henry  II  of  England.  Louis  and  Eleanor  were  estranged  when  they  returned  from 
the  crusade.  They  were  of  incompatible  temperament,  socially  active  and  pleasure- 
loving  Eleanor  contrasting  with  the  pious,  almost  puritanical  Louis.  Eleanor  was 
thrilled  by  the  elaborate  social  life  of  the  East,  both  at  Constantinople  and  at  Antioch. 
Whether  her  indiscretions  involved  any  more  than  overindulgence  in  this  social  life 
may  be  questioned.  It  became  customary  for  French  writers  to  place  the  more  sinister 
interpretation  upon  the  matter,  so  that  legends  soon  circulated  about  her  amours  with 
various  persons,  including  even  Saladin,  who  at  this  time  was  about  ten  years  of  age. 
The  sources  of  William’s  information  about  this  matter  were  obviously  French  (see 
R.KJ.y  p.  248,  note  3). 


BALDWIN  III  AND  MELISEND  i8i 

dlgnityj  she  disregarded  her  marriage  vows  and  was  unfaithful  to 
her  husband. 

As  soon  as  the  king  discovered  these  plots,  he  took  means  to  pro¬ 
vide  for  his  life  and  safety  by  anticipating  the  designs  of  the  prince. 
By  the  advice  of  his  chief  nobles,  he  hastened  his  departure  and  secretly 
left  Antioch  with  his  people.  Thus  the  splendid  aspect  of  his  affairs 
was  completely  changed,  and  the  end  was  quite  unlike  the  beginning. 
His  coming  had  been  attended  with  pomp  and  glory  j  but  fortune 
is  fickle,  and  his  departure  was  ignominious. 

Some  people  attribute  this  outcome  to  the  king’s  own  base  conduct. 
They  maintain  that  he  received  his  just  deserts  because  he  did  not 
accede  to  the  request  of  a  great  prince  from  whom  he  and  his  followers 
had  received  kind  treatment.  This  is  of  especial  interest,  because  these 
persons  constantly  affirm  that  if  the  king  would  have  devoted  himself 
to  that  work,  one  or  more  of  the  above-named  cities  might  easily  have 
been  taken. 

28.  The  winter  being  ovevy  Emferor  Conrad  arrives  in  Syria  by 
sea.  Count  Alfhonse  also  lands  at  the  city  of  Acre.  He  dies 
at  Caesarea. 

i 

Emperor  Conrad  passed  the  winter  in  the  royal  city.  He  was  treated 
with  the  utmost  courtesy  by  the  emperor  of  Constantinople,  as  befitted 
so  great  a  prince,  and  on  his  departure  received  many  and  splendid 
gifts.  Attended  by  his  escort  of  nobles,  he  set  sail  for  the  East  in  a  fleet 
which  was  provided  by  his  imperial  highness  and  landed  at  the  port 
of  Acre.  From  there  he  went  on  to  Jerusalem.  King  Baldwin  and 
Fulcher,  patriarch  of  precious  memory,  accompanied  by  the  clergy  and 
the  entire  people,  met  him  outside  the  city  and,  to  the  sound  of  hymns 
and  chants,  conducted  him  into  Jerusalem. 

About  that  same  time  there  also  landed  at  the  port  of  Acre  a  splendid 
and  illustrious  man,  Alphonse,  count  of  Toulouse.^^  He  was  a  son  of 
the  elder  Count  Raymond,  that  great  leader  who  rendered  such  im¬ 
portant  service  on  the  first  expedition.  Alphonse  was  eminent  because 
of  his  own  worth  but  still  more  so  because  of  the  precious  memory 
left  by  his  father.  While  on  his  way  to  Jerusalem  to  give  thanks  for 

Conrad  arrived  in  Jerusalem  about  the  second  week  in  April,  1148. 

See  Book  X,  note  54. 


i82 


BALDWIN  III  AND  MELISEND 


the  successful  accomplishment  of  his  pilgrimage,  he  stopped  at  the 
coast  city  of  Caesarea.  A  few  days  after  reaching  there,  however,  he 
fell  sick  and  died.  It  was  rumored  that  he  was  poisoned,  but  the  author 
of  the  fell  crime  was  not  discovered.  The  arrival  of  this  man  of  famous 
memory  had  been  anticipated  with  eagerness  by  the  entire  people,  for 
it  was  hoped  that  he  would  bring  to  the  kingdom  the  happy  and 
prosperous  omens  of  his  father. 

29.  'The  king  of  the  Franks  leaves  Antioch  and  proceeds  to 
J erusalem.  The  patriarch  of  J erusalem  is  sent  to  meet  him* 

Meanwhile,  news  was  received  at  Jerusalem  that  the  king  of  the 
Franks  had  left  Antioch  and  was  approaching  the  land  of  Tripoli. 
The  nobles  at  once  unanimously  resolved  to  send  Fulcher,  patriarch 
of  Jerusalem  of  precious  memory,  to  invite  the  king  with  fitting  words 
and  salutary  counsel  to  visit  the  kingdom.  For  it  was  feared  that  the 
prince  of  Antioch  might  become  reconciled  to  him  and  call  him  back 
or  that  he  might  be  detained  by  the  count  of  Tripoli,  his  kinsman.  In 
either  case,  the  desires  of  the  people  of  Jerusalem  would  be  hindered. 

The  possessions  of  the  Latins  in  the  East  were  divided  into  four 
principalities.  The  first  to  the  south  was  the  kingdom  of  Jerusalem, 
which  began  at  the  brook  between  Jubail  and  Beirut,  martime  cities  of 
the  province  of  Phoenicia,  and  ended  at  the  desert  which  is  beyond 
Daron.  The  second  toward  the  north  was  the  county  of  Tripoli,  which 
began  at  the  rivulet  just  mentioned  and  extended  to  another  stream 
between  Maraclea  and  Valenia,  likewise  maritime  cities.  The  third  was 
the  principality  of  Antioch.  This  began  at  the  last-named  rivulet  and 
extended  toward  the  west  to  Tarsus  in  Cilicia.  The  county  of  Edessa, 
the  fourth  division,  began  at  the  forest  called  Marrim  and  extended 
out  toward  the  east  beyond  the  Euphrates. 

From  the  first,  the  great  and  powerful  lords  of  these  countries  had 
cherished  the  hope  that  through  the  valiant  assistance  of  these  sover¬ 
eigns  who  were  coming  they  might  be  able  to  enlarge  their  own  terri¬ 
tories  and  extend  their  boundaries  immensely.  All  had  powerful  ene¬ 
mies  whose  hated  cities,  so  near  their  own  territories,  they  longed  to 
add  to  their  own  domains.  All  were  anxious  over  their  own  affairs  and 
eager  to  extend  their  lands.  Accordingly,  each  one,  intent  on  anticipat¬ 
ing  the  others,  sent  messengers  with  gifts  and  invitations  to  the  two 
monarchs.  Of  these,  the  hopes  of  the  king  and  people  of  Jerusalem 


BALDWIN  III  AND  MELISEND 


183 

seemed  most  likely  to  be  realized.  Love  and  reverent  devotion  for  the 
holy  places  naturally  drew  all  thither  j  moreover,  the  emperor  was 
now  with  them.  There  was  reason  to  believe  that  the  king  of  the  Franks 
would  also  hasten  thither,  both  to  accomplish  his  pilgrimage  and  to 
offer  his  prayers,  and  also  that  he  might  engage  in  some  work  for  the 
advancement  of  Christianity,  as  decided  by  common  counsel. 

The  chief  men  of  the  realm  greatly  feared  that  the  king  might  be 
detained  in  the  vicinity  of  Aleppo  by  the  prince,  to  whom  he  was 
closely  bound  by  the  ties  of  marriage  and  affection,  a  contingency  which 
seemed  quite  probable.  They  feared  also  that  the  queen  might  in¬ 
tervene,  They  therefore  sent  the  patriarch  to  meet  him. 

When  they  learned,  however,  that  the  king  and  the  prince  had 
parted  with  far  from  friendly  feelings,  they  felt  increased  hope  that 
he  would  leave  there  without  delay  and  come  to  Jerusalem.  Yet  to 
guard  against  the  tricks  of  fortune  and  to  anticipate  anything  that 
might  happen,  they  sent  the  venerable  patriarch  to  use  his  influence 
with  the  king.  Nor  was  this  hope  in  vain;  the  king  was  persuaded  by 
Fulcher’s  words  and  proceeded  at  once  to  Jerusalem.^^  All  the  clergy 
and  people  went  out  to  meet  him  on  his  arrival.  With  all  due  honor 
and  ceremony  he  was  welcomed  to  the  city  and,  to  the  accompaniment 
of  hymns  and  chants,  was  led  with  his  nobles  to  the  venerable  places. 

When  at  last  his  prayers  had  been  accomplished  according  to  custom, 
a  general  court  was  proclaimed  at  the  city  of  Acre  to  consider  the 
results  of  this  great  pilgrimage,  the  completion  of  such  great  labors, 
and  also  the  enlargement  of  the  realm.  On  the  appointed  day  they 
assembled  at  Acre,  as  had  been  arranged.  Then,  together  with  the 
nobles  of  the  realm  who  possessed  an  accurate  knowledge  of  affairs 
and  places,  they  entered  into  a  careful  consideration  as  to  what  plan 
was  most  expedient. 

William’s  clear  analysis  reveals  one  of  the  great  weaknesses  of  the  Latin  East, 
but  William  apparently  does  not  condemn  the  rivalry  so  long  as  Jerusalem  gains  by  it. 


HERE  ENDS  THE  SIXTEENTH  BOOK 


HERE  BEGINS  THE  SEVENTEENTH  BOOK 


THE  CAPTURE  OF  ASCALON  OFFSETS  THE 
FAILURE  OF  THE  SECOND  CRUSADE 

I.  A  general  council  is  held  at  the  city  of  Acre  on  the  coast. 

The  names  of  the  'princes  who  attended  are  given. 

It  seems  well  worth  while  and  quite  in  harmony  with  the  present  his¬ 
tory  that  the  names  of  the  nobles  who  were  present  at  the  council  just 
mentioned,  men  who  had  come  from  lands  of  great  importance,  should 
be  recorded  here  for  the  benefit  of  posterity.  Foremost  among  these 
was  the  famous  Conrad,  king  of  the  Teutons  and  emperor  of  the 
Romans.  He  was  accompanied  by  the  following  ecclesiastical  nobles 
of  his  court:  Otto,  bishop  of  Freising,  his  brother,  a  man  of  letters;  ^ 
Stephen,  bishop  of  Metz;  and  Henry,  bishop  of  Toul,  brother  of  Count 
Thierry  of  Flanders.  Theotwin,  bishop  of  Porto,  the  papal  legate,  a 
Teuton  by  birth,  also  accompanied  the  emperor’s  train  by  command  of 
Pope  Eugenius. 

Among  the  secular  princes  present  were  Henry,  duke  of  Austria, 
the  emperor’s  brother;  Duke  Guelf,  a  distinguished  and  powerful 
noble;  and  Frederick,  the  illustrious  duke  of  the  Swabians  and  Vin- 
delicians  [probably  Bavarians],  son  of  the  emperor’s  eldest  brother. 
The  last-named  prince  was  a  young  man  of  remarkable  character  who 
later  succeeded  his  uncle  Conrad  and  now  rules  the  Roman  Empire 
with  vigor  and  courage.  There  were  present  also  Hermann,  margrave 
of  Verona;  Berthold  of  Andechs,  later  duke  of  Bavaria;  [the  elder] 
William,  margrave  of  Montferrat,  the  emperor’s  brother-in-law;  and 
Guy,  count  of  Blandras,  whose  wife  was  the  sister  of  the  margrave  just 
named.  The  two  nobles  last  mentioned,  both  great  and  distinguished 


^  Otto,  bishop  of  Freising,  the  great  German  historian  of  the  twelfth  century,  was 
a  half  brother  of  Conrad  III.  Their  mother,  widow  of  Conrad’s  father,  married  the 
duke  of  Austria.  Otto,  one  of  the  younger  members  of  a  very  large  family,  had  been 
destined  for  an  ecclesiastical  career.  When  he  finished  his  studies  at  Paris  he  was  con¬ 
verted  to  the  monastic  life  and  entered  the  new  Cistercian  order.  He  became  an  abbot 
and  later  was  chosen  bishop.  He  accompanied  Conrad  on  the  crusade  and  was  in 
charge  of  one  of  the  detachments  on  the  march  across  Asia  Minor.  His  account  of  the 
crusade,  however,  is  very  meager,  consisting  chiefly  of  incidental  mention  in  his  two 
chief  historical  works,  the  Chronicle  and  the  Deeds  of  Frederick  /. 


CAPTURE  OF  ASCALON  185 

princes,  were  from  Lombardy.  Other  noted  men  of  high  rank,  whose 
names  and  titles  we  do  not  recall,  also  attended.^ 

Louis,  most  pious  king  of  the  Franks,  of  famous  memory  in  the 
Lord,  was  also  present.  With  him  were  Godfrey,  bishop  of  Langresj 
Arnulf,  bishop  of  Lisieuxj  Guy  of  Florence,  cardinal-priest  of  the 
church  of  Rome,  with  title  St.  Chrysogonus,  the  legate  of  the  apostolic 
see  j  Robert,  count  of  Perche,  the  king’s  brother  j  and  Henry,  count  of 
Troyes,  son  of  the  elder  Count  Theobald  and  also  son-in-law  of  the 
king,  a  young  man  of  fine  character.  With  the  king  also  were  Thierry, 
the  magnificent  count  of  Flanders,  brother-in-law  of  the  king  of  Jeru¬ 
salem  3  and  Ives  de  Nesle  from  Soissons,  a  wise  and  loyal  man.  Many 
other  important  nobles  of  high  rank  were  also  present.  All  are  worthy 
of  remembrance,  but  since  it  would  take  too  long  to  record  them  here, 
their  names  are  intentionally  omitted.^ 

From  our  own  lands  there  were  present  Baldwin,  king  of  Jerusalem, 
a  youth  of  great  promise,  and  his  mother,  a  wise  and  circumspect 
woman,  strong  of  heart  and  not  inferior  in  wisdom  to  any  prince  what¬ 
soever.  They  were  accompanied  by  the  Patriarch  Fulcher  j  Baldwin, 
archbishop  of  Caesarea^  Robert,  archbishop  of  Nazareth  j  Rorgo, 
bishop  of  Acre  5  Bernard,  bishop  of  Sidon^  William,  bishop  of  Beirut  j 
Adam,  bishop  of  Banyas  j  Gerald,  bishop  of  Bethlehem  j  Robert,  master 
of  the  Knights  of  the  Temple;  and  Raymond,  master  of  the  Hospital.^ 
Among  the  lay  nobles  were:  Manasses,  the  royal  constable;  Philip 
of  Nablus;  Elinandus  of  Tiberias;  Gerard  of  Sidon;  Walter  of  Caes¬ 
area;  Payens,  lord  of  the  country  which  lies  beyond  the  Jordan;  the 
elder  Balian;  Humphrey  of  Toron;  Guy  of  Beirut,  and  many  others. 
To  name  each  one  individually  would  take  far  too  long.  All  these  great 


^  William’s  list  of  the  German  dignitaries  is,  as  he  confesses,  not  complete.  The 
^‘Blandras”  is  probably  Biandrate  in  Italy,  Rohricht  has  added  many  names  to  this  list 
(see  R.  Rohricht,  Die  Deutschen  im  Heiligen  Land^  pp.  27—41,  and  Geschichte  des 
Konigreichs  Jerusaleniy  iioo—i2giy  p.  249). 

®  The  author’s  greater  familiarity  with  the  French  is  here  definitely  stated.  It  is 
also  evident  in  the  greater  amount  and  accuracy  of  his  information  about  them.  This 
fact  led  to  the  belief  that  he  had  used  a  French  source,  the  Gesta  Ludoviciy  for  his 
information.  The  conclusion  of  the  scholars’  debate  on  this  question,  however,  is  that 
the  Gesta  Ludovici  derived  this  portion  of  its  chronicle  from  William’s  account  (see 
Introduction,  note  4). 

^  The  archbishop  of  Tyre  is  missing  from  this  nearly  complete  list  of  the  prelates 
of  Jerusalem.  Ralph,  the  royal  chancellor,  w^ho  claimed  the  office,  had  not  been  con¬ 
firmed  by  the  pope.  It  is  not  improbable  that  William,  then  a  theological  student 
about  eighteen  years  old,  was  himself  present  at  Acre.  It  is  unfortunate  that  he  did 
not  report  more  of  the  discussion  at  the  council  in  light  of  the  later  events. 


i86 


CAPTURE  OF  ASCALON 


men  had  assembled,  as  we  have  said,  at  the  city  of  Acre  for  the  pur¬ 
pose  of  considering,  first  of  all,  the  best  time  and  place  when,  by  the 
will  of  God,  they  might  endeavor  to  enlarge  the  kingdom  and  add 
to  the  glory  of  the  Christian  name. 

2.  They  decide  to  lay  siege  to  the  city  of  Damascus  and  march 
thither  as  agreed  upon. 

Accordingly,  the  matter  was  thoroughly  discussed.  Various  opinions 
of  diverse  factions  were  offered  and  arguments  pro  and  con  presented, 
as  is  customary  in  matters  of  such  importance.  At  last  it  was  agreed  by 
all  that  under  the  circumstances  it  would  be  best  to  besiege  Damascus, 
a  city  of  great  menace  to  us.  When  this  decision  was  finally  reached, 
the  herald  was  ordered  to  proclaim  that  upon  the  appointed  day  all 
with  one  accord  must  be  ready  to  lead  their  troops  to  those  parts.  Ac¬ 
cordingly,  the  entire  military  strength  of  the  realm,  both  cavalry  and 
infantry,  natives  and  pilgrims  alike,  was  mustered.  The  two  great 
sovereigns,  beloved  of  God,  also  arrived  with  their  forces.  Then,  on 
the  twenty-fifth  day  of  May,  in  the  year  1147  of  the  Incarnation  of 
our  Lord,  led  by  the  Cross  of  Salvation,  the  united  armies  proceeded, 
as  had  been  arranged,  to  the  city  of  Tiberias.^  Thence,  the  entire  host 
was  conducted  by  the  shortest  route  along  the  sea  of  Galilee  to  Banyas, 
which  is  Caesarea  Philippi.  Here  the  leaders  conferred  with  persons 
well  acquainted  with  the  situation  of  Damascus  and  the  adjacent  coun¬ 
try.  Then,  after  consulting  with  their  own  leading  men,  they  decided 
that  the  best  way  to  blockade  Damascus  was  first  of  all  to  take  the 
orchards  which  surrounded  the  greater  part  of  the  city  and  afforded 
it  much  protection.  When  these  had  been  seized  the  city  itself  could 
undoubtedly  be  easily  taken. 

In  pursuance  of  this  plan,  therefore,  they  resumed  the  march.  Cross¬ 
ing  famous  Mt.  Lebanon  which  lies  between  Caesarea  Philippi  and 
Damascus,  they  descended  into  the  plain  at  the  village  of  Daria,  four 
or  five  miles  from  the  city.  From  this  place  the  metropolis  and  the 
surrounding  plain  could  be  easily  seen. 

^^The  year  should,  of  course,  be  1148.  It  is  not  certain  whether  this  is  merely  £. 
copyist’s  error  or  a  mistake  in  William’s  chronology. 


CAPTURE  OF  ASCALON 


187 


3.  The  situation  of  Damascus  is  described. 

Damascus  is  the  largest  city  of  Lesser  Syria,  sometimes  called  also  the 
Phoenicia  of  Lebanon.  It  is  also  the  metropolis  of  that  region,  for,  as 
we  read,  ^^the  head  of  Syria  is  Damascus.’’  The  name  of  the  city  is 
derived  from  its  reputed  founder,  a  servant  of  Abraham,  and  is,  being 
interpreted,  the  bloody  city  or  the  city  full  of  blood.  It  lies  in  a  plain 
which  is  arid  and  sterile  except  as  it  is  irrigated  by  ancient  canals  which 
bring  the  water  from  above  for  its  benefit.  From  a  neighboring  moun¬ 
tain  ridge  in  the  upper  part  of  that  region,  a  river  descends  and  is  re¬ 
ceived  in  canals,  whence  its  waters  can  be  led  at  will  through  the  plain 
and  distributed  over  the  various  parts  of  the  lands  below  to  fertilize 
the  sterile  soil.  Since  the  supply  is  very  abundant,  the  river  also  waters 
the  orchards  on  both  banks,  which  are  planted  with  fruit  trees,  and 
then  continues  on  its  course  past  the  eastern  wall  of  the  city. 

At  Daria,  since  the  city  was  now  so  near,  the  sovereigns  drew  up 
their  forces  in  battle  formation  and  assigned  the  legions  to  their  proper 
places  in  the  order  of  march.  For,  if  they  advanced  without  method, 
quarrels  might  arise  which  would  hinder  the  work  before  them. 

Because  of  its  supposed  familiarity  with  the  country,  the  division 
led  by  the  king  of  Jerusalem  was,  by  the  common  decision  of  the 
princes,  directed  to  lead  the  way  and  open  a  path  for  the  legions  fol¬ 
lowing.  To  the  king  of  the  Franks  and  his  army  was  assigned  the 
second  place  or  center,  that  they  might  aid  those  ahead  if  need  arose. 
By  the  same  authority,  the  emperor  was  to  hold  the  third  or  rear  posi¬ 
tion,  in  readiness  to  resist  the  enemy  if,  perchance,  an  attack  should  be 
made  from  behind,  and  thus  to  guard  the  troops  ahead  from  surprise 
in  the  rear.  When  the  three  armies  had  been  arranged  in  this  strategic 
order,  they  moved  the  camp  forward  and  endeavored  to  approach  close 
to  the  city. 

On  the  west,  the  direction  from  which  our  army  was  approaching, 
and  also  on  the  north,  the  orchards  stretched  out  five  miles  or  more  in 
the  direction  of  Lebanon  and,  like  a  dense,  gloomy  forest,  encircled 
the  city  far  and  wide.  To  indicate  the  limits  of  each  orchard  and  also 
to  prevent  trespassers  entering  at  will,  these  groves  are  enclosed  by 
walls  of  mud,  for  stone  is  scarce  in  that  region.  These  enclose  and  pro¬ 
tect  the  orchards  in  such  a  way  that  the  holding  of  each  owner  is  clearly 

®  Is.  7 :  8. 


i88 


CAPTURE  OF  ASCALON 


defined.  Paths  and  public  ways  are  left  free,  narrow  to  be  sure,  yet 
wide  enough  to  allow  the  gardeners  and  caretakers  to  pass  through 
them  with  the  pack  animals  which  carry  the  fruit  to  the  city. 

These  orchards  are  of  the  greatest  protection  to  the  city.  The  vast 
number  of  trees  planted  close  together  and  the  narrow  paths  made  it 
difficult — in  fact,  well  nigh  impossible — for  anyone  to  approach  Da¬ 
mascus  from  that  side.  Yet,  from  the  very  first,  our  leaders  had  de¬ 
termined  to  lead  the  army  through  the  orchards  and  in  this  way  open 
an  approach  to  the  city.  There  were  two  reasons  for  this:  first,  because 
after  the  most  strongly  fortified  places  on  which  the  people  of  Damascus 
placed  their  greatest  hope  had  been  taken,  all  else  would  seem  light 
and  easily  accomplished  3  secondly,  because  they  wished  to  give  the 
troops  the  benefit  of  the  fruit  and  the  water. 

The  king  of  Jerusalem,  accordingly,  was  the  first  to  lead  his  men 
through  those  narrow  orchard  paths.  The  army  advanced  with  extreme 
difficulty,  however,  sometimes  hindered  by  the  narrow  ways  and  again 
harassed  by  the  wiles  of  the  enemy  who  lay  hidden  in  the  copses.  Oc¬ 
casionally,  it  was  even  necessary  to  engage  in  open  conflict,  for  the  foe 
had  already  blocked  the  approach  and  seized  the  winding  paths.  The 
people  of  the  city  had  come  out  into  the  orchards  as  with  one  accord, 
that  they  might  try  to  stop  the  passage  of  the  army,  both  from  cover 
and  by  open  attack. 

Within  the  orchards  themselves,  moreover,  rose  high  buildings  well 
defended  by  men  whose  possessions  lay  close  by  and  who  were  de¬ 
termined  to  fight  for  them.  From  these  vantage  points  they  kept  up 
a  constant  downpour  of  arrows  and  other  missiles  which  effectually 
protected  the  gardens  and  prevented  all  approach.  Arrows  shot  from 
a  distance  also  made  the  public  thoroughfares  very  unsafe  for  travel. 
Nor  did  these  formidable  measures  against  our  advance  proceed  from 
one  part  of  the  gardens  only;  from  every  direction  there  was  equal 
danger  for  any  incautious  passer-by.  Peril  of  instant  death  from  an¬ 
other  source  was  also  to  be  feared.  Along  the  wall  inside  lurked  men 
armed  with  lances  who,  themselves  unseen,  could  look  out  through 
small  peepholes  carefully  arranged  in  the  walls  and  stab  the  passer-by 
from  the  side.  It  is  said  that  many  perished  miserably  in  this  way  that 
day.  Innumerable  other  dangers  of  various  kinds  also  beset  all  who 
tried  to  traverse  those  narrow  ways. 


CAPTURE  OF  ASCALON 


4.  The  Christians  force  their  way  into  the  orchards  andy  in 
sfite  of  the  enemy^s  effortSy  take  fosses sion  of  the  river  with 
a  strong  hand.  A  remarkable  feat  of  the  emferory  well 
worthy  of  wonder y  is  described. 

The  Christians,  well  aware  of  the  situation,  pressed  on  all  the  more 
fiercely.  They  broke  down  the  barricades  by  force  and  eagerly  took 
possession  of  the  orchards.  All  persons  found  within  the  enclosures  or 
in  the  houses  there  were  either  put  to  the  sword  or  taken  captive.  On 
learning  this,  the  townspeople  who  had  come  out  to  help  defend  the 

I 

orchards  departed  in  terror  lest  the  same  fate  should  overtake  them 
and  fled  to  the  city  in  crowds.  So,  since  the  enemy  had  been  either 
routed  or  slain,  our  troops  entered  without  further  opposition. 

It  was  realized  that  the  Christians  would  presently  advance  from 
the  orchards  to  besiege  the  city.  Accordingly,  the  cavalry  forces  of 
Damascus  and  of  their  allies  who  had  come  to  help  them  hastened  to 
the  river  which  flows  by  the  city.  By  using  their  bows  and  ballistae  they 
hoped  to  keep  the  weary  soldiers  from  the  river  and  to  prevent  them 
from  relieving  their  intense  thirst  by  means  of  its  eagerly  desired 
waters.  On  hearing  that  the  river  was  so  near,  the  Christians  had,  in¬ 
deed,  hurried  thither,  intent  on  satisfying  the  cruel  thirst  which  their 
strenuous  labors  and  the  clouds  of  dust  raised  by  the  feet  of  horses 
and  men  had  induced.  The  sight  of  the  large  forces  massed  on  the  river 
bank  caused  them  to  halt  for  a  little.  Soon,  however,  they  rallied. 
Necessity  furnished  them  courage  and  boldness  j  once  and  again  they 
strove  to  gain  the  river  but  without  success. 

While  the  king  and  his  knights  were  exerting  themselves  thus  to  no 
purpose,  the  emperor,  in  command  of  the  forces  following,  demanded 
to  know  why  the  army  did  not  advance.  He  was  told  that  the  enemy 
was  in  possession  of  the  river  and  would  not  allow  our  forces  to  pass. 
Enraged  at  this  news,  Conrad  with  his  knights  galloped  swiftly  for¬ 
ward  through  the  king’s  lines  and  reached  the  fighters  who  were  try¬ 
ing  to  win  the  river.  Here  all  leaped  down  from  their  horses  and 
became  foot  soldiers,  as  is  the  custom  of  the  Teutons  when  a  desperate 
crisis  occurs.  Holding  their  shields  before  them,  they  engaged  the 
enemy  in  a  hand-to-hand  fight  with  swords.  The  Damascenes  at  first 
resisted  bravely,  but  soon,  unable  to  sustain  the  onslaught,  they  aban¬ 
doned  the  river  and  fled  to  the  city  with  all  possible  haste. 


CAPTURE  OF  ASCALON 


190 

During  this  engagement,  the  emperor  is  reported  to  have  performed 
a  memorable  feat.  He  is  said  to  have  slain  in  a  most  remarkable  way  a 
Turkish  knight  who  was  making  a  strenuous  and  courageous  resistance. 

With  one  blow  of  the  sword,  he  severed  from  the  body  of  his  enemy 

■ 

the  head  and  neck,  the  left  shoulder  with  the  arm  attached,  and  also 
a  part  of  the  side.  This  indeed  caused  such  terror,  not  only  to  those 
citizens  who  witnessed  the  feat  but  even  to  those  who  merely  heard 
the  story  from  others,  that  they  lost  all  hope  of  resisting  and  despaired 
even  of  life  itself.'^ 

5.  The  citizens y  in  their  despair y  meditate  flight.  They  bribe 
some  of  the  Christian  leaders y  at  whose  instigation  the  army 
is  transferred  to  the  opposite  side  of  the  city. 

So  the  river  was  won  and  the  bank  freely  conceded.  The  Christians 
now  encamped  in  widespread  ranks  around  the  city  and,  without  oppo¬ 
sition,  enjoyed  at  pleasure  the  river  and  the  orchards  thus  won  by 
force.  The  citizens  were  overwhelmed  with  astonishment  at  the  num¬ 
ber  and  valor  of  the  Christians.  They  began  to  doubt  whether  their 
strength  was  sujSicient  to  withstand  them,  and  in  terror  lest  their  foes 
should  suddenly  fall  upon  them,  they  took  counsel  together  and,  with 
that  cleverness  which  ever  attends  those  in  adverse  and  distressing 
circumstances,  resorted  to  desperate  measures.  With  tall  beams  of  im¬ 
mense  size  they  barricaded  all  the  streets  on  the  side  of  the  city  where 
our  camp  was  located,  for  their  only  hope  lay  in  the  chance  that  they 
might  escape  in  the  opposite  direction  with  their  wives  and  children, 
while  the  Christians  were  engaged  in  tearing  down  these  barriers. 

To  all  appearance  it  seemed  certain  that,  if  divine  power  was  pro¬ 
pitious,  the  city  would  soon  be  taken  by  the  Christians.  But  He,  who 
is  ^^terrible  in  his  doing  toward  the  children  of  men,”  ®  judged  other¬ 
wise.  The  city  was  in  desperate  straits,  her  citizens  had  lost  all  hope 
of  resistance  and  were  preparing  to  leave  with  all  their  effects  in  the 
hope  of  saving  their  lives.  At  this  crisis,  however,  in  punishment  for 

^  This  feat  recalls  the  similar  feat  of  Godfrey  at  the  siege  of  Antioch.  Both  appear 
legendary.  Qalanisi,  who  was  in  Damascus  during  the  siege,  heard  nothing  of  it  (see 
H,  A.  R.  Gibb,  trails..  The  Damascus  Chromcley  p.  283).  Rohricht,  however,  is  dis¬ 
posed  to  accept  it,  regarding  the  feat  as  another  example  of  the  proverbial  ^‘Schwaben- 
streich”  (see  R.  K.  7.,  p.  252,  note  i). 

®  Ps.  66:5. 


CAPTURE  OF  ASCALON 


our  sins,  the  Damascenes  began  to  work  upon  the  cupidity  of  some  of 
our  people.  By  offering  inducements,  they  attempted  to  capture  the 
hearts  of  those  whose  bodily  strength  they  could  not  hope  to  overcome. 
Skilful  arguments  led  certain  of  our  nobles  to  assume  the  role  of  the 
traitor  Judas  and  induced  them,  on  assurance  of  receiving  a  great  sum 
of  money  already  collected,  to  endeavor  to  raise  the  siege.  Led  on  by 
avarice,  the  root  of  all  evil,  these  men  allowed  themselves  to  be  so 
corrupted  by  bribes  and  promises  that  they  descended  into  the  depths 
of  crime.  Their  wicked  suggestions  persuaded  the  king  and  the  pilgrim 
princes,  who  fully  relied  upon  their  loyalty  and  assiduity,  to  leave  the 
orchards  and  move  the  armies  to  the  opposite  side  of  the  city.  In  order 
to  conceal  their  guilt  under  some  plausible  pretext,  they  said  that  on 
the  opposite  side  of  the  city  which  faced  south  and  east  there  were 
no  protecting  orchards  and  neither  river  nor  moat  to  hinder  the  ap¬ 
proach  to  the  fortifications.  The  low  wall,  built  of  unbaked  bricks,  they 
declared,  could  scarcely  sustain  the  first  attack.  There  would  be  little 
need  of  machines  or  strenuous  efforts  on  that  side,  for  the  wall  would 
fall  at  the  first  attempt  and  it  would  not  be  difficult  to  force  a  passage 
into  the  city.  Their  sole  purpose  in  presenting  these  arguments  was 
to  cause  the  removal  of  the  army  from  its  present  position,  for  here 
the  city  was  particularly  hard  pressed  and  powerless  to  hold  out,  while 
on  the  other  side  the  siege  could  not  possibly  be  long  maintained.  This 
specious  talk  was  believed  by  the  kings  and  all  the  principal  leaders 
of  the  united  host.  The  position  which  had  been  won  with  great  toil 
and  loss  of  men  was  abandoned,  and  under  the  direction  of  the  traitors 
all  the  legions  were  moved,  and  camp  was  established  on  the  opposite 
side  of  the  city. 

They  soon  perceived,  however,  that  this  position  was  far  away  from 
the  abundant  fruit  and  the  convenient  supply  of  water,  and  as  food 
was  already  beginning  to  fail  they  realized  that  treachery  had  been  at 
work.  Then,  all  too  late,  they  began  to  murmur  that  they  had  been 
maliciously  induced  to  move  from  that  most  advantageous  position.^ 


^  This  maneuver  as  here  described  does  little  credit  to  the  intelligence  of  the  leaders 
of  the  expedition.  None  of  the  Arab  writers  mention  such  a  shift  of  the  Christian 
camp.  Qalanisi,  the  best  authority  on  the  siege,  gives  a  day-by-day  description  of  the 
battles  from  Saturday  to  Thursday  with  a  statement  of  the  location.  According  to 
him,  the  Christians  remained  in  the  same  general  area  until  the  day  when  they  with¬ 
drew  from  the  siege  entirely  (Gibb,  Chronicle^  pp,  28 2— 87),  Stevenson  has  refused 
to  accept  William’s  statement  about  the  change. 


192 


CAPTURE  OF  ASCALON 


6.  Food  jails  in  the  Christian  camf.  The  wickedness  of  the 
traitors  is  revealed.  The  siege  is  raised  and  our  feofle  re¬ 
turn  home. 

Food  now  began  to  fail  in  the  camp.  Before  setting  out  on  the  cam¬ 
paign,  the  Christians  had  been  led  to  believe  that  the  city  would  be 
taken  without  delay,  and  hence  supplies  for  a  few  days  only  had  been 
brought.  This  was  especially  the  case  with  the  pilgrims,  and  for  it  they 
could  not  be  blamed,  since  they  had  no  knowledge  of  the  country.  They 
had  been  persuaded  to  believe  that  Damascus  would  be  easily  taken  at 
the  first  attack  j  in  the  meantime,  even  if  all  other  food  should  be  lack¬ 
ing,  they  had  been  assured  that  a  vast  army  could  be  fed  on  the  fruit 
which  could  be  had  for  nothing.  Great  doubt  and  perplexity  assailed 
the  Christians  in  this  emergency.  Consultations  were  held  openly  and 
in  private  as  to  what  course  should  be  taken.  To  return  to  the  position 
they  had  left  seemed  difficult,  in  fact,  impossible.  For  as  soon  as  the 
Christians  departed,  the  enemy,  their  end  accomplished,  immediately 
entered  in  and  established  even  stronger  defenses  than  before.  The 
roads  by  which  the  Christians  had  previously  entered  were  now  barri¬ 
caded  with  immense  beams  and  heavy  masses  of  rocks,  and  a  large 
body  of  archers,  located  there,  now  prevented  all  possibility  of  entrance. 
On  the  other  hand,  to  make  the  attack  from  the  present  position  of  the 
camp  would  require  some  delay,  a  matter  which  the  inadequacy  of  the 
food  supply  would  not  permit. 

The  pilgrim  princes  therefore  took  counsel  with  one  another.  All 
too  clearly  they  now  perceived  the  treachery  of  those  to  whose  loyalty 
they  had  entrusted  their  lives  and  interests  and  abhorred  the  perfidy 
by  which  they  had  been  deceived.  Convinced  that  their  undertaking 
had  no  chance  of  success,  they  determined  to  abandon  it  and  return 
home.  Thus,  because  of  our  sins,  the  kings  and  princes  who  had 
gathered  in  untold  numbers  were  compelled  to  retreat  without  ac¬ 
complishing  their  purpose.  Covered  with  confusion  and  fear,  they 
returned  to  the  kingdom  over  the  same  road  by  which  they  had  come. 
Henceforward,  as  long  as  they  remained  in  the  Orient,  and,  indeed, 
ever  after,  they  looked  askance  on  all  the  ways  of  our  leaders.  They 
justly  declined  all  their  plans  as  treacherous  and  showed  utter  indiffer¬ 
ence  about  the  affairs  of  the  kingdom.  Even  when  permitted  to  return 
to  their  own  lands,  the  memory  of  the  wrongs  which  they  had  suffered 


CAPTURE  OF  ASCALON  193 

I 

still  rankled,  and  they  regarded  with  abhorrence  the  wicked  conduct 
of  those  nobles.  Not  only  was  this  true  in  regard  to  themselves,  but 
their  influence  caused  others  who  had  not  been  present  there  to  slacken 
in  love  toward  the  kingdom.  As  a  result,  fewer  people,  and  those  less 
fervent  in  spirit,  undertook  this  pilgrimage  thereafter.  Moreover,  even 
to  the  present  day,  those  who  do  come  fear  lest  they  be  caught  in  the 
same  toils  and  hence  make  as  short  a  stay  as  possible. 

7.  Various  opinions  are  expressed  as  to  the  responsibility  for  this 
great  treachery.  It  is  proposed  to  lay  siege  to  Ascalon  a  second 
timey  but  the  attempt  is  unsuccessfuL 

I  RECALL  that  I  have  often  interviewed  wise  men  and  those  whose 
memory  of  those  times  is  still  fresh,  particularly  with  a  view  to  using 
the  information  thus  obtained  in  the  present  history,  I  endeavored  to 
learn  the  reason  for  this  great  wrong;  who  were  the  instigators  of  such 
treachery;  and  how  so  detestable  a  crime  could  have  been  carried 
through.  I  found  that  the  reports  vary  greatly  in  regard  to  this  matter. 
Some  think  that  a  certain  act  of  the  count  of  Flanders  was  responsible; 
for,  as  has  been  said,  he  was  with  the  army  on  this  expedition. After 
our  legions  arrived  before  Damascus,  when  the  orchards  and  the  river 
had  already  been  seized  by  force  and  the  city  lay  under  siege,  he  is  said 
to  have  approached  each  of  the  kings  separately,  one  after  another,  and 
urgently  demanded  that  the  city  when  taken  be  given  to  him.  It  is  said 
that  this  was  granted.  Although  some  of  the  great  lords  of  our  realm 
gave  their  consent,  yet  others,  on  hearing  of  it,  were  indignant.  They 
resented  the  fact  that  this  great  prince,  whose  own  possessions  should 

William  here  reveals  one  of  his  favorite  methods  of  obtaining  information.  Note 
his  unwillingness  to  accept  one  account  alone  or  even  to  indicate  a  strong  personal 
preference.  The  failure  of  this  crusade  was  a  great  blow  to  the  expectations  which 
Europe  had  entertained  for  it,  not  only  because  it  was  led  by  two  great  monarchs, 
but  even  more  because  it  had  been  sponsored  by  Bernard  of  Clairvaux,  who  was  already 
widely  regarded  as  a  saint.  Only  treachery  would  satisfy  the  latter^s  many  friends 
as  the  explanation  of  the  failure.  William  apparently  shared  the  feeling  (see  E.  Va- 
candard,  Vie  de  Saint  Bernard^  abbe  de  Clairvaux) , 

Theodore,  or  Thierry,  of  Flanders  visited  the  Holy  Land  at  least  three  times 
(1137,  1148,  and  1157),  each  time  accompanied  by  a  considerable  force  which  did 
some  fighting  for  the  Latin  states.  Perhaps  this  led  to  the  impression  that  he  desired 
to  gain  territory  there  for  himself.  His  wife,  Sibylla,  it  must  be  remembered,  was  a 
daughter  of  King  Fulk  and  therefore  half  sister  of  young  Baldwin  III.  According 
to  Robert  of  Torigni,  she  ultimately  entered  a  convent  in  the  Holy  Land.  There  is 
no  real  basis  for  the  charge  here  made.  It  does  however  reflect  a  chronic  suspicion 
which  the  Latin  nobles  in  the  East  felt  toward  the  nobles  from  the  West. 


CAPTURE  OF  ASCALON 


194 

have  sufficed  for  him  and  who  was  seemingly  fighting  without  recom¬ 
pense  for  the  glory  of  the  Lord,  insisted  that  so  large  a  portion  of  the 
kingdom  be  given  to  him.  They  themselves  were  hoping  that  whatever 
increase  accrued  to  the  realm  through  the  valiant  efforts  of  these  princes 
might  be  used  to  enlarge  their  own  possessions.  Actuated  by  resent¬ 
ment,  therefore,  they  stooped  to  this  wicked  course,  for  they  preferred 
that  the  Damascenes  should  keep  their  city  rather  than  to  see  it  given 
to  the  count.  It  seemed  utterly  unjust  that  they  who  had  endured  un¬ 
told  privations  and  whose  lives  had  been  spent  in  fighting  for  the  king¬ 
dom  should  now  be  passed  over  without  hope  of  reward,  while  others 
who  had  only  recently  come  should  gather  in  the  fruits  which  they 
themselves  had  earned  by  long-continued  labor. 

Others  say  that  the  prince  of  Antioch  used  all  his  Influence  to  cause 
the  king’s  enterprise  to  fail.  He  was  incensed  because  the  latter  had 
parted  from  him  in  anger  and,  despite  many  kindnesses,  had  not  as¬ 
sisted  him  in  any  way.  Accordingly,  he  prevailed  on  some  of  the  nobles 
in  the  army  to  manage  affairs  in  such  a  way  that  the  king  was  com¬ 
pelled  to  abandon  the  project  and  retire  ingloriously. 

Still  other  stories  are  to  the  effect  that  nothing  happened  except  that 
the  enemy  bribed  certain  persons  by  a  vast  sum  of  money  to  bring 
about  this  great  disaster.  They  still  speak  of  it  as  marvellous  that  after¬ 
wards  all  this  money  so  wickedly  obtained  was  found  to  be  spurious 
and  utterly  worthless. 

Thus  opinions  differed  as  to  the  responsibility  for  this  detestable 
act,  but  I  have  been  unable  to  obtain  definite  information  on  the  sub¬ 
ject.  Whoever  the  guilty  ones  are,  however,  they  may  be  sure  that 
in  due  time  they  will  obtain  the  reward  which  they  justly  deserve,  un¬ 
less,  indeed,  they  seek  forgiveness,  when  God,  in  His  gracious  mercy, 
may  grant  them  pardon. 

This  charge  also  appears  somewhat  legendary.  Two  later  Syrian  writers  claimed 
that  Elinandus  or  Helinandus  of  Tiberias  was  the  guilty  person,  and  that  the  fifty 
thousand  gold  pieces  which  he  received  from  Damascus  were  later  found  to  be  spurious. 
It  must  be  put  to  William’s  credit  that  he  refused  to  attach  any  name  to  the  charge. 

The  charge  of  treachery  for  the  failure  of  the  siege  of  Damascus  and  of  the 
Second  Crusade  was  also  made  by  later  writers  against  the  Hospitallers,  the  Templars, 
and  even  Baldwin  III,  none  of  whom  William  includes  in  his  list.  One  or  two.  very 
important  facts  have  been  regularly  overlooked  in  the  discussion.  The  army  that  be¬ 
sieged  Damascus  was  not  a  very  large  one,  probably  no  larger  than  the  one  which 
had  attempted  the  same  task  twenty  years  before.  There  were  more  and  greater  names 
in  the  army,  each  betokening  a  large  following  in  the  West,  but  not  here,  because 
most  of  the  leaders  had  come  by  boat  from  Attalia  or  other  ports  of  Asia  Minor, 


CAPTURE  OF  ASCALON 


195 


Thus  it  wasj  as  has  been  related,  that  our  people  returned  without 
glory.  The  Damascenes  rejoiced  in  their  departure,  for  fear  of  the 
Christians  had  lain  heavy  upon  them.  As  for  our  people,  on  the  con¬ 
trary,  ^^my  harp  also  is  turned  to  mourning,  and  my  organ  into  the  voice 
of  them  that  weep.” 

On  returning  to  the  kingdom,  the  kings  again  called  an  assembly  of 
the  nobles  and  tried,  but  in  vain,  to  arrange  for  undertaking  some 
other  work  which  would  render  their  memory  glorious  in  the  eyes  of 
posterity.  It  was  suggested  by  some  that  they  lay  siege  to  Ascalon, 
which  was  still  in  the  hands  of  the  infidels.  Since  this  city  lay  nearly  in 
the  center  of  the  kingdom,  everything  necessary  could  easily  be  trans¬ 
ported  thither  and  it  would  be  a  short  and  easy  task,  they  maintained, 
to  restore  it  to  the  Christian  faith.  Many  similar  proposals  were  made, 
but  each  was  abandoned  as  the  first  had  been,  and  almost  before  it  was 
conceived  it  was  rejected.  For  the  Lord  in  His  wrath  seemed  to  render 
all  their  undertakings  of  no  avail. 

8.  The  E7nfe7’or  Conrad  returns  to  his  oiun  la?idy  but  the  king 
of  the  Franks  tarries  in 

The  Emperor  Conrad  now  perceived  that  the  Lord  had  withdrawn 
his  favor  from  him  and  had  denied  him  the  privilege  of  taking  further 
part  in  the  affairs  of  the  kingdom.  He  therefore  ordered  his  ships  to 
be  made  ready,  said  farewell,  and  returned  to  his  own  realm.  Within  a 
few  years  after  this,  he  died  at  Bamberg  and  was  there  buried  with 
much  magnificence  in  the  great  church.  He  was  a  man  of  fine  appear¬ 
ance,  pious  and  merciful,  distinguished  for  his  lofty  spirit  and  for  his 
wide  experience  in  military  affairs.  His  life  and  character  were  ex¬ 
emplary  in  every  respect,  and  his  memory  is  held  in  benediction.^*'' 
Frederick,  the  illustrious  duke  of  Swabia,  who  had  been  the  in¬ 


while  their  less  fortunate  followers  had  to  follow  the  land  route  and  were  cut  down 
by  famine,  thirst,  and  Turks.  The  army  which  besieged  Damascus,  therefore,  con¬ 
sisted  of  too  many  officers  and  not  enough  troops.  Qalanisi  adds  a  factor  which  un¬ 
doubtedly  also  played  its  part,  namely,  that  Muslims  summoned  by  letter  were  arriving 
in  constantly  increasing  numbers  and  Nureddin  himself  was  on  the  way  to  relieve 
Damascus.  This  news  discouraged  the  Christians  (see  B.  Kugler,  Studien  zur  Gesc/iichte 
des  z<we\tten  KreuzzugSy  p.  200  j  F.  Lundgreen,  Wilhelm,  von  Tyrus  und  der  Tern- 
flerordeny  p.  84). 

Job  30:  31. 

Conrad  III  died  in  1152  and  was  succeeded,  as  William  states,  by  his  nephew 
Frederick  I,  Barbarossa,  who  ruled  until  1190. 


196  CAPTURE  OF  ASCALON 

separable  companion  of  the  emperor  on  his  pilgrimage,  suceeded  him 
on  the  throne.  He  was  a  young  man  of  fine  character,  the  son  of  Con¬ 
rad’s  eldest  brother,  and  he  it  is  who  today  rules  the  empire  with  vigor 
and  success. 

The  king  of  the  Franks  passed  a  year  among  us.  Then,  at  the  time  of 
the  spring  crossing,  after  celebrating  Easter  at  Jerusalem,  he  returned 
to  his  own  land  with  his  wife  and  nobles.  On  his  arrival  there,  remem¬ 
bering  the  wrongs  which  he  had  suffered  from  his  wife  on  the  journey 
and,  in  fact,  during  the  entire  pilgrimage,  he  decided  to  put  her  away. 
An  annulment  was  solemnly  granted  in  the  presence  of  the  bishops  of 
his  realm  on  the  ground  of  blood  relationship.^®  Immediately,  without 
lapse  of  time,  and  even  before  she  returned  to  Aquitaine,  her  paternal 
inheritance,  she  was  taken  to  wife  by  Henry,  duke  of  Normandy  and 
count  of  Anjou.  Shortly  after  the  marriage,  Henry  succeeded  Stephen, 
king  of  the  Angles,  who  died  without  male  children. 

The  king  of  the  Franks,  happier  in  his  second  choice,  then  espoused 
Maria,  daughter  of  the  emperor  of  Spain,  a  maiden  pleasing  to  God 
and  highly  esteemed  for  her  saintly  life  and  character.^'^ 

9.  Nureddin  invades  the  land  of  Antioch;  Prince  Raymond  at¬ 
tacks  him;  a  battle  ensues ;  Raymond  is  slain. 

From  this  time,  the  condition  of  the  Latins  in  the  East  became  visibly 
worse.  Our  enemies  saw  that  the  labors  of  our  most  powerful  kings 
and  leaders  had  been  fruitless  and  all  their  efforts  vain  3  they  mocked 
at  the  shattered  strength  and  broken  glory  of  those  who  represented 
the  substantial  foundations  of  the  Christians.  With  impunity  they  had 
scorned  the  actual  presence  of  those  whose  very  names  had  formerly 
terrified  them.  Hence  their  presumption  and  boldness  rose  to  such 

Louis  VII  returned  to  France  in  the  summer  of  1149.  Suger,  abbot  of  St.  Denis, 
who  had  originally  arranged  the  marriage,  sought  to  prevent  the  separation  of  the 
estranged  couple  and  was  successful  up  to  the  time  of  his  death  in  1151.  At  the  be¬ 
ginning  of  spring  in  1152,  however,  Louis  had  the  marriage  declared  void  on  the 
grounds  of  consanguinity.  Eleanor  was  so  much  sought  by  ambitious  suitors  that  she 
had  to  flee  to  avoid  being  captured.  She  selected  Henry  of  Anjou  as  her  husband  and 
was  married  to  him  little  more  than  a  month  after  the  annulment.  He  became  king 
of  England  in  1154  and,  with  Eleanor’s  inheritance,  ruled  over  half  of  France  as  well. 

Her  name  was  Constance,  not  Maria.  She  was  the  daughter  of  Alfonso  VII,  who 
is  distinguished  among  the  rulers  of  Castile  and  Leon  as  the  “emperor.”  He  was  crowned 
“emperor  in  Spain”  in  1135  in  the  presence  of  many  Spanish  princes,  both  Christian 
and  Muslim,  The  title  had  been  claimed  by  other  earlier  rulers  and  its  memory  lin¬ 
gered  on  after  his  time,  but  Alfonso  VII  is  the  one  with  whom  the  title  is  peculiarly 
associated  (see  R.  B.  Merriman,  The  Rise  of  the  Spanish  EmfirCy  I,  89—91). 


I 


CAPTURE  OF  ASCALON 


197 

heights  that  they  no  longer  feared  the  Christian  forces  and  did  not 
hesitate  to  attack  them  with  unwonted  vigor.  Immediately  after  the 
departure  of  the  two  sovereigns,  Nureddin,  the  son  of  Zangi  who  was 
mentioned  above,  mustered  a  vast  army  from  all  over  the  Orient  and 
began  to  devastate  the  country  around  Antioch  with  unusual  boldness. 
Perceiving  that  the  land  of  the  Latin  princes  was  destitute  of  aid,  he 
decided  to  invest  the  fortress  called  Neva.^^  Reliable  news  of  this 
movement  was  brought  to  Raymond,  prince  of  Antioch.  Without  wait¬ 
ing  for  the  escort  of  his  cavalry  which  he  had  ordered  to  be  called,  he 
at  once  hurried  rashly  to  the  place  with  a  few  men,  for  he  was  a  man 
of  undaunted  and  impetuous  courage  who  allowed  himself  to  be  ruled 
by  the  advice  of  no  one  in  matters  of  this  kind.  He  found  Nureddin 
still  intent  on  the  siege  of  the  castle  named  above. 

When  Nureddin  heard  that  the  prince  was  coming,  he  hesitated  to 
wait  and  encounter  him,  for  he  feared  that  Raymond  might  be  bring¬ 
ing  large  forces  with  him.  He  therefore  left  the  siege  and  retired  to 
a  place  of  safety.  Here  he  remained  until  he  could  ascertain  through 
repeated  reports  what  kind  of  forces  the  prince  had  with  him  and 
whether  still  larger  reserves  were  expected. 

Elated  by  his  first  success  and,  as  usual,  undertaking  more  than  he 
should  have  done,  the  prince  began  to  be  somewhat  careless. Al¬ 
though  he  possessed  fortresses  near  by  where  he  might  have  remained 
in  safety  with  his  followers  and  thence  led  them  back  without  danger, 
he  preferred  to  trust  to  the  open  plain.  He  deemed  it  unworthy  that 
he  should  seem  to  have  retired  even  temporarily,  through  fear  of 
Nureddin,  and  preferred  to  expose  himself  to  the  wiles  of  the  enemy. 
When  Nureddin  perceived  that  the  prince  had  received  no  additional 
aid,  he  believed  that  he  could  easily  conquer  the  forces  that  Raymond 
had  brought  with  him.  That  night,  therefore,  he  surrounded  the 
prince’s  company  and  stormed  the  camp  as  if  he  were  besieging  a  city. 

When  morning  dawned,  Raymond  saw  that  he  was  ringed  in  by 

William  fails  to  mention  the  earlier  attack  upon  the  fortress  of  Areima  in  Tripoli. 
According’  to  Arab  historians,  Raymond  II  of  Tripoli  invited  Nureddin  and  Anar, 
whose  forces  had  been  united  when  the  former  came  to  the  relief  of  Damascus,  to 
attack  this  fortress,  which  was  then  held  by  the  widow  and  son  of  Alphonse  of  Tou¬ 
louse.  Raymond  feared  their  pretensions  to  his  prinicipality.  Nureddin  and  Anar  cap¬ 
tured  the  fortress  and  carried  oif  Bertram  and  his  mother  as  prisoners.  This  happened 
shortly  after  the  sieg’e  of  Damascus  had  been  abandoned  (W.  B.  Stevenson,  T//e  Cru¬ 
saders  hi  the  Easty  p.  164). 

Nureddin’s  campaign  in  the  territory  of  Antioch  late  in  1 14S  had  been  unsuccessful. 
Raymond  of  Antioch  had  indeed  gained  a  victory  over  a  portion  of  Nureddin’s  army. 


198  CAPTURE  OF  ASCALON 

the  enemy’s  hosts,  and  too  late,  alas,  he  began  to  feel  doubtful  about 
his  own  strength.  Nevertheless,  he  drew  up  his  lines  in  battle  forma¬ 
tion,  stationed  his  knights  in  order,  and  prepared  to  fight  at  close 
quarters.  In  this  way  the  battle  began  3  but  Raymond’s  forces,  being 
inferior  in  strength,  were  unable  to  withstand  the  great  numbers  of  the 
foe.  They  turned  and  fled.  The  prince  was  left  with  only  a  few  of  his 
men  around  him.  He  fought  valiantly,  like  the  high-spirited  and 
courageous  warrior  he  was,  but  finally,  wearied  by  killing  and  ex¬ 
hausted  in  spirit,  he  was  slain  by  a  stroke  of  the  sword  in  the  midst  of 
the  slaughter  which  he  had  wrought.  The  Turks  cut  off  his  head  and 
right  arm  and  left  the  mutilated  remains  among  the  corpses  of  the  slain 
on  the  field. 

Among  others  who  fell  in  that  engagement  was  that  great  and 
powerful  knight,  forever  regretted  by  his  own  land,  Renaud  of 
Marash,  to  whom  the  count  of  Edessa  had  given  his  own  daughter  in 
marriage.  Other  nobles  also  fell  at  the  same  place,  but  their  names  are 
lost. 

Raymond  was  a  man  of  lofty  spirit,  one  who  had  had  much  experi¬ 
ence  in  warfare  3  he  was  greatly  dreaded  by  the  enemy,  yet  he  was 
unlucky.  The  many  noble  and  valiant  deeds  which  he  wrought  in  the 
principality  are  worthy  of  a  special  account,  but  we  must  hasten  to 
resume  the  general  history  and  can  not  delay  for  details  of  this  kind 
or  allow  the  pen  to  linger  over  them. 

Raymond  was  slain  in  the  year  1148  of  the  Incarnation  of  the  Lord, 
on  the  twenty-seventh  day  of  June,  which  is  the  feast  day  of  the  holy 
apostles  Peter  and  Paul.  He  was  in  the  thirteenth  year  of  his  rule.^^ 
The  place  where  he  fell  is  called  the  Walled  Fountain.  It  lies  between 
the  city  of  Apamea  and  the  fortress  of  Rugia.  The  body  of  the  prince 
was  found  among  the  other  dead  and  was  recognized  by  certain  marks 
and  scars.  It  was  borne  to  Antioch  and  there  interred  with  solemn  rites 
amid  the  tombs  of  his  predecessors,  in  the  vestibule  of  the  church  of 
the  Prince  of  the  Apostles. 

This  disaster  occurred  June  29,  1149.  Nureddin  followed  up  the  victory  by  a 
successful  siege  of  Apamea,  which  he  captured  July  26  (Stevenson,  Crusaders,  p.  165). 


CAPTURE  OF  ASCALON 


199 


10.  Nureddm  treats  the  entire  region  according  to  his  own  fleas- 
ure»  The  king  hurries  thither  to  render  aid.  The  sultan  of 
Icontuni  invades  the  land  of  the  count  of  E  dess  a. 

In  token  of  his  victory  and  to  increase  his  own  prestige,  Nureddin 
sent  Raymond’s  head  and  right  arm  (which  he  had  caused  to  be  cut 
off  for  the  purpose)  to  the  caliph  of  Bagdad,  the  mightiest  prince  and 
monarch  of  the  Saracens,  as  proof  that  the  most  formidable  persecutor 
of  the  Gentiles  was  dead.  It  was  then  sent  on  to  all  the  other  Turkish 
satraps  throughout  the  Orient. 

The  people  of  Antioch,  deprived  of  the  support  of  their  great  leader, 
abandoned  themselves  without  restraint  to  grief.  With  plaintive  words 
and  tearful  lamentations  they  recalled  the  great  achievements  of  that 
valiant  man.  The  report  of  his  death  not  only  cast  gloom  over  those  in 
the  vicinity,  but  to  all  far  and  wide  it  carried  woe  and  filled  the  hearts 
of  both  great  and  small  with  bitter  sorrow. 

Nureddin,  like  his  father,  was  a  mighty  persecutor  of  the  Christian 
name  and  faith.  Since  the  prince  of  the  land  and  the  main  part  of  his 
valiant  forces  had  fallen  in  battle,  he  saw  that  the  whole  province  lay 
at  his  mercy.  Accordingly,  he  at  once  sent  forth  his  troops  and  began  to 
overrun  the  whole  country  in  hostile  fashion.  After  passing  close  to 
Antioch  and  burning  everything  in  that  vicinity,  he  went  on  to  the 
monastery  of  St.  Simeon,  which  lies  high  up  on  the  mountains  between 
Antioch  and  the  sea.  Here  also  he  acted  freely  according  to  his  own 
good  pleasure  and  treated  all  with  unrestrained  license.  From  there  he 
went  down  to  the  sea,  which  he  now  saw  for  the  first  time  j  and,  in  token 
that  he  had  come  as  conqueror  even  to  the  sea,  he  bathed  there  in  the 
presence  of  his  army.  On  the  return  march,  in  passing,  he  seized  the 
fortress  of  Harim,  scarcely  ten  miles  from  Antioch,  and  at  once  care¬ 
fully  strengthened  it  with  arms,  food,  and  soldiers,  so  that  it  might  be 
able  to  endure  a  siege  of  many  days. 

Panic  now  seized  upon  the  entire  people,  and  the  land  was  humbled 
before  him,  because  the  Lord  had  given  into  his  hand  the  flower  of  the 
army  and  the  prince  of  the  land.  There  was  no  one  to  offer  powerful 
protection  against  the  dangers  which  threatened  them.  Constance,  the 
widow  of  Prince  Raymond,  had  been  left  with  two  sons  and  two  daugh¬ 
ters  in  some  charge  of  the  state  and  principality,  but  there  was  no 

Constance  was  still  a  very  young  woman,  scarcely  twenty-two  years  old  at  the 
death  of  her  husband. 


200 


CAPTURE  OF  ASCALON 

leader  to  undertake  the  duties  of  the  prince  and  to  rouse  the  people 
from  their  state  of  dejection.  In  this  emergency  Aimery,  the  patriarch 
of  Antioch,  an  able  man  of  great  wealth,  came  forward  as  protector  of 
the  deeply  afflicted  land.  Contrary  to  his  usual  habits,  he  supplied 
money  liberally  to  hire  troops  and  thus  provided  temporarily  for  the 
immediate  necessities  of  the  land.-^ 

The  news  of  Raymond’s  death  and  the  desperate  condition  of  Anti¬ 
och  overwhelmed  the  king  of  Jerusalem  with  consternation.  He  at 
once  mustered  troops  for  the  relief  of  his  brethren  in  distress  and  has¬ 
tened  to  the  land  of  Antioch.  The  disheartened  people,  who  felt  no 
confidence  in  themselves,  were  greatly  comforted  by  his  presence.  He 
united  the  forces  which  he  had  led  with  him  with  troops  from  that 
entire  region  and  called  on  the  people  to  resist.  To  help  them  in  regain¬ 
ing  their  wonted  courage,  he  laid  siege  to  the  fortress  of  Harim,  which, 
as  was  stated  above,  had  been  lately  taken  by  the  enemy.  The  place 
had  been  so  carefully  fortified,  however,  that,  after  spending  several 
days  there  without  success,  he  gave  up  the  attempt  and  returned  to 
Antioch. 

The  sultan  of  Iconium,  on  hearing  of  the  death  of  the  prince,  also 
went  down  into  Syria  with  an  immense  host.^^  He  took  many  cities  and 
fortresses  in  that  land  and  finally  laid  siege  to  Turbessel,  though  Count 
Joscelin  and  his  wife  and  children  were  within  it.  During  this  time, 
the  king  sent  Humphrey  the  constable  with  sixty  knights  to  protect  the 
fortress  of  Ezaz  and  to  prevent  its  being  taken  by  the  Turks. 

The  count  finally  released  all  the  sultan’s  subjects  whom  he  was 
holding  as  prisoners  and,  in  addition,  gave  him  twelve  suits  of  armor. 
Thereupon,  peace  was  concluded  between  themj  the  sultan  departed 
and  the  count,  delivered  from  the  siege,  proceeded  the  same  day  to 
Ezaz.  Thence  he  hastened  to  Antioch  to  thank  the  king  for  the  kind¬ 
ness  which  he  had  showed  toward  him.  Then,  after  visiting  that  mon¬ 
arch,  he  said  farewell  and  returned  to  his  own  land  accompanied  by 
the  modest  escort  which  he  had  brought  with  him.^*^ 

The  king  assumed  the  responsibility  of  the  distressed  country  and 
for  that  purpose  remained  at  Antioch  until  affairs  were  reduced  to 

Aimery,  whose  election  William  had  not  approved,  was  in  difficulties  with  the 
papacy  at  this  time.  His  aid,  under  the  circumstances,  is  all  the  more  commendable. 

This  was  Masud,  son  of  Qilij  Arslan,  who  ruled  the  sultanate  of  Rum  or  Iconium 
1 1  i6-i  156. 

This  visit  of  Baldwin  III  and  Joscelin  II  must  be  dated  in  the  latter  part  of.  1149. 


CAPTURE  OF  ASCALON 


201 


order  as  far  as  time  aiad  place  permitted.  Then,  when  some  degree  of 
tranquillity  had  been  established,  he  went  back  to  his  own  land  to  at¬ 
tend  to  his  private  affairs. 


1 1 .  Ajicr  the  kwg^s  departure  jront  A utiochy  the  count  of  Edessa 
IS  captured  by  the  enemy  and  dies  ignominiouslw 


JoscELiN  the  Younger,  count  of  Edessa,  was  far  inferior  to  his  father 
in  cliai*acter.  He  was  a  lazy,  idle  man,  given  over  to  low  and  dissolute 
pleasures,  one  who  spurned  good  ways  and  followed  base  pursuits.  He 
had  pui'sued  the  prince  of  Antioch  with  insatiable  hatred  and  regai'ded 
the  fall  of  the  latter  as  most  fortunate  for  himself.  He  paid  but  slight 
attention  to  the  truth  of  the  savins:,  '^‘^When  your  neishbor’s  house  is 

w'  O '  y  O 

biu'ning,  your  own  property  is  in  danger.’-  At  the  summons  of  the 
patriarch,  it  is  said,  he  set  out  for  Antioch  at  night.  Attended  only  by 
a  youns  man  who  was  leadins  his  horse,  he  had  left  his  escort  and 

^  O  O  ' 

turned  aside  to  relieve  the  needs  of  nature,  when,  unknown  both  to 
those  ahead  and  those  folio  wins,  he  was  attacked  bv  brisands  who 
rushed  forth  from  ambush.  He  was  seized  and  led  in  chains  to  Aleppo. 
There,  overcome  by  the  squalid  conditions  of  the  prison  and  the  heaw 
iron  chains,  wasted  by  mental  and  physical  sufferings,  he  reaped  the 
result  of  his  dissolute  ways  and  came  to  a  wretched  end. 

At  dawn,  the  members  of  his  escort,  entirely  unaware  of  what  had 
happened,  anxiously  sought  for  their  lord  but  could  not  find  him. 
When  their  search  proved  without  result,  they  tiuned  back  and  re¬ 
ported  the  disaster  that  had  overtaken  them.  Again  the  whole  land  was 
dazed  with  consternation.  Hitherto  the  people  had  felt  no  compassion 
for  the  misfortunes  of  their  neiohbors,  but  now,  overwhelmed  by  dis- 
aster  themselves,  they  learned,  by  a  similar  experience,  how  to  sympa¬ 


thize  with  the  troubles  of  others.  Some  time  later,  it  was  learned  from 
reliable  sources  that  the  count  was  a  prisoner  at  Aleppo.^'^ 

His  vife,  a  chaste  and  sober  woman,  one  who  feared  God  and  found 
favor  in  His  sight,  was  left  with  a  minor  son  and  two  daughters.  With 
the  assistance  of  the  principal  men  still  left  in  the  kingdom,  she  tried  to 
govern  the  people  to  the  best  of  her  ability  j  and,  far  beyond  the 


Horace  Ep,  I.  xviii.  S+. 

Joscelin  II  had  been  captured  by  some  of  Nureddin^s  troops.  According^  to  Arab 
accounts  he  was  kept  in  prison  at  Aleppo  for  nine  years  until  the  time  of  his  death 
and  forced  to  endure  tortures  of  various  kinds  t^^ee  R,  K.  p.  265).  Qalanisi  (Gibb, 
Cbrotiiclcy  p.  300)  dates  his  capture  as  May  5,  1150. 


202 


CAPTURE  OF  ASCALON 


strength  of  a  woman,  she  busied  herself  in  strengthening  the  fortresses 
of  the  land  and  supplying  them  with  arms,  men,  and  food. 

Thus,  in  punishment  for  our  sins,  these  two  countries  were  deprived 
of  the  wise  counsels  of  their  princes  and,  under  the  government  of 
women,  were  holding  their  own  with  difficulty. 

12.  The  king  and  the  lords  of  the  realm  rebuild  Gazay  near 
Ascalon, 

Shortly  after  these  events  occurred  in  the  land  of  Antioch,  divine 
mercy  visited  the  kingdom.  Rising  out  of  the  depths  of  depression  into 
which  they  had  fallen  because  of  the  repeated  disasters  that  had  over¬ 
taken  them,  the  king  and  his  nobles  again  took  heart  and  resolved  to 
rebuild  Gaza.  By  this  course,  they  hoped  to  put  a  more  effective  curb 
on  their  redoutable  enemies,  the  people  of  Ascalon,  and  to  prevent 
their  disastrous  raids. 

Gaza,  a  very  ancient  city,  lay  about  ten  miles  south  of  Ascalon.  It 
was  now  in  ruins  and  entirely  uninhabited.  This  place  they  resolved  to 
reconstruct,  so  that  Ascalon  might  be  hemmed  in  on  the  south  just  as 
it  was  on  the  north  and  east  by  the  fortresses  they  had  built  there.  From 
this  direction  also  repeated  attacks  against  that  city  could  be  made  and 
aggressive  warfare  carried  on  without  ceasing.  Accordingly,  on  the 
appointed  day  the  entire  people  assembled  as  one  man  at  the  place 
designated.  They  attacked  the  work  with  concerted  efforts  and  each 
vied  with  his  neighbor  in  assisting  to  rebuild  the  place. 

This  same  Gaza,  a  most  ancient  city,  was  one  of  the  five  cities  of  the 
Philistines.  It  was  celebrated  for  its  buildings,  and  many  handsome 
churches  and  spacious  houses  of  marble  and  huge  stones,  though  now  in 
ruins,  still  gave  splendid  evidence  of  its  ancient  glory.  Many  reservoirs 
and  weUs  of  living  water  also  still  remained.  It  was  built  on  a  slight 
eminence  and  enclosed  within  its  walls  much  widespread  territory. 

The  Christians  realized  that  it  would  not  be  expedient  to  rebuild 
the  whole  city  and  also  that  their  strength  might  not  be  sufficient  for 
such  a  task  at  that  time.  They  therefore  took  a  part  of  the  hill,  laid 
foundations  of  suitable  depth,  and  built  a  fortress  notable  for  its  wall 
and  towers.  Within  a  short  time,  by  the  help  of  God,  the  work  was 
successfully  completed.  When  entirely  finished  in  all  its  parts,  it  was 
committed  by  general  consent  to  the  care  of  the  Knights  of  the  Tern- 


% 


CAPTURE  OF  ASCALON 


203 


pie,  to  be  held  by  them  in  perpetuity  together  with  all  the  adjacent 
district.  This  charge  the  brothers,  brave  men  and  valiant  warriors,  have 
faithfully  and  wisely  guarded  even  to  this  time.  Again  and  again  they 
have  vigorously  assaulted  Ascalon,  sometimes  openly  and  again  by 
attacks  from  ambush.  As  a  result,  those  enemies  who  formerly  over¬ 
ran  and  desolated  the  whole  region  and  made  themselves  dreaded 
by  the  Christians,  now  consider  themselves  most  fortunate  if,  by  en¬ 
treaties  or  money,  they  can  obtain  a  temporary  peace  and  permission 
to  dwell  quietly  within  their  walls. 

Gaza  proved  useful  not  only  in  restraining  Ascalon,  for  whose  an¬ 
noyance  it  had  been  built,  but,  after  that  city  had  been  conquered,  it  also 
served  as  a  fortified  boundary  at  the  south  and  was  a  great  protection 
to  that  district  against  the  Egyptians. 

In  the  early  spring,  when  the  interior  of  the  fortress  was  partly 
finished,  the  king  and  the  patriarch  returned  to  Jerusalem.^*^  They 
left  at  Gaza  the  Knights  of  the  Temple,  to  whose  care  the  castle  was 
committed.  Now,  the  Egyptians  were  in  the  habit  of  sending  additional 
forces  three  or  four  times  a  year  to  reinforce  the  strength  of  the  Asca- 
lonites.^®  After  the  king’s  departure,  it  happened  that  these  forces  ap¬ 
peared  in  large  numbers  before  the  stronghold  at  Gaza  and  made  a 
furious  attack  on  the  place,  whither  the  townspeople  had  fled  through 
fear  of  the  foe.  After  several  days  had  been  wasted  in  the  siege,  how¬ 
ever,  the  officers  in  command  perceived  that  their  efforts  were  in  vain 
and  departed  for  Ascalon.  From  that  day  the  strength  of  the  foe  was 
apparently  weakened  and  their  power  of  injuring  decreased  until 
gradually  they  ceased  to  harry  the  lands  around  them. 

The  Egyptian  army,  also,  which,  as  we  have  said,  had  so  often 
brought  aid  to  the  now  afflicted  city,  presently  began  to  come  by  sea 
only.  They  feared  the  ambuscades  arising  from  the  fortress  lying  on 
the  way  and  stood  in  great  awe  of  the  knights. 

The  building  of  this  fortress  must  have  occurred  in  the  winter  of  1149— 1150, 
According  to  Qalanisi  the  king  was  still  engaged  in  that  work  when  he  was  summoned 
by  Damascus  to  help  repel  Nureddin^s  attack  upon  that  city.  Anar  had  died  August  28, 
1 149.  The  combination  of  unusually  heavy  rains  in  April  and  the  coming  of  Baldwin  III 
discouraged  Nureddin  at  this  time  so  that  he  signed  a  treaty  of  peace  with  Damascus 
May  I,  1150  (Gibb,  Chronicley  pp,  299—300). 

William  persists  in  his  statement  that  the  garrison  was  changed  three  or  four 
times  each  year,  though  the  settled  policy  of  the  Egyptians  was  to  change  it  twice 
each  year.  The  first  serious  test  of  this  fortress  occurred  in  1152.  Perhaps  William  has 
that  in  mind  (Gibb,  Chronicle y  p.  312). 


204 


CAPTURE  OF  ASCALON 


13.  Serious  discord  arises  between  the  king  and  his  mother;  he 
is  crowned  zvithout  her  knowledge. 

At  this  time,  the  affairs  of  the  kingdom  in  the  East  were  progressing 
satisfactorily  and  a  certain  degree  of  tranquillity  prevailed.  This  con¬ 
dition  was  somewhat  impaired,  however,  by  the  fact  that  the  county 
of  Edessa  had  passed  into  the  power  of  our  enemies  and  was  thus  lost 
to  us;  and,  also  because  the  land  of  Antioch  was  constantly  subject  to 
hostile  attacks.  Presently,  Satan,  the  enemy  of  man,  who  is  ready  to 
sow  the  seeds  of  tares,  began  to  look  with  envy  upon  our  prosperity  and 
sought  to  disturb  our  peace  by  exciting  civil  dissensions.  The  origin  and 
cause  of  the  trouble  was  as  follows.  As  has  been  related,  Queen  Meli- 
send,  of  glorious  and  pious  memory  in  the  Lord,  was  left,  on  the  death 
of  her  husband,  with  two  children  still  under  age.  Acting  as  their  legal 
guardian,  she  assumed  as  by  hereditary  right  the  care  and  administra¬ 
tion  of  the  realm.  With  the  advice  of  the  barons  of  the  realm,  strenu¬ 
ously  and  faithfully,  beyond  the.  strength  and  courage  of  women,  she 
had  ruled  as  regent  up  to  that  time.  Her  eldest  son,  Baldwin,  of  whose 
acts  we  are  now  writing,  lived  in  entire  harmony  with  her  and  wisely 
complied  with  her  dictates,  even  after  he  ascended  the  throne. 

Among  others  on  whose  assistance  and  counsel  she  relied  was  her 
kinsman,  Manasses,  a  man  of  high  rank  and  her  intimate  friend.  As 
soon  as  she  undertook  the  government,  she  made  him  constable  and 
put  him  in  supreme  command  of  the  army.  He,  taking  advantage  of 
the  queen’s  favor,  is  said  to  have  conducted  himself  very  haughtily. 
He  assumed  an  insolent  attitude  of  superiority  toward  the  elders  of 
the  realm  and  refused  to  show  them  proper  respect.  This  roused  in¬ 
tense  hatred  toward  him  on  the  part  of  the  nobles,  and,  if  the  authority 
of  the  queen  had  not  been  exerted,  they  would  have  carried  their  ani¬ 
mosity  into  action.  Manasses  had  married  the  widow  of  the  elder 
Balian,  a  noble  matron,  mother  of  the  three  brothers,  Hugh,  Baldwin, 
and  Balian  of  Ramlah.  By  this  alliance  he  had  acquired  much  wealth 
and  had  greatly  increased  his  possessions.  The  king  was  foremost,  both 
in  feeling  and  act,  among  those  who  hated  Manasses  and  claimed  that 
the  man  was  alienating  his  mother’s  good  will  from  him  and  thwarting 
her  munificence. 

There  were  many  who  hated  the  power  and  evil  domination  of  this 
man.  They  continually  fanned  the  flame  of  the  king’s  dislike  toward 


CAPTURE  OF  ASCALON 


205 


him  and  constantly  urged  that  he  remove  his  mother  from  the  control 
of  the  kingdom.  Now  that  he  had  reached  years  of  maturity,  they  said, 
it  was  not  fitting  that  he  should  be  ruled  by  the  will  of  a  woman.  He 
ought  to  assume  some  of  the  responsibility  of  governing  the  realm 
himself.^^ 

Influenced  by  the  counsels  of  these  advisers  and  others  like  them, 
the  king  determined  to  be  crowned  at  Jerusalem  on  Easter  day.  The 
patriarch  and  other  wise  men  who  desired  peace  for  the  kingdom 
begged  him  earnestly  to  allow  his  mother  to  participate  in  his  glory. 
By  the  advice  of  the  counsellors  just  mentioned,  however,  he  deferred 
the  time  which  had  been  set  for  the  ceremony  in  order  that  his  mother 
should  not  be  crowned  with  him.  Then  unexpectedly,  on  the  following 
day,  without  summoning  his  mother  he  appeared  in  public,  crowned 
with  the  laurel. 

% 

14.  The  kingdom  u  divided  hetvoeen  the  mother  and  son,  The 
king  enters  J er us olem  by  jorce  and  makes  his  mother  a  'pris¬ 
oner  in  the  tower  of  David,  Peace  and  tranquillity  are  finally 
restored. 

When  the  solemnity  was  over,  the  king  called  an  assembly  of  his 
nobles.  Count  Ives  of  Soissons  and  Walter,  the  castellan  of  St.  Omer, 
being  also  present.  Baldwin  went  to  his  mother  and  demanded  that 
she  at  once  divide  the  kingdom  with  him  and  assign  to  him  a  portion 
of  his  ancestral  heritage.  After  much  deliberation  on  both  sides,  the 
inheritance  was  finally  divided.  The  king  was  given  the  choice  and 
took  for  his  share  the  maritime  cities  in  the  lands  of  Tyre  and  Acre 
with  their  dependencies.  Jerusalem  and  Nablus,  also  with  the  cities 
pertaining  to  them,  were  left  to  the  queen.  Thus  they  were  separated 
from  one  another,  and  the  people  hoped  that,  for  the  sake  of  peace, 
the  agreement  determined  upon  might  endure  and  that  they  would  be 
contented  with  the  portion  which  had  fallen  to  each  of  them.  At  this 
time,  also,  the  king  appointed  as  his  constable  and  commander  of  the 
army  a  certain  magnificent  noble,  Humphrey  of  Toron,  who  had  great 

Baldwin  III  reached  the  age  of  twenty-one  in  the  year  1151.  The  legal  age  at 
which  a  king  might  reign  in  Jerusalem  was  fifteen.  Baldwin  III  must  have  become 
increasingly  restive  under  the  rule  of  his  mother  and  her  able  but  unpopular  constable. 
It  would  seem  reasonable  to  expect  this  trouble  in  1151,  though  Rohricht  has  put  it 
in  the  following  year  (see  R,  K.  pp.  268—70). 


2o6  capture  of  ascalon 

and  extensive  possessions  in  Phoenicia  among  the  mountains  which  lie 
near  Tyre. 

But  not  even  in  this  way  was  the  wish  to  persecute  the  queen  stilled. 
On  the  contrary,  the  still-smouldering  fire  was  rekindled  on  trivial 
pretexts  and  blazed  forth  into  a  conflagration  far  more  dangerous  than 
before.  At  the  instigation  of  those  same  nobles  to  whose  counsels  he  had 
formerly  harkened,  the  king  again  began  to  make  trouble  for  his 
mother.  He  proposed  to  seize  that  portion  of  the  kingdom  which  she 
had  received  by  the  good  will  of  both,  and  thus  wholly  exclude  her.  On 
learning  of  his  design,  the  queen  left  Nablus  in  the  care  of  some  of  her 
loyal  nobles  and  hurried  to  Jerusalem. 

The  king,  in  the  meantime,  mustered  as  large  a  force  as  possible  and 
besieged  Manasses  in  one  of  his  own  castles  called  Mirabel.  The  latter 
was  forced  to  surrender  and  compelled  to  renounce  the  kingdom  and 
all  the  region  on  this  side  of  the  sea  [Palestine] .  The  king  then  seized 
Nablus  and  advanced  to  Jerusalem  in  pursuit  of  his  mother. 

Certain  nobles  whose  possessions  lay  within  the  queen’s  domains 
and  who  were  attached  to  her  by  merely  nominal  loyalty  disregarded 
their  oaths  of  fealty  and  withdrew  from  her.  The  few  who  adhered  to 
her  cause,  however,  preserved  a  strict  loyalty.  Among  these  were  her 
son,  Amaury,  count  of  Jaffa,  a  very  young  man  j  Philip  of  Nablus  j  and 
Rohard  the  Elder,  with  a  few  others  whose  names  are  unknown. 

When  the  queen  heard  that  her  son  was  advancing  with  an  army,  she 
retired  to  the  citadel  with  her  household  staff  and  loyal  followers  and 
trusted  herself  to  the  defenses  of  the  fortress.  But  the  Patriarch 
Fulcher,  of  good  memory,  perceived  that  dangerous  times  and  days  of 
peril  were  threatening.  Desiring  to  intervene  as  peacemaker  and  plead 
for  proposals  of  peace,  he  took  with  him  religious  and  God-fearing  men 
from  among  the  clergy  and  went  out  to  meet  the  king.  He  admonished 
him  to  desist  from  his  wicked  project,  to  abide  by  the  terms  of  the 
agreement,  and  to  suffer  his  mother  to  rest  in  peace.  As  these  warnings 

were  of  no  avail,  however,  he  returned  to  the  city  in  utter  detestation 
of  the  king’s  purpose. 

The  king,  bent  on  carrying  out  his  intention,  placed  his  camp  before 
the  city,  and  the  citizens,  to  avert  the  royal  wrath,  finally  opened  the 
gates  and  admitted  him  with  his  troops.  He  at  once  laid  siege  to  the 
citadel,  whither  his  mother  had  retreated.  He  set  up  his  engines  in 
position  for  assault  and,  with  ballistae,  bows,  and  hurling  machines. 


CAPTURE  OF  ASCALON 


207 

stormed  it  in  enemy  fashion.  So  incessant  were  the  attacks  that  the 
besieged  were  denied  any  chance  to  rest.  They,  on  their  part,  resisted 
with  all  their  might  and  strove  to  repel  force  by  force.  Using  the  same 
methods  employed  by  the  besieging  force  outside,  they  hesitated  not 
to  hurl  back  injuries  upon  their  enemies  and  to  work  equal  destruction 
upon  them. 

The  contest  lasted  for  several  days  with  great  peril  to  both  sides,  for 
the  king,  although  he  made  little  progress  in  capturing  the  citadel,  was 
still  loath  to  withdraw.  At  length,  however,  certain  individuals  came 
forward  as  mediators  of  peace  and  amity.  The  queen  was  induced  to  be 
content  with  the  city  of  Nablus  and  its  territory  and  to  resign  Jerusalem, 
the  capital  of  the  kingdom,  to  the  king.  A  guarantee  was  offered  on 
the  part  of  the  king  and  a  solemn  oath  given  that  he  would  not  molest 
her  in  the  possession  of  that  city  in  perpetuity.  Thus  they  were  restored 
to  the  good  graces  of  one  another  j  and  as  the  morning  star  which  shines 
forth  in  the  midst  of  darkness  tranquillity  again  returned  to  the  king¬ 
dom  and  the  church. 

0 

15.  The  sultan  of  Iconium  again  invades  the  county  of  Edessa, 

The  king  repairs  thither  with  all  haste. 

News  of  the  deplorable  disaster  which  had  resulted  in  the  capture  of 
the  count  of  Edessa  was  brought  to  the  king  of  Jerusalem,  and  from 
reliable  sources  he  learned  that  Edessa,  left  entirely  without  a  defender, 
was  lying  exposed  to  the  wiles  of  the  enemy.  That  entire  province  and 
the  land  of  Antioch  as  well,  abandoned  to  feminine  rule,  required  the 
king’s  care.  In  response  to  this  urgent  need,  Baldwin  took  with  him 
Humphrey  the  constable  and  Guy  of  Beirut  and  repaired  to  the  land 
of  Tripoli.  From  the  queen’s  domains  he  had  been  unable  to  obtain  any 
response,  although  he  had  summoned  each  of  her  nobles  by  name.  At 
Tripoli  he  was  joined  by  the  count  of  that  land  and  his  knights,  and  the 
whole  force  proceeded  as  rapidly  as  possible  to  Antioch. 

It  was  said  everywhere,  and  it  was  in  fact  true,  that  a  powerful 
Turkish  prince,  the  sultan  of  Iconium,  with  immense  cavalry  forces 
had  invaded  that  country  and  seized  nearly  all  the  region  bordering 
on  his  own  territory.  The  inhabitants,  unable  to  resist  and  to  withstand 
the  might  of  his  army,  had  surrendered  to  him  all  their  cities  and  for¬ 
tresses  on  condition  of  being  granted  a  safe  and  unhindered  exit  with 
their  wives  and  children  and  safe  conduct  to  Turbessel.  That  place  was 


2o8  capture  of  ascalon 

better  fortified  than  the  others  and  had  more  inhabitants,  the  count  had 
his  permanent  residence  there,  and  it  appeared  to  be,  as  yet,  undis¬ 
turbed.  But  when  he,  the  sultan,  had  seized  all  the  district  with  the 
exception  of  a  few  fortresses,  he  was  obliged  to  return  home  to  attend 
to  more  important  affairs.  Even  so,  the  hardships  of  the  provincials 
were  not  lessened,  nor  was  their  anxiety  diminished.  For  Nureddin, 
that  most  troublesome  persecutor  of  our  people  and  a  very  powerful 
Turkish  prince,  was  harrying  the  entire  region.  So  incessant  were  his 
attacks  that  no  one  dared  to  appear  outside  the  fortresses.  Thus  that 
wretched  people  was  continually  ground,  as  it  were,  between  two  mill¬ 
stones.  It  was  tortured  beyond  endurance  by  two  exceedingly  great 
princes,  although  barely  able  to  endure  the  violence  of  one. 

1 6.  The  emferor  of  C onstantinofle  sends  an  army  to  the  land  of 
Antioch,  He  demands  that  the  county  of  Edessa  be  surren¬ 
dered  to  him.  He  obtains  his  demand.  The  fortresses  are 
surrendered  to  the  Greeks.  The  king  leads  the  Latins  forth.^^ 

In  the  meantime,  the  emperor  of  Constantinople,  learning  of  the 
desperate  condition  of  Edessa,  had  sent  thither  one  of  his  nobles  with 
a  great  store  of  supplies  and  a  large  force  of  his  own  knights.  He  offered 
to  the  countess  a  fixed  annual  revenue  sufficient  to  afford  herself  and 
her  children  an  honorable  livelihood  always,  if,  in  return,  she  would 
surrender  into  his  control  the  fortresses  still  in  her  possession.  Be¬ 
cause  of  his  immense  riches,  he  was  confident  that  if  the  province  were 
resigned  to  him  he  could  protect  it  unharmed  from  the  incursions  of 
the  Turks  and  without  difficulty  restore  to  his  empire  those  parts  which 
had  been  lost. 

When  the  king  arrived  at  Antioch  and  the  reason  for  the  coming  of 
the  imperial  envoys  was  disclosed,  they  themselves  also  explaining 
their  mission,  a  disagreement  arose  among  the  nobles  of  that  land. 
Some  said  that  affairs  had  not  yet  reached  such  an  extremity  that  this 
course  was  necessary  j  others  maintained,  on  the  contrary,  that  action 
must  be  taken  before  the  land  had  fallen  entirely  into  the  hand  of  the 
enemy.  In  the  midst  of  these  uncertainties  the  king  saw  that  the  country 

Emperor  Manuel’s  attention  had  been  aroused  by  the  events  of  1149.  The  situ¬ 
ation  seemed  to  offer  an  unusual  opportunity  to  realize  ancestral  claims  upon  the 
region.  He  not  only  reinforced  his  army  in  the  neighborhood,  but  also  prepared  to 
extend  his  interests  in  both  Edessa  and  Antioch.  The  transactions  here  recorded  must 
be  dated  in  1150  (see  F.  Chalandon,  Les  Comnene^  II,  424—25). 


CAPTURE  OF  ASCALON 


209 

could  not  long  continue  in  its  present  state  j  the  responsibilities  of  his 
own  kingdom  would  not  permit  him  to  remain  there  very  longj  nor 
had  he  sufficient  forces  to  enable  him  conveniently  to  rule  two  provinces 
lying  a  journey  of  fifteen  days  apart.  In  consideration  also  of  the  fact 
that  Antiochj  midway  between  the  two  countries,  had  been  for  several 
years  without  the  protection  of  a  prince,  he  came  to  the  conclusion 
that  it  was  best  to  transfer  to  the  Greeks,  under  the  conditions  proposed, 
the  strongholds  which  still  remained.  He  felt  but  little  confidence  that 
the  province  could  be  maintained  in  good  condition  by  the  Greek  forces, 
yet  he  preferred  that  disaster  should  overtake  it  while  it  was  under  their 
power  rather  than  that  the  downfall  of  a  people  already  in  jeopardy 
and  the  ruin  of  their  Imperilled  country  should  be  laid  to  him.  With 
the  consent  of  the  countess  and  her  children,  therefore,  a  treaty  satis¬ 
factory  to  both  parties  was  concluded,  based  on  the  terms  stated  above. 
A  day  was  also  set  when  the  king  should  go  down  to  that  county  with 
all  his  forces  to  surrender  all  the  fortresses  and  put  the  emperor’s  men 
in  possession.  At  the  appointed  time,  according  to  agreement,  the  king, 
accompanied  by  the  count  of  Tripoli  and  noblemen  both  from  the  king¬ 
dom  and  from  Antioch,  marched  into  the  land  of  the  count  of  Edessa 
to  Turbessel.  The  Greek  deputies  attended  him.  There  he  took  under 
his  protection  the  countess  and  her  children  and  all  others  of  both 
sexes,  whether  Latins  or  Armenians,  who  wished  to  leave,  and  sur¬ 
rendered  the  land  to  the  Greeks.  The  fortresses  which  up  to  this  time 
remained  in  the  possession  of  the  Christians  were:  Turbessel,  Hantab, 
Ravendal,  Ranculat,  Bile,  Samosata,  and  possibly  some  others.  All 
these  were  given  over  into  the  power  of  the  Greeks. 

The  king  then  prepared  for  the  march.  With  him  went  all  the  peo¬ 
ple  who  desired  to  leave,  together  with  their  pack  animals  and  a  great 
amount  of  baggage,  for  each  man  proposed  to  take  with  him  his  entire 
household  and  domestic  staff  as  well  as  all  his  furniture.  So  with  this 
great  crowd  of  unwarlike  people  and  an  enormous  amount  of  baggage, 
the  king  hastened  to  depart,  that  he  might  lead  them  to  a  place  of 


210 


CAPTURE  OF  ASCALON 


17.  Nureddm  meets  the  king  on  the  way  and  succeeds  in  staf¬ 
fing  the  exodus.  The  king  returns  to  Antioch  with  some 
difficidty,  ISfureddin  thrusts  jorth  the  Greeks  and  sehses  the 
entire  region. 

The  news  that  the  people  of  Edessa,  in  despair  of  retaining  the  land, 
had  surrendered  their  fortresses  to  the  mild  and  effeminate  Greeks 
and  that  the  king  had  marched  thither  to  conduct  the  people  away 
reached  Nureddin.  The  consciousness  of  the  fear  felt  by  the  Christians 
made  him  still  bolder.  He  at  once  mustered  armed  forces  from  all  the 
adjacent  regions  and  descended  suddenly  upon  those  parts  where  he 
hoped  to  encounter  the  king  with  the  people  who  had  so  greatly  dis¬ 
trusted  their  own  strength.  If  he  could  meet  them  under  such  circum¬ 
stances,  hindered  as  they  were  by  an  excessive  amount  of  baggage,  it 
would  be  greatly  to  his  advantage.  Accordingly,  scarcely  had  the  king 
reached  the  city  of  Tulupa,  not  more  than  five  or  six  miles  from  Tur- 
bessel,  when  Nureddin  poured  forth  his  forces  over  the  whole  land. 
There  was  a  fortress  near  by,  however,  called  Hantab,  past  which  the 
Christians  were  to  pursue  their  course.  Realizing  their  danger  and  wish¬ 
ing  to  hasten,  they  drew  up  their  lines  in  battle  formation  and  arranged 
their  forces  in  good  order  in  expectation  of  an  immediate  encounter. 
The  enemy’s,  troops,  also  in  battle  formation,  eagerly  awaited  our  ap¬ 
proach  as  if  confident  of  victory.  Yet  matters  turned  out  contrary  to 
their  expectation.  Our  army,  led  by  the  mercy  of  God,  reached  that 
fortress  in  safety,  and  there  the  weary  men  and  beasts  were  permitted 
to  rest  all  that  night.  Meanwhile,  the  leaders,  in  council  assembled, 
deliberated  on  the  plan  of  march  for  the  following  day. 

Certain  of  the  principal  nobles  demanded  that  the  fortress  be  given 
over  to  their  charge  3  with  the  help  of  God  they  believed  that  their 
strength  was  sufficient  to  hold  the  place  against  the  attack  of  the  Turks. 
Among  those  from  the  kingdom  who  held  this  view  was  Humphrey  of 
Toron,  the  royal  constable,^^  a  man  of  high  courage.  Robert  de  Sour- 
deval,  a  powerful  noble  from  the  principality  of  Antioch,  also  con¬ 
curred  in  this  opinion.  The  king,  however,  was  convinced  that  neither 
of  the  two  had  strength  or  power  sufficient  for  the  task 3  he  rejected  the 

There  is  a  slight  chronological  confusion  here.  Humphrey  of  Toron  was  made 
constable  by  Baldwin  III  when  the  latter  assumed  sole  rule  in  1151  or  1152,  whereas 
the  transfer  of  these  fortresses  of  Edessa  to  the  Greeks  was  made  in  1150.  Humphrey 
of  Toron  %vas  no  doubt  with  Baldwin  but  not  yet  constable. 


2II 


CAPTURE  OF  ASCALON 

offer  of  both  as  unworthy  of  consideration  and  insisted  on  keeping  the 
treaty.  The  place  was  delivered  to  the  Greeks  and  the  people  ordered 
to  prepare  to  continue  the  march. 

In  that  throng  were  to  be  seen  men  of  high  birth  and  noble  matrons 
with  highborn  maidens  and  little  children.  With  tears  and  sobs,  they 
were  leaving  their  native  soil,  the  homes  of  their  ancestors  and  the 
land  of  their  fathers  and,  in  deep  distress,  were  migrating  to  the  land 
of  strangers.  Hearts  of  adamant  might  well  have  been  moved  by  the 
groans  and  lamentations  of  this  people  as  they  went  forth  into  exile. 

When  day  again  returned,  the  baggage  was  arranged  and  the  march 
resumed.  The  enemy  also  formed  in  line  of  march  and  advanced  along 
with  them  on  either  side,  ready  to  swoop  down  upon  the  column  from 
every  direction.  When  the  Christians  saw  that  great  array  in  marching 
order,  they  rearranged  their  own  battalions  with  the  five  hundred 
knights  whom  they  had  with  them  and  assigned  regular  places  to  all. 
The  king  was  to  march  ahead  with  the  vanguard  and  direct  the  advance 
of  the  crowds  on  foot.  The  count  of  Tripoli  and  the  royal  constable, 
Humphrey,  were  assigned  to  protect  the  rear  divisions.  With  the 
largest  and  strongest  forces  they  were  to  sustain  the  attacks  of  the  foe 
and  defend  the  people  from  their  violence.  The  nobles  of  Antioch  were 
placed  on  the  left  and  the  right  of  the  column,  that  a  strong  force  of 
brave  men  and  armed  knights  might  encircle  the  multitude  who  had 
been  placed  in  the  center. 

Throughout  that  entire  day,  until  sunset,  the  Christians  advanced 
in  this  order.  Without  intermission,  they  were  harried  by  intolerable 
evils,  repeated  attacks,  and  skirmishes  at  close  quarters.  Showers  of 
arrows  rained  upon  the  advancing  troops  until  all  the  baggage  bristled 
with  darts  like  a  porcupine.  Dust  and  heat,  always  prevalent  in  August, 
exhausted  the  people  beyond  endurance  and,  in  addition,  severe  thirst 
assailed  them.  Finally,  just  as  the  sun  was  sinking  to  rest,  the  Turks, 
who  had  no  food  supplies  with  them  and  who  had,  moreover,  lost  some 
of  their  nobles,  gave  the  signal  for  retreat.  Overcome  with  wonder  at 
the  incomparable  perseverance  and  steadfastness  of  the  Christians,  they 
now  ceased  to  follow  our  army. 

Humphrey,  the  constable,  armed  with  his  bow,  was  pursuing  the 
retreating  infidels  a  little  apart  from  the  army  when  a  soldier  from 
the  enemy’s  ranks  approached  him.  Laying  down  his  arms,  he  clasped 
his  hands,  first  on  one  side,  then  on  the  other,  in  sign  of  reverence.  He 


212 


CAPTURE  OF  ASCALON 

was  a  confidential  retainer  of  a  very  powerful  Turkish  noble  who  was 
bound  to  the  constable  in  a  fraternal  alliance  and  that  very  closely. 
This  man  had  been  sent  to  greet  Humphrey  and  to  inform  him  of  con¬ 
ditions  in  the  hostile  army.  He  reported  that  Nureddin  intended  to 
return  with  his  army  to  his  own  land  that  very  night,  for  all  the  pro¬ 
visions  in  his  camp  were  exhausted  and  he  could  not  pursue  the  Chris¬ 
tians  farther.  The  messenger  then  returned  to  his  own  people,  and  the 
constable  went  back  to  the  camp.  He  communicated  the  news  that  he 
had  received  to  the  king,  and,  as  night  was  now  at  hand,  the  entire 
company  encamped  at  a  place  called  Joha.  There  was  no  further  trouble. 
During  the  following  days,  the  king  conducted  the  people  through  the 
wood  called  Marrim,  to  territory  which  was  under  the  jurisdiction  of 
the  Christians.  He  then  returned  to  Antioch. 

Nureddin  now  perceived  that  the  land  of  the  count  was  left  without 
the  aid  of  the  Latins.  Accordingly,  taking  advantage  of  the  unwarlike 
character  of  the  Greeks  to  whose  charge  it  had  been  resigned,  he  began 
to  trouble  it  sorely.  The  Greeks  found  themselves  unable  to  sustain 
his  repeated  attacks.  In  the  end,  he  sent  large  forces  and  laid  siege  to 
the  strongholds.  The  Greeks  were  driven  out  by  force  and,  within  a 
year,  he  had  seized  the  whole  region. 

Thus,  because  of  our  sins,  that  exceedingly  wealthy  province,  full 
of  streams,  woods,  and  pastures,  a  land  with  most  productive  soil  and 
abounding  in  all  kinds  of  commodities,  a  place  capable  of  affording 
sufficient  support  for  five  hundred  knights,  passed  into  the  enemy’s 
hands  and  even  to  the  present  day  is  alienated  from  our  jurisdiction. 

The  church  of  Antioch  suffered  the  loss  of  three  archbishoprics  in 
that  land,  namely,  those  at  Edessa,  Hierapolis,  and  Coritium.  These 
churches,  much  against  their  will,  are  still  held  by  the  infidels  in  the 
superstition  of  the  Gentiles. 

1 8.  The  king  advises  the  'princess  to  marry  one  of  the  princes  to 
rule  her  realmy  but  his  advice  is  not  heeded.  Re  goes  thence 
to  Tripoli  on  his  way  home. 

Great  was  the  anxiety  of  King  Baldwin  of  Jerusalem  at  this  time  on 
behalf  of  Antioch  and  the  lands  adjacent  to  it.  He  feared  lest,  deprived 

Territories  were  soon  lost,  it  is  true,  but  most  of  them  were  captured  by  Masud 
in  the  next  three  or  four  years.  Nureddin  acquired  many  of  them  after  the  death  of 
Masud  in  1155  or  1156. 


CAPTURE  OF  ASCALON 


213 

as  it  was  of  the  protection  of  its  prince,  it  might  fall  into  the  hand  of 
the  enemy  and  suffer  the  pitiable  fate  of  Edessa,  as  just  related.  This 
would  cause  still  more  trouble  and  bring  intolerable  loss  upon  the 
Christian  people.  He  himself  was  not  free  to  remain  longer  at  Antioch, 
since  the  responsibilities  of  his  own  kingdom  required  his  return.  He 
therefore  repeatedly  advised  the  princess  to  choose  one  of  the  nobles 
as  a  husband,  by  whose  counsel  and  efforts  the  principality  might  be 
governed. 

There  were  in  the  land  at  that  time  a  number  of  noble  and  distin¬ 
guished  men  attached  to  the  camp  of  the  king.  Among  them  were  Ives 
de  Nesle,  count  of  Soissons,  a  distinguished  man,  wise  and  discreet,  of 
great  influence  in  the  kingdom  of  the  Franks  j  Walter  de  Falkenberg,^^ 
castellan  of  St.  Omer,  who  was  later  lord  of  Tiberias,  a  discreet  man 
and  very  courteous,  wise  in  counsel  and  valiant  in  arms  3  and  also  Ralph 
de  Merle,  a  noble  of  the  highest  rank,  experienced  in  the  practice  of 
arms  and  noted  for  his  good  sense.  Any  one  of  these  seemed  with  justice 
quite  capable  of  protecting  the  region.  The  princess,  however,  dreaded 
the  yoke  of  marriage  and  preferred  a  free  and  independent  life.  She 
paid  little  heed  to  the  needs  of  her  people  and  was  far  more  interested 
in  enjoying  the  pleasures  of  life.^^ 

The  king,  well  aware  of  her  predilection,  called  a  general  council 
at  Tripoli,  consisting  of  the  nobles  of  the  kingdom  and  the  principality.  ' 
To  this  he  invited  the  patriarch  of  Antioch  and  his  suffragans  and  also 
the  princess  with  her  nobles.  His  mother.  Queen  Melisend,  was  also 
present,  attended  by  the  princes  of  the  kingdom.  After  subjects  of 
general  interest  had  received  careful  attention,  the  matter  of  the  mar¬ 
riage  of  the  princess  was  given  consideration.  Neither  the  king  nor  the 
count,  her  kinsmen,  neither  the  queen  nor  the  countess  of  Tripoli,  her 
two  aunts,  was  able  to  induce  her  to  yield  and  thus  provide  for  herself 
and  her  land. 

It  was  rumored,  however,  that  she  was  guided  by  the  advice  of  the 
patriarch.  He,  being  a  very  artful  and  subtle  man,  is  said  to  have  sup¬ 
ported  her  in  this  mistake,  in  order  that  he  might  have  a  freer  hand 
in  the  government  of  the  land — a  thing  which  he  greatly  desired.  Since 

Walter  de  Falkenberg-  was  a  member  of  the  famous  family  of  castellans  of  St.  Omer, 
one  of  whom,  Hugh,  had  been  the  second  lord  of  Tiberias  (R.  Grousset,  Histoire  des 
croisades  et  du  royaume  franc  de  Jerusalem^  II,  App.  i  j  see  also  note  40). 

Emperor  Manuel  was  quite  as  much  interested  in  having  Constance  accept  a 
suitable  husband  as  was  Baldwin  III.  His  choice,  however,  was  a  Greek,  Caesar  John, 
his  own  brother-in-law  (Chalandon,  Les  Comnene^  II,  426). 


214  CAPTURE  OF  ASCALON 

nothing  could  be  accomplished  in  respect  to  this  matter,  the  assembly 
broke  up  and  all  returned  home.®^ 

19.  The  king  and  his  mother  meet  at  Tripoli  to  try  to  effect  a 
reconciliation  between  the  count  and  his  wifcy  hut  without 
results.  The  count  is  killed  by  the  Assassins  at  the  city  gate. 

During  this  time  an  enmity  arising  from  jealousy  sprang  up  between 
the  count  of  Tripoli  and  his  wife,  a  sister  of  Queen  Melisend*  It  was 
in  the  hope  of  settling  this  unpleasantness  and  at  the  same  time  of 
visiting  her  niece,  the  princess  of  Antioch,  that  Queen  Melisend  had 
come  thither.  Since  she  had  met  with  but  little  success  in  patching  up  the 
matter,  however,  she  determined  to  take  her  sister  back  with  her,  and, 
with  this  end  in  view,  the  two  had  already  left  the  city  of  Tripoli.  The 
count  accompanied  the  princess  for  a  time  on  her  journeys  then,  after 
a  little  time,  he  took  leave  of  her  and  returned.  As  he  was  entering 
the  city  gate,  without  thought  of  evil  mishap,  he  was  struck  down  by 
the  swords  of  the  Assassins  at  the  entrance  to  the  gate  between  the 
barbican  and  the  wall  and  perished  miserably.  With  him  was  slain  also 
that  distinguished  nobleman  mentioned  above,  Ralph  de  Merle,  and 
one  of  his  knights,  both  of  whom  had  chanced  to  be  with  the  count  on 
that  journey. 

During  this  time  the  king,  free  from  care,  was  enjoying  himself  over 
a  game  of  dice  in  the  city,  unconscious  of  all  that  had  happened.  At 
the  news  of  the  count’s  murder,  the  whole  city  was  roused.  The  people 
flew  to  arms  and  without  discrimination  put  to  the  sword  all  those  who 
were  found  to  differ  either  in  language  or  dress  from  the  Latins.  In 
this  way  it  was  hoped  that  the  perpetrators  of  the  foul  deed  might  be 
found. 

Roused  by  the  sudden  uproar,  the  king  learned  of  the  count’s  mur¬ 
der.  Saddened  and  greatly  depressed,  he  could  not  refrain  from  tears 
and  sighs,  and  ordered  that  his  mother  and  aunt  be  recalled  at  once. 
On  their  return,  the  body  was  committed  to  the  tomb  with  due  mag- 
nificence  amid  the  lamentations  and  tears  of  all.  By  the  king’s  order,  all 

the  nobles  of  those  parts  then  swore  allegiance  to  the  countess  and  her 
children. 

The  time  of  this  meeting*  at  Tripoli  is  not  clear.  It  might  have  occurred  on 
Baldwin’s  return  from  the  north  late  in  1150,  but  the  events  of  the  next  chapter  are 
apparently  intertwined  with  this  and  involve  the  death  of  Raymond  II  of  Tripoli, 
which  cannot  be  placed  earlier  than  1151  (see  Stevenson,  Crusaders y  p.  170,  note  5). 


CAPTURE  OF  ASCALON 


215 


The  count  left  a  son  of  the  same  name,  Raymond,  hardly  twelve 
years  old,  and  a  younger  daughter  called  Melisend.  When  the  king  had 
arranged  affairs  in  this  way,  he  returned  to  the  kingdom  accompanied 
by  his  mother  and  the  nobles  of  his  court. 

20.  A  great  army  of  ’Turks  advances  against  J erusalem  to  take 
Hy  but  the  Christians  march  forth  and  defeat  them  with 
much  valor. 

Not  very  long  after  this,  certain  Turkish  satraps  surnamed  Hiaroquin, 
powerful  men  of  distinguished  lineage  among  their  own  people,  as¬ 
sembled  a  great  number  of  Turks  and  determined  to  go  to  seize  Jeru¬ 
salem  as  belonging  to  them  by  hereditary  right. For,  prior  to  its 
deliverance  by  the  Christians,  the  sacred  city  is  said  to  have  belonged 
to  them  by  ancestral  heritage.  Their  mother  was  a  zealous  advocate  of 
this  course  and  reproached  her  sons  because  they  had  allowed  them¬ 
selves  to  be  exiled  for  so  long  from  their  hereditary  possessions. 

Moved  by  the  incessant  admonitions  of  their  aged  mother,  they  set 
out  on  the  march  at  the  head  of  a  large  number  of  knights  with  the 
intention  of  accomplishing  their  desired  end,  if  the  Lord  should  so 
permit.  At  Damascus  they  tarried  for  a  while  to  refresh  their  troops 
and  recruit  their  strength.  The  people  of  that  city  tried  in  vain  to  divert 
them  from  their  foolish  project,  but  they  refused  to  listen.  They  re¬ 
plenished  their  supplies,  rearranged  the  baggage,  and  again  resumed 
their  march  to  Jerusalem,  as  if  without  doubt  of  success.  With  their 
numerous  train  they  crossed  the  Jordan  and  went  up  into  the  moun¬ 
tainous  country  where  the  holy  city  lies  and  came  to  the  Mount  of 
Olives,  which  towers  above  Jerusalem  and  is  adjacent  to  it.  Thence 
they  could  gain  an  unobstructed  view  of  all  the  venerable  places  and 
especially  of  the  temple  of  the  Lord,  which  they  hold  in  peculiar 
reverence  3  in  fact,  the  outlook  embraced  the  whole  city. 

Most  of  the  armed  forces  of  the  region  had  gone  to  Nablus,  where 
they  feared  the  enemy  might  assemble  since  the  city  itself  was  without 
fortifications.  When  the  people  who  were  left  at  Jerusalem  saw  the 

This  interesting*  undertaking  by  descendants  of  the  Turks  who  had  held  Jerusalem 
up  to  1098  is  not  mentioned  by  Qalanisi.  The  leader  whom  William  calls  Hiaroquin 
(probably  for  Yaruk)  has  been  identified  as  Timurtash  of  Maridin,  of  the  Ortuqid 
dynasty.  Both  Rdhricht  and  Stevenson  accept  the  identification.  Despite  William’s 
statement  that  the  expedition  stopped  at  Damascus  on  its  way,  it  is  not  mentioned  in 
the  Damascus  Chronicle  (see  R.  A".  7.,  p.  271). 


ai6 


CAPTURE  OF  ASCALON 

army  of  Turks  advancingj  they  feared  that  it  would  soon  descend  upon 
them.  They  at  once  seized  their  weapons  and^  invoking  aid  from 
heaven,  marched  zealously  forth  against  the  enemy,  eager  to  engage 
them. 

The  road  which  goes  down  from  Jerusalem  to  Jericho  and  thence 
to  the  Jordan  is  very  rough  and  dangerous.  The  many  steep  and 
precipitous  places  render  both  the  ascent  and  the  descent  very  difficult 
for  travellers  even  when  the  road  is  unchallenged  and  there  is  no 
reason  for  fear.  When  the  foe  entered  this  road,  the  Christians  fell 
furiously  upon  them  and  put  them  to  flight  in  panic.  Many  fell  head¬ 
long  and  perished  without  the  aid  of  the  sword,  for  the  cliffs  and 
narrow  defiles  afforded  no  easy  passage  to  fugitives.  Some  who  had 
taken  to  the  more  level  roads  tried  to  continue  their  flight,  but  here 
too  they  encountered  the  swords  of  the  Christians  and,  mortally 
wounded,  met  sudden  death.  Their  horses,  fatigued  by  the  hardships 
of  the  long  march,  were  unable  to  endure  the  rough  roadj  they  gave 
out  utterly  and  refused  to  obey  their  riders.  The  Turks  were  thus  forced 
to  become  foot  soldiers.  Burdened  by  their  arms  and  wholly  unac¬ 
customed  to  hardships,  they  were  cut  down  like  sheep  by  the  swords 
of  their  pursuers.  So  terrible  was  the  massacre  of  both  men  and  horses 
that  the  progress  of  the  Christians  was  hindered.  Yet  all  the  more 
eagerly  they  pursued  their  advantage.  Scorning  thought  of  plunder, 
they  passed  by  the  spoils  and  continued  the  fierce  slaughter,  for  it  was 
regarded  as  the  supreme  reward  to  be  bathed  in  the  blood  of  the  foe. 

As  soon  as  the  people  who  had  assembled  at  Nablus  heard  that  this 
enemy  was  marching  to  attack  Jerusalem,  they  left  as  with  one  accord 
and  rushed  to  the  fords  of  the  Jordan  to  prevent  the  Turks  from  cross¬ 
ing.  They  attacked  on  the  side  those  who  had  escaped  their  pursuers, 
caught  them  off  guard,  and  slew  them.  The  hand  of  the  Lord  was 
indeed  heavy  upon  our  enemies  that  day,  for,  as  it  is  written,  ‘^That 
which  the  palmer-worm  hath  left,  hath  the  locust  eaten.”  Those 
who  thought  they  had  escaped  their  pursuers,  thanks  to  the  speed  of 
their  horses  or  in  some  other  way,  fell  by  the  swords  of  the  Christians 
who  attacked  them  from  another  direction.  Others  who  had  entered 
the  Jordan  ahead  of  the  main  line,  through  their  ignorance  of  the 
fords,  were  seized  by  the  tumultuous  waves  and  drowned  in  the  river. 
Thus  the  host  which  had  gone  up  with  many  thousands,  strong  in  the 

Joel  1:4. 


CAPTURE  OF  ASCALON 


217 

pride  of  their  might,  relying  on  the  strength  of  their  cavalry,  returned 
to  their  own  land  reduced  to  a  small  number  and  covered  with  con¬ 
fusion  and  terror.  It  is  reported  that  about  five  thousand  of  the  enemy 
were  killed  that  day. 

This  happened  on  the  ninth  day  before  the  Kalends  of  December 
[November  23]  in  the  year  of  the  Incarnation  of  the  Lord  1152  and 
the  ninth  year  of  the  reign  of  King  Baldwin,  the  fourth  king  of  Jeru¬ 
salem.'^^ 

Laden  with  the  spoils  of  the  foe  and  driving  before  them  as  trophies 
much  plunder  in  the  shape  of  cattle,  the  Christians  returned  to  Jeru¬ 
salem  to  offer  solemn  sacrifice  of  thanksgiving  to  the  Lord. 

21.  The  king  and  the  barofis  of  the  realm  refair  to  Ascalon  with 
the  intention  of  devastating  the  orchards  which  encircle  the 
city,  Imf roving  on  their  original  flan^  however ^  they  lay 
siege  to  the  city. 

This  victory,  granted  by  divine  favor,  raised  the  hopes  of  the  Chris¬ 
tians  greatly.  Accordingly,  the  Lord  directing  their  purposes,  it  was 
unanimously  resolved,  by  the  wish  of  the  least  as  well  as  the  greatest, 
to  try  in  some  way  to  injure  their  enemies  in  that  vicinity  who  had  so 
often  brought  serious  trouble  on  them,  namely,  the  people  of  Ascalon. 

It  seemed  the  most  satisfactory  plan  for  the  time  being  to  try  to 
destroy  with  a  strong  force  the  orchards  in  the  vicinity  of  Ascalon. 
These  were  of  great  value  to  the  citizens,  and,  in  this  way,  some  loss 
might  be  inflicted  upon  the  insolent  foe.  With  this  purpose  in  view,  the 
entire  strength  of  the  realm  was  gathered  in  large  numbers  before  the 
city  just  mentioned.  If  this  plan  could  be  successfully  carried  out  they 
felt  that  it  would  be  sufficient. 

But  divine  mercy  in  marvellous  fashion  attended  the  Christians 
assembled  before  that  city  and  suddenly  began  to  spur  them  on  to 
greater  things.  Scarcely  had  our  forces  taken  up  a  position  before  the 
city  when  a  panic  seized  on  the  townspeople.  In  great  haste  they  re¬ 
treated  within  the  city,  and  not  a  man  dared  venture  outside  the  walls 
to  meet  our  soldiers.  Taking  advantage,  therefore,  of  the  enemy’s 
terrified  condition,  the  Christians,  directed  by  divine  grace,  decided 

This  statement  of  the  date  is  formal  and  appears  to  be  correct.  William  has  not 
applied  his  determination  to  Count  Godfrey  as  the  first  king,  which  would  have  made 
Baldwin  III  the  fifth  king.  The  reckoning  of  1152  as  the  ninth  regnal  year  of  Bald¬ 
win  III  serves  as  a  point  of  comparison  with  other  formal  dates  used  by  William. 


2i8 


CAPTURE  OF  ASCALON 

to  besiege  the  city  also.  Messengers  were  at  once  sent  throughout  the 
kingdom  to  announce  the  plan,  inspired  by  God,  and  to  summon  those 
who  had  remained  at  home,  that  no  one  might  fail  to  be  present  on 
the  day  appointed. 

Those  who  had  been  called  assembled  joyfully  and  without  delay. 
They  joined  their  comrades  who  had  preceded  them  and  encamped 
with  the  others  around  the  city.  And  that  all  might  continue  steadfast 
in  their  undertaking  without  thought  of  wavering,  they  bound  them¬ 
selves  by  solemn  oath,  one  to  another,  that  they  would  not  abandon 
the  siege  till  the  city  had  been  taken.  Thus  the  whole  strength  of  the 
kingdom  having  been  convoked  and  the  people  assembled  with  una¬ 
nimity  of  purpose,  the  king  and  the  patriarch  with  the  other  nobles 
of  the  realm,  both  secular  and  ecclesiastic,  accompanied  by  the  life- 
giving  and  venerated  sign  of  the  Cross  of  the  Lord,  encamped  before 
Ascalon  under  happy  auspices  on  the  eighth  day  before  the  Kalends  of 
February. 

There  were  present  the  following  prelates  of  the  church:  Fulcher, 
the  lord  patriarch  of  Jerusalem  j  Peter,  archbishop  of  Tyrej  Baldwin, 
archbishop  of  Caesarea  j  Robert,  archbishop  of  Nazareth  j  Frederick, 
bishop  of  Acre  j  and  Gerald,  bishop  of  Bethlehem.  There  were  certain 
abbots  present  also.  Bernard  de  Tremelay,  master  of  the  Knights 
Templars  3  and  Raymond,  master  of  the  Hospital,  also  attended. 

Among  the  lay  princes  present  were:  Hugh  dTbelin,  Philip  of 
Nablus,  Humphrey  of  Toron,  Simon  of  Tiberias,  Gerard  of  Sidon,  Guy 
of  Beirut,  Maurice  of  Montreal,  Renaud  de  Chatillon  and  Walter  of 
St.  Omer.  These  last  two  served  the  king  for  pay.^^ 

The  tents  were  set  up  and  arranged  in  a  circle  and  definite  and  suit¬ 
able  quarters  assigned  to  each  noble.  They  then  applied  themselves 
loyally  to  the  work  in  hand,  with  wisdom  and  foresight  putting  forth 
the  efforts  which  so  important  a  task  demanded. 

January  25,  1153. 

It  is  interesting  to  note  that  nobles  of  some  importance,  such  as  Walter,  castellan 
of  St.  Omer,  served  for  pay.  Both  of  these  men  were  noble  adventurers  each  of  whom 
gained  a  place  in  Latin  Syria  through  marriage.  There  is  a  very  brief  collection  of 
references  to  Walter  de  Falkenberg,  castellan  of  St.  Omer,  by  Giry  (see  A.  Giry,  ‘Tes 
Chatelains  de  Saint-Omer  1042-1386,”  Bihliotheque  de  VEcole  des  chartes^  XXXV 

[1874],  341—43).  Renaud  de  Chatillon  is  the  subject  of  an  extended  biography  (see 
G.  Schlumberger,  Renaud  de  Chatillon) , 


CAPTURE  OF  ASCALON 


219 


22.  The  situation  of  the  city  Is  described  and  Its  advantages  set 
forth, 

Ascalon  is  one  of  the  five  cities  of  the  Philistines.  It  lies  upon  the  sea- 
coast  in  the  form  of  a  semicircle,  the  chord  or  diameter  of  which  extends 
along  the  shore,  while  the  arc  or  bow  lies  on  the  land  looking  toward 
the  east.  The  entire  city  rests  in  a  basin,  as  it  were,  sloping  to  the  sea 
and  is  surrounded  on  all  sides  by  artificial  mounds,  upon  which  rise  the 
walls  with  towers  at  frequent  intervals.  The  whole  is  built  of  solid 
masonry,  held  together  by  cement  which  is  harder  than  stone.  The 
walls  are  wide,  of  goodly  thickness  and  proportionate  height.  The  city 
is  furthermore  encircled  by  outworks  built  with  the  same  solidity  and 
most  carefully  fortified.  There  are  no  springs  within  the  confines  of 
the  walls,  nor  are  there  any  near  by,  but  wells,  both  without  and  within 
the  city,  furnish  an  abundant  supply  of  fresh  water  fit  for  drinking.  As 
a  further  precaution,  the  citizens  had  constructed  within  the  town 
cisterns  to  receive  the  rain  water. 

There  are  four  gates  in  the  circuit  of  the  wall,  strongly  defended 
by  lofty  and  massive  towers.  The  first  of  these,  facing  east,  is  called 
the  Greater  gate  and  sometimes  the  gate  of  Jerusalem,  because  it  faces 
toward  the  Holy  City.  It  is  surmounted  by  two  very  lofty  towers  which 
serve  as  a  strong  protection  for  the  city  below.  In  the  barbican  before 
this  gate  are  three  or  four  smaller  gates  through  which  one  passes  to 
the  main  entrance  by  various  winding  ways  . 

The  second  gate  faces  the  west.  It  is  called  the  Sea  gate,  because 
through  it  the  people  have  egress  to  the  sea.  The  third  to  the  south 
looks  toward  the  city  of  Gaza,  to  which  reference  has  been  made  above, 
whence  also  it  takes  its  name.  The  fourth,  with  outlook  toward  the 
north,  is  called  the  gate  of  Jaffa  from  the  neighboring  city  which  lies 
on  this  same  coast. 

Ascalon  is  at  a  disadvantage,  however,  from  the  fact  that  its  location 
admits  of  neither  a  port  nor  any  other  safe  harborage  for  ships.  The 
shore  is  very  sandy,  and  the  violent  winds  make  the  surrounding  sea 
so  tempestuous  that  it  is  generally  feared  by  all  who  approach  it  except 
in  very  calm  weather. 

The  soil  of  the  fields  surrounding  the  city  is  overlaid  with  sand  and 
is  consequently  unfit  for  agriculture,  yet  it  is  well  adapted  to  the  culture 
of  vineyards  and  fruit  trees.  There  are,  however,  a  few  valleys  on  the 


220  CAPTURE  OF  ASCALON 

north  which,  when  well  fertilized  and  irrigated  with  water  from  the 
wells,  furnish  the  townspeople  with  a  certain  amount  of  fruits  and 
vegetables. 

There  was  a  large  population  in  that  city,  even  the  least  of  whom — 
and,  indeed,  according  to  the  general  report,  even  the  youngest  babes 
— ^received  pay  from  the  treasury  of  the  caliph  of  Egypt.  That  monarch 
and  his  princes  felt  the  utmost  solicitude  for  Ascalon,  realizing  that  if 
it  should  fall  and  come  into  the  power  of  the  Christians  there  would 
be  nothing  to  prevent  our  leaders  from  invading  Egypt  without  let  or 
hindrance  and  seizing  that  kingdom  by  force. 

They  regarded  Ascalon  as  a  bulwark,  therefore,  and  four  times  a 
year  with  lavish  munificence  they  furnished  assistance  to  the  city, 
both  by  land  and  by  sea.  As  long  as  Ascalon  held  out  and  our  people 
exhausted  their  zealous  efforts  upon  it,  the  Egyptians  themselves  might 
enjoy  the  coveted  peace.  At  great  expense,  therefore,  they  furnished 
the  city  with  everything  needful  and  at  regular  intervals  sent  arms, 
food,  and  fresh  troops,  for  while  the  Christians  were  occupied  with 
Ascalon  the  Egyptians  felt  less  anxiety  over  our  dreaded  strength. 

23.  Siege  oferations  are  begun;  officers  are  f laced  in  command 
of  the  fleet  and  also  of  the  land  army. 

For  fifty  years  and  more  after  the  Lord  had  given  the  rest  of  the 
Land  of  Promise  into  the  hands  of  the  Christian  people,  Ascalon  had 
resisted  all  our  attempts  and  shown  itself  a  formidable  rival  to  us.  The 
Christians  finally  resolved  to  besiege  the  place.  This  was  an  arduous 
and  almost  impossible  feat,  for  Ascalon  was  well  defended  by  walls 
and  barbicans,  towers  and  embankments,  and  equipped  with  an  in¬ 
credible  amount  of  arms  and  provisions.  In  addition,  it  had  a  large 
population  well  trained  and  thoroughly  versed  in  the  practice  of  arms. 
In  fact,  from  the  very  beginning  of  the  siege  even  unto  the  end  the 
number  of  defenders  was  double  that  of  the  besieging  host. 

The  king,  the  patriarch,  Peter,  archbishop  of  Tyre,  our  predecessor, 
and  other  great  men  of  the  realm,  princes  as  well  as  prelates  of  the 
church,  and  the  citizens  of  each  city  set  up  their  tents  separately  and 
blockaded  the  city  by  land.  The  fleet  of  fifteen  ships,  beaked  and 
equipped  to  sail,  was  placed  in  the  command  of  Gerard  of  Sidon,  one  of 

See  Book  XVII,  note  28  j  Book  XIII,  note  39. 


CAPTURE  OF  ASCALON 


221 


the  great  barons  of  the  realm. He  was  to  prevent  any  approach  from 
the  sea  and  likewise  to  frustrate  all  attempts  at  egress  from  the  city.  Al¬ 
most  daily  our  people,  now  the  knights  and  again  the  foot  soldiers,  made 
attacks  upon  the  city.  The  townspeople,  however,  met  these  attempts 
with  courage  and  resisted  with  spirit,  for  they  were  fighting  for  their 
wives  and  children  and,  what  is  far  more  important,  for  liberty  itself. 
In  these  engagements,  as  usually  happens  under  such  conditions,  vic¬ 
tory  fell  now  to  the  citizens  and  again  to  the  Christians,  but  on  the 
whole  success  more  often  fell  to  the  lot  of  our  forces. 

There  was  said  to  be  such  security  in  that  camp,  such  opportunities 
of  buying  all  kinds  of  commodities,  that  the  people  in  their  tents  and 
pavilions  lived  as  they  were  accustomed  to  do  at  home  in  their  walled 
cities. 

The  townspeople  guarded  the  city  with  especial  care  at  night.  Re¬ 
lays  of  watchers  were  employed,  and  even  the  leading  men  of  the  city 
took  their  turn  at  patrolling  the  walls,  passing  the  greater  part  of  the 
night  without  sleeping.  Along  the  walls  and  on  the  ramparts  of  the 
towers  were  placed  glass  lamps  fed  by  oil  and  provided  with  trans¬ 
parent  covers  to  protect  the  flame.  These  made  it  as  bright  as  day  and 
assisted  the  watchers  while  they  were  making  the  rounds  of  the  walls. 

In  the  Christian  camp  detachments  of  sentinels  were  also  provided 
for  the  protection  of  our  troops.  The  watch  never  ceased,  for  it  was 
feared  that  the  citizens  might  attack  the  camp  under  cover  of  night. 
There  was  also  danger  that  the  Egyptians,  hastening  to  the  aid  of 
Ascalon,  might  suddenly  and  unexpectedly  fall  upon  the  army,  al¬ 
though  scouts  had  been  stationed  in  many  places  around  Gaza  to  give 
timely  warning  of  the  enemy’s  approach. 

24.  During  the  second  month  of  the  siege^  a  crossing  of  filgrims 
occurs.  This  is  of  great  assistance  to  the  Christians  in  carry¬ 
ing  on  the  blockade. 

The  siege  continued  for  two  months  without  change.  About  Easter 
time,  the  customary  crossing  took  place  which  brought  great  numbers 
of  pilgrims  thither.  After  taking  counsel  together,  the  Christians  dis¬ 
patched  messengers  from  the  army  forbidding  all  sailors  and  pilgrims. 

This  is  one  of  the  clearest  indications  of  the  existence  of  a  royal  fleet.  Whether 
the  ships  were  built  or  bought  for  the  occasion  or  were  part  of  a  permanent  force  is 
not  stated,  though  the  appointment  of  Gerard  of  Sidon  as  commander  would  seem 
to  be  purely  temporary. 


222 


CAPTURE  OF  ASCALON 


by  the  king’s  command,  to  return  home.  All,  under  promise  of  pay, 
were  invited  to  take  part  in  the  siege,  a  labor  so  acceptable  to  God.^^ 
All  vessels  also,  whether  great  or  small,  were  ordered  to  sail  to  Ascalon. 
Within  a  very  few  days,  therefore,  all  the  ships  that  had  come  in  that 
crossing  arrived  before  the  city,  sped  by  a  favoring  breeze,  and  great 
forces  of  pilgrims,  both  knights  and  foot  soldiers,  joined  our  ranks. 
Thus,  day  by  day,  the  strength  of  the  army  increased.  Great  was  the 
joy  in  camp,  and  hope  of  winning  the  victory  was  unbounded. 

Among  the  enemy,  on  the  contrary,  grief  and  anxiety  prevailed  ever 
more  and  more.  They  began  to  feel  less  confident  of  their  own  strength 
and,  although  more  frequently  challenged,  sallied  forth  less  often  to 
the  conflict.  Again  and  again  they  besought  the  caliph  of  Egypt  to  send 
them  aid  as  soon  as  possible,  for  otherwise  they  must  soon  give  way. 
Accordingly,  the  caliph  took  active  measures  for  their  relief.  He 
ordered  the  nobles  responsible  for  such  work  to  prepare  a  fleet  and 
muster  an  army.  He  had  the  tall  ships  loaded  with  arms,  provisions, 
and  engines  of  war,  appointed  commanders,  and  provided  for  the  neces¬ 
sary  expenses,  all  the  while  chiding  delay  and  commanding  haste. 

In  the  meantime,  the  Christians  had  purchased  ships  for  a  great  sum 
and  removed  the  masts.  Workmen  were  then  called  in  and  ordered  to 
build  a  very  high  tower  of  the  wood.  This  was  carefully  protected 
against  fire  and  other  untoward  accidents  by  wickerwork  and  hides, 
both  inside  and  out,  that  the  fighters  who  were  to  attack  the  city  from 
it  might  be  quite  safe.  The  material  which  was  left  from  the  wooden 
ships  was  used  to  construct  hurling  engines,  which  were  then  placed  in 
strategic  positions  for  battering  down  the  walls.  Covered  sheds  were 
also  made  from  the  same  material  under  protection  of  which  the  em¬ 
bankments  might  be  approached  and  levelled  in  safety.  All  these  prepa¬ 
rations  were  duly  made  and  the  section  of  wall  to  which  the  engines 
could  be  most  easily  applied  carefully  considered.  Then  when  the 
greater  part  of  the  embankment  had  been  levelled,  as  mentioned  above, 
the  tower  was  moved  with  loud  shouts  to  the  wall.  From  its  top  a  view 
of  the  entire  city  could  be  gained  and  a  hand-to-hand  fight  with  the 
defenders  in  the  towers  near  by  carried  on.  The  townspeople,  however, 
now  from  the  walls  and  now  from  the  mounds,  boldly  and  persistently 
used  their  bows  and  arrows  to  harass  those  concealed  within  the  mov- 

The  use  of  money  had  become  increasingly  common  in  the  conduct  of  warfare 
in  the  East  by  this  time.  It  could  purchase  many  forms  of  service  ranging  from  manual 
labor  to  responsible  military  aid. 


CAPTURE  OF  ASCALON 


223 


able  towers.  All  their  efforts  were  in  vain,  however,  for  they  were 
unable  to  harm  those  who  were  pushing  the  engine  forward.  A  great 
crowd  of  defenders  was  then  massed  at  the  section  of  the  wall  opposite 
the  tower,  and  the  bolder  spirits  among  them  were  ordered  to  try  their 
strength  there  in  a  continual  fight  with  the  assailants  in  the  movable 
tower. 

Incessant  fighting  was  also  going  on  at  the  same  time  at  various 
points  elsewhere  along  the  walls.  Scarcely  a  day  passed  without  carnage, 
to  say  nothing  of  the  great  number  of  wounded  on  both  sides.  We  have 
heard  stories  of  memorable  deeds  wrought  at  that  siege  by  certain 
individuals  and  of  the  remarkable  valor  shown  both  by  the  enemy  and 
the  Christians.  Since  we  are  writing  a  general  history,  however,  little 
attention  can  be  paid  to  incidents  of  this  kind. 

25.  During  the  fifth  month  of  the  siege y  the  Egyftian  fleet  ar¬ 
rives  at  Ascalofiy  an  event  which  affords  much  consolation 
to  the  besieged* 

For  five  consecutive  months  our  leaders  had  persevered  in  the  siege, 
and  the  strength  of  the  foe  was  apparently  becoming  somewhat  im¬ 
paired.  The  prospect  of  taking  the  city  seemed  brighter  than  usual, 
when  suddenly  the  Egyptian  fleet,  borne  by  favoring  breezes,  appeared 
before  the  city.  At  sight  of  it  the  Ascalonites  raised  their  hands  to  the 
heavens  and,  with  loud  shouts,  cried  out  that  the  Christians  would  now 
have  to  retreat  or  soon  perish.  When  Gerard  of  Sidon,  the  commander 
of  the  Christian  fleet,  perceived  that  the  ships  were  nearing  the  city, 
he  tried  to  hinder  their  progress  by  attacking  them  with  his  small 
number  of  galleys.  At  last,  however,  alarmed  at  the  large  numbers  of 
the  foe,  he  turned  back  again  and  took  measures  for  life  and  safety  by 
flight. 

The  enemy ^s  force  sailed  boldly  toward  the  city  with  the  long- 
deferred  assistance  for  the  beseiged.  The  fleet  consisted,  according  to 
report,  of  seventy  galleys  and  some  other  ships  laden  to  the  limit  with 
men,  arms,  and  food.  The  vessels  were  of  immense  size  and  had  all 
been  sent  for  the  aid  of  the  city  by  the  Egyptian  prince  mentioned 
above.  Thus  reinforced,  the  enemy  once  more  began  hostilities,  and, 
as  with  strength  renewed,  more  boldly  and  more  frequently  they  now 
challenged  us  to  fight.  The  citizens  themselves,  who  well  knew  the 
prowess  of  our  men,  were  somewhat  wary,  but  the  rougher  element  and 


CAPTURE  OF  ASCALON 


224 

the  newcomers  thirsted  for  glory  and  longed  to  show  their  strength 
and  courage.  They  rushed  into  the  conflict  without  caution  and  fell 
in  large  numbers,  until,  having  experienced  the  steadfast  courage  of 
the  Christians,  they  learned  to  deliver  their  attacks  with  more  caution 
and  to  sustain  our  onslaughts  with  more  moderation. 

26.  Constance y  'princess  of  Antioch,  weds  Renaud  de  Chatillon, 
Nureddin  seizes  the  kingdom  of  Damascus  by  force.  Amal- 
rich  is  placed  over  the  church  at  Sidon. 

While  these  things  were  happening  in  the  camp  before  Ascalon,  the 
Lady  Constance,  widow  of  Prince  Raymond  of  Antioch,  who,  after 
the  fashion  of  women,  had  refused  many  distinguished  nobles,  secretly 
chose  as  her  husband  Renaud  de  Chatillon,  a  knight  in  the  pay  of  the 
king.  She  did  not  wish  this  to  be  made  public,  however,  until  she  had 
secured  the  authority  and  consent  of  the  king,  her  cousin,  under  whose 
protection  her  principality  lay.  Accordingly,  Renaud  hastened  to  the 
army  to  communicate  her  intention  to  the  king  and,  after  obtaining  his 
consent,  returned  to  Antioch  and  married  the  princess.  Many  there 
were,  however,  who  marvelled  that  a  woman  so  eminent,  so  distin¬ 
guished  and  powerful,  who  had  been  the  wife  of  a  very  illustrious 
man,  should  stoop  to  marry  an  ordinary  knight.^'^ 

During  this  time  also,  Nureddin,  a  man  of  much  foresight  and  dis¬ 
cretion,  learned  of  the  death  of  his  father-in-law,  Anar.^^  This  dis¬ 
tinguished  man,  the  commander  in  chief  of  the  army  of  Damascus  and 
the  administrator  of  the  king^s  affairs,  had  always  strenuously  resisted 
all  the  projects  of  his  son-in-law.  Nureddin  was  aware  that  the  king  of 
Jerusalem  with  all  the  chivalry  of  the  land  had  been  for  some  time 
engaged  in  beseiging  Ascalon,  and  he  felt  confident  that  Baldwin  would 
not  willingly  abandon  that  undertaking  to  respond  to  the  appeals  of 
the  Damascenes  for  assistance  against  himself.  He  therefore  seized  the 
opportunity  and  marched  against  Damascus  with  a  large  army  to  take 
the  kingdom  by  force.  The  people  received  him  with  favor,  however, 

This  statement  is  somewhat  inconsistent  with  both  William’s  earlier  statement  re¬ 
garding-  Walter  of  St.  Omer  and  his  list  of  prominent  leaders  at  Ascalon  among  whom 
he  included  both  Renaud  de  Chatillon  and  Walter,  castellan  of  St.  Omer. 

Anar  had  died  August  28,  ii49)  according  to  Qalanisi,  who  describes  the  event 
in  some  detail  (Gibb,  Chronicle^  pp.  294-95).  Nureddin  made  attempts  to  gain 
Damascus  after  Anar’s  death  as  well  as  before.  He  finally  succeeded  in  April,  1 1 54, 
having  prepared  the  way  by  a  sort  of  blockade  of  foodstuffs  (Gibb,  Chronicley  pp. 
320-21). 


CAPTURE  OF  ASCALON 


225 

and  surrendered  voluntarily  j  whereupon  he  removed  their  monarch, 
a  dissolute  and  worthless  man,  from  power  and  forced  him  to  fly  to 
the  Orient,  a  fugitive  and  exile  over  the  earth.  This  change  was  de¬ 
cidedly  disastrous  to  the  interests  of  the  kingdom.  In  place  of  a  man 
without  power,  whose  weakness  rendered  him  harmless  to  the  Chris¬ 
tians  and  who  up  to  this  time,  as  if  subject,  had  rendered  them  an  an¬ 
nual  tribute,  a  formidable  adversary  arose.  For  just  as  ^^Every  kingdom 
divided  against  itself  is  brought  to  desolation,”  according  to  the 
words  of  the  Saviour,  so  many  kingdoms  when  united  tend  to  gain 
strength  from  one  another  and  rise  with  greater  strength  against  a 
common  foe. 

Thus,  after  Nureddin  had  taken  Damascus  and  subdued  all  the 
region  round  about,  he  desired  to  assist  Ascalon  as  far  as  was  possible 
from  such  a  distance.  Taking  advantage  of  the  preoccupation  of  the 
Christians,  he  besieged  the  city  of  Banyas,  which  lies  at  the  extreme 
end  of  the  kingdom.  He  hoped  that  our  people,  on  being  summoned  to 
the  relief  of  the  beleaguered  city,  would  abandon  the  siege  of  Ascalon. 
But  by  the  mercy  of  God  which  guided  us,  his  great  hopes  were  not 
realized,  and  neither  of  his  projects  succeeded.  For  he  was  unsuccessful 
in  the  siege  of  Banyas,  and  the  Christians,  by  the  aid  of  the  Lord,  com¬ 
pelled  Ascalon  to  surrender.^ 

About  this  time,  also,  Bernard,  bishop  of  Sidon,  of  blessed  memory, 
died,  and  Amalrich,  of  pious  memory  in  the  Lord,  was  chosen  in  his 
place.  Amalrich  was  abbot  of  the  regular  canons  of  the  order  of  the 
Premonstratensians  in  the  monastery  of  St,  Habakkuk,  or  St.  Joseph 
of  Arimathea.  He  was  a  sincere  and  God-fearing  man  of  godly  life. 
Since  no  one  was  allowed  to  go  far  away  from  the  besieged  city,  he  is 
said  to  have  received  the  gift  of  consecration  in  the  church  at  Lydda 
from  the  hands  of  Peter,  archbishop  of  Tyre,  of  revered  memory. 

27*  The  besiegers  make  a  furious  assault  upon  the  city.  The 
citizens  try  to  burn  the  machine  outside  the  walls.  A  por¬ 
tion  of  the  city  wall  falls.  Some  of  the  Christians y  while  at¬ 
tempting  to  rush  iuy  are  killed.  Our  army  abandons  hope. 

Meanwhile,  those  who  were  engaged  in  this  campaign  pressed  on 
their  project  with  great  energy  and  kept  up  vigorous  assaults  on  the 

Mat.  12:  25. 

Nureddin  had  called  upon  the  people  of  Damascus  to  aid  him  in  the  sieg’e  of 
Banyas  under  the  terms  of  his  latest  treaty  with  them.  Though  they  joined  him,  it 


226 


CAPTURE  OF  ASCALON 


city  without  intermission.  This  was  especially  the  case  around  the 
Greater  gate,  as  it  is  called,  where  the  attacks  were  renewed  again  and 
again  with  results  most  disastrous  to  the  citizens.  Volleys  of  mighty 
rocks  hurled  from  the  casting  machines  threatened  to  weaken  the  walls 
and  towers  and  to  overthrow  from  their  very  foundations  the  houses 
within  the  city.  Great  was  the  slaughter  which  resulted.  With  their 
bows  and  arrows,  the  soldiers  in  the  movable  tower  also  wrought  great 
destruction  not  only  upon  the  defenders  who  were  resisting  them  from 
the  top  of  the  towers  and  walls,  but  also  on  those  who  were  forced  by 
necessity  to  move  about  the  city.  In  comparison  with  the  ills  which  as¬ 
sailed  them  from  this  tower  all  the  trials  which  the  citizens  endured 
at  other  points,  however  hard,  appeared  light. 

They  took  counsel,  therefore,  with  one  another.  Profiting  especially 
by  the  advice  of  those  who  had  had  much  experience  in  matters  of  this 
nature,  they  resolved,  no  matter  at  what  risk  and  danger,  to  destroy 
that  machine.  Dry  wood  and  other  material  suitable  for  kindling  and 
increasing  the  flames  were  to  be  thrown  between  the  wall  and  the 
tower.  This  was  to  be  set  on  fire  stealthily  and  the  tower  burned.  There 
seemed  to  be  no  other  hope,  nor  had  they  courage  to  resist  longer,  for 
they  were  now  reduced  to  the  lowest  depths  of  despair. 

Certain  brave  men,  noted  for  their  strength  and  courage,  men  who 
considered  the  safety  of  their  fellow  citizens  before  their  own,  imme¬ 
diately  responded  to  the  appeal  and  offered  to  undertake  the  dangerous 
task.  Wood  was  carried  to  the  part  of  the  wall  nearest  to  the  tower  and 
thrown  over  into  the  space  outside  between  the  wall  and  the  machine. 
When  a  great  pile  of  wood  had  been  built  up,  sufficient  in  their  judg¬ 
ment  to  burn  the  tower,  they  poured  upon  it  from  above  pitch,  oil, 
and  other  liquids  provocative  of  fire,  anything  which  would  make  a 
fiercer  flame.  As  soon  as  it  blazed  up,  however,  divine  clemency  was 
manifested  toward  usj  for,  although  the  flames  at  once  increased  in 
violence,  a  strong  wind  from  the  east  sprang  up  which  turned  the  entire 
fury  of  the  flames  against  the  walls.  This  wind,  then,  by  its  own  fury, 
drove  the  fire  against  the  wall,  and  an  incessant  gale,  which  continued 
throughout  the  entire  night,  reduced  it  to  ashes.  About  dawn  an  entire 
portion  of  the  wall,  between  two  towers,  crumbled  away  entirely  with 
a  noise  that  roused  the  whole  army. 

was  with  a  feeling  of  distrust  which  finally  led  to  quarrels  between  them  and  the 
abandonment  of  the  siege  in  June,  1153  (see  Gibb,  Chronicle^  pp.  315-16). 


CAPTURE  OF  ASCALON 


227 

But  the  mass  as  it  fell  struck  against  the  tower  with  such  force  that 
some  of  the  necessary  parts  of  the  machine,  which  the  fire  had  been  un¬ 
able  to  injure,  were  shattered.  The  sentinels  on  duty  at  the  top  and  on 
the  projections  were  almost  thrown  to  the  ground.  Roused  at  the  sound 
of  the  crash,  the  entire  army  seized  arms  and  rushed  to  the  place,  eager 
to  enter  at  once  as  if  an  entrance  had  been  opened  from  on  high.  But 
Bernard  de  Tremelay,  the  master  of  the  Templars,  and  his  brethren 
had  reached  there  much  before  the  rest;  he  held  the  opening  and  al¬ 
lowed  none  but  his  own  men  to  enter.  It  was  charged  that  he  kept  the 
rest  back  in  order  that  his  own  people,  being  the  first  to  enter,  might 
obtain  the  greater  and  richer  portion  of  the  spoils  and  plunder.^®  For 
when  a  city  is  taken  by  assault,  custom  among  the  Christians  has  made 
it  a  law,  even  to  this  day,  that  whatever  anyone  on  entering  seizes  for 
himself,  that  he  may  hold  in  perpetual  right  for  himself  and  his  heirs. 
If  all  had  entered  with  equal  chance,  the  city  might  have  been  taken 
and  the  spoils  would  have  been  sufficient  for  all.  But  ^fit  is  rare  that 
an  enterprise  bad  in  inception  and  perverse  in  purpose  has  a  good  end¬ 
ing,”  for  “Gain  basely  obtained  brings  no  good  results.”  Through 
cupidity,  they  refused  to  allow  their  comrades  to  share  in  the  booty, 
therefore  they  alone  justly  suffered  peril  of  death.  About  forty  entered, 
but  the  rest  were  not  able  to  follow. 

Up  to  this  time  the  citizens  had  feared  for  their  very  lives  and  were 
prepared  to  endure  extreme  measures  without  resistance.  Now,  how¬ 
ever,  perceiving  that  these  few  were  cut  off  from  their  comrades,  they 
fell  upon  them  with  renewed  strength  and  courage  and  killed  them. 
They  then  rallied  their  forces  and,  as  with  courage  reborn,  again  seized 
the  arms  which  they  had  laid  down  as  if  defeated  and  rushed  with  one 
accord  to  the  place  where  the  wall  had  fallen  in.  There,  by  joining  to¬ 
gether  immense  beams  and  huge  blocks  of  wood,  of  which  the  ships  af¬ 
forded  a  large  supply,  they  filled  the  breach,  closed  the  opening,  and 
with  the  utmost  ardor  made  the  place  impenetrable. 

After  strengthening  the  towers  next  to  the  burned  area  on  both  sides, 
which  had  been  abandoned  because  of  the  furious  flames,  they  again 
girded  themselves  for  the  combat  and  renewed  the  fight.  Of  their 
own  accord,  as  if  with  no  thought  of  their  former  reverses,  they  chal- 

This  charg’e  of  cupidity  against  the  Templars  is  regarded  by  Lundgreen  as  a 
reflection  of  William’s  prejudice  against  the  order,  and  unjustified  by  the  facts,  which 
could  be  explained  in  other  ways. 

Ovid  Am.  i.  x.  48. 


I 


228 


CAPTURE  OF  ASCALON 


lenged  us  to  battle.  The  fighters  in  the  tower,  however,  knowing  that 
its  foundations  had  been  weakened  and  that  the  lower  part  of  the  solid 
frame  had  been  injured,  felt  no  confidence  in  it  and  accordingly  fought 
with  little  energy. 

The  enemy,  for  our  undoing,  suspended  the  bodies  of  our  slain  by 
ropes  from  the  ramparts  of  the  wall  and,  with  taunting  words  and 
gestures,  gave  vent  to  the  joy  which  they  felt.  But  deepest  grief  soon 
took  the  place  of  this  joy,  and  the  events  which  followed  plainly  showed 
how  true  is  the  saying,  ‘Tride  goeth  before  destruction  and  an  haughty 
spirit  before  a  fall.” 

The  Christians,  on  the  contrary,  were  prostrated  in  mind  and  heart. 
Overcome  by  grief,  in  bitterness  of  spirit,  they  became  faint-hearted 
and  lost  all  hope  of  ultimate  victory. 

28.  Again  the  Christians  are  comjorted ;  they  are  encouraged 
to  continue  the  siege  and  fress  on  more  xealously  than  ever. 

In  the  meantime,  the  king,  appalled  at  the  terrible  calamity,  called 
the  chiefs  together.  When  they  had  assembled  in  his  tent  (the  patri¬ 
arch  and  the  archbishop  of  Tyre  and  other  prelates  of  the  church  being 
also  in  attendance),  he  placed  before  them  the  Life-giving  Cross  and 
anxiously  inquired  what  was  to  be  done  in  such  a  great  change  of  for¬ 
tune.  As,  in  the  fear  of  God,  they  deliberated  with  the  utmost  solicitude, 
there  arose  a  division  of  opinion  which  split  the  assembly  into  two  par¬ 
ties.  For  some,  doubtful  of  their  power  to  win  the  city,  maintained  that 
they  had  wasted  their  efforts  there  for  a  long  time  in  vain.  Their  forces 
had  been  slain  in  large  numbers,  the  leaders  either  wounded  or  taken 
prisoners  j  even  their  resources  had  given  out.  They  contended  that 
the  city  was  impregnable  j  the  citizens  had  an  abundance  of  all  commodi¬ 
ties,  their  strength  was  frequently  repaired,  while  ours  was  failing. 
They  advised  a  return. 

Others,  of  a  saner  mind,  counselled  that  they  persevere,  hoping  in 
the  mercy  of  the  Lord,  who  was  not  wont  to  abandon  those  who  with 
pious  long-suffering  trusted  in  Him.  It  was  of  little  use,  they  said,  for 
an  enterprise  to  have  a  good  beginning  unless  it  was  brought  to  a  like 
end.  Much  time  and  expense  had  indeed  been  employed,  but  it  was 
with  the  hope  of  a  more  abundant  reward  of  which,  though  it  seemed 

Pr.  16:  18. 


CAPTURE  OF  ASCALON 


229 

deferred,  God  would  not  deprive  them.  Their  forces  had  indeed  fallen, 
but  yet  the  hope  remained  that  they  would  find  a  glorious  resurrection  3 
for  the  promise  to  the  faithful  was :  Y our  sorrow  shall  be  turned  into 
joy”  and  ^^Seek,  and  ye  shall  find.”  Reasoning  in  this  way,  they 
advised  against  returning  and  strove  to  induce  the  Christians  to  per¬ 
severe  as  strong  men  in  this  task.  Almost  all  the  lay  princes  upheld  the 
opinion  of  the  first  faction  3  the  king,  also,  wearied  by  adverse  fate, 
seemed  to  lean  toward  that  view. 

The  patriarch,  the  archbishop  of  Tyre,  and  all  the  clergy,  also  Ray¬ 
mond,  the  master  of  the  Hospitallers,  and  his  brethren  agreed  with 
the  opposite  faction. 

Thus  the  assembly  was  divided  and  all  gave  various  reasons  support¬ 
ing  opposite  opinions.  But  divine  mercy,  ever  present  with  them,  caused 
the  opinion  of  the  patriarch  to  prevail,  for  it  seemed  to  have  greater 
merit  and  promised  more  glory.*^^  It  was  therefore  unanimously  re¬ 
solved  to  return  to  the  Lord  and,  after  imploring  aid  from  Heaven,  to 
persevere  in  the  task  they  had  undertaken  until  the  Dayspring  from 
on  high  should  visit  them  and  look  with  favor  upon  their  labors. 

Accordingly,  with  unanimity  of  purpose,  all  seized  their  arms  and, 
returning  to  the  task  in  hand,  ordered  the  trumpets  to  sound  the  signal. 
The  clarion’s  call  and  the  voice  of  the  herald  soon  summoned  the 
whole  people  to  battle.  Eager  to  avenge  the  wrongs  of  their  murdered 
brethren,  the  people  gathered  before  the  city  with  unusual  fervor  and 
with  avidity  challenged  the  foe  to  battle.  To  survey  our  ranks,  it  was 
as  if  they  had  suflFered  no  loss  or  had,  at  least,  received  fresh  reinforce¬ 
ments.  Seized  with  a  mad  fury  for  extermination,  they  rushed  upon  the 
enemy  and  attacked  them  so  fiercely  that  the  foe  marvelled  and  stood 
dumbfounded  before  the  evidence  of  our  insuperable  strength  and 
indomitable  perseverance.  Although  they  made  desperate  efforts  to 
retaliate  with  equal  fury,  it  was  all  in  vain,  for  they  could  not  stand 
against  the  shock  of  our  troops  or  avoid  their  swords.  The  battle  that 
day  was  waged  between  far  from  equal  forces,  yet  knights  and  foot 
soldiers  alike  won  the  palm  of  victory  everywhere  and  triumphed  at 
every  point  over  the  foe. 

Jno.  1 6  :  20.  Mat.  7:7. 

It  is  of  interest  to  note  at  this  point  not  only  another  instance  of  the  aggressive, 
vigorous  attitude  of  Patriarch  Fulcher,  but  also  of  the  cooperation  of  Fulcher  with 
the  Hospitallers,  who  were  apparently  the  only  military  group  strongly  in  favor  of 
continued  operations. 


230  CAPTURE  OF  ASCALON 

Thus  great  slaughter  was  wrought  upon  the  enemy,  and  the  injury 
suffered  by  the  Christians  three  days  before  was  returned  in  overwhelm¬ 
ing  measure.  There  was  not  a  household  in  the  city  whose  domestic 
circle  was  not  touched  with  deepest  anguish.  The  city  was  covered  with 
confusion,  and  the  woes  already  experienced  seemed  light  by  compari¬ 
son  with  the  present  peril.  At  no  time,  from  the  beginning  of  the  siege 
even  to  that  time,  had  similar  disasters  befallen  them,  nor  had  they 
ever  experienced  equal  losses.  For,  since  the  flower  of  their  kingdom 
was  destroyed  and  the  rulers  of  the  city  killed,  they  lacked  counsel, 
valor  languished,  and  all  hope  of  resistance  vanished. 

By  general  consent,  therefore,  certain  of  their  principal  leaders  were 
sent  to  the  king  as  ambassadors.  They  were  to  ask  a  temporary  truce 
for  the  purpose  of  exchanging  the  bodies  of  the  dead,  that  each  side 
might  have  the  privilege,  according  to  its  own  custom,  of  rendering  the 
last  honors  with  fitting  funeral  rites. 

The  terms  demanded  met  with  the  approval  of  the  Christians.  The 
bodies  of  the  dead  were  exchanged  and  committed  to  the  tomb  with 
solemn  obsequies. 

29.  The  feofle  of  Ascalon  give  way  to  desfair ;  by  general  con¬ 
sent  they  are  disposed  to  surrender , 

When  the  people  of  Ascalon  saw  the  evidence  of  the  slaughter  of 
their  host  and  perceived  the  mighty  strength  which  the  Lord  had  di¬ 
rected  against  them,  the  grief  and  consternation  of  their  hearts  was 
renewed,  and,  in  proportion  to  the  magnitude  of  their  distress,  their 
courage  melted  away.  Moreover,  that  nothing  might  be  lacking  to 
the  sum  of  their  misfortunes,  that  same  day  a  further  disaster  overtook 
them.  Forty  of  their  gallant  soldiers  were  dragging  a  mighty  beam  to 
a  place  where  it  was  needed  when  a  huge  stone,  cast  by  our  hurling 
machine,  fell  upon  the  beam  and  crushed  it  completely,  together  with 
the  men  moving  it. 

Then,  in  bitterness  of  heart,  struggling  under  the  weight  of  troubles, 
the  surviving  elders  of  the  city  called  the  people  together.  With  tears 
and  lamentations  they  assembled  j  among  the  throng  were  women 
clasping  their  little  ones  to  their  breasts  and  feeble  old  men  whose  last 
breath  was  almost  spent.  Then,  with  the  general  consent  of  all,  certain 
wise  and  eloquent  men  addressed  the  assembled  people  as  follows: 
^^Men  of  Ascalon,  you  who  dwell  within  these  gates,  you  know,  and  no 


CAPTURE  OF  ASCALON 


231 


one  better  than  you,  how  we  have  for  fifty  years  waged  a  dangerous 
and  difficult  struggle  against  this  redoubtable  people,  so  persistent  in 
their  purpose.  You  know  full  well  by  actual  experience  how  often  they 
have  overthrown  our  sires  in  battle  and  how  many  times,  stepping  into 
the  places  of  their  fathers,  our  sons  have  renewed  the  struggle  to  repel 
their  injuries.  The  hope  of  preserving  this  spot  whence  we  derived 
our  origin,  of  defending  our  wives  and  children  and  that  far  greater 
privilege,  liberty,  has  ever  led  us  on.  For  forty- four  years  this  strife 
has  continued,  since  the  time  when  that  people,  so  troublesome  to  us, 
came  upon  us  from  the  most  remote  regions  of  the  West  and  with  a 
strong  hand  took  violent  possession  of  the  whole  region  from  Tarsus 
of  Cilicia  even  unto  Egypt.  This  city  alone,  by  reason  of  the  valorous 
efforts  of  our  forefathers,  has  remained  intact,  in  the  midst  of  such 
strong  adversaries,  even  unto  the  present  day.  Yet  the  hazards  en¬ 
dured  up  to  this  time,  when  compared  with  those  now  threatening  us, 
may  be  deemed  little  or  nothing.  Even  now,  not  one  among  us  has  less 
inclination  to  resist,  but  the  army  is  wasted  away,  the  supplies  are  ex¬ 
hausted,  the  burden  of  hardships  is  unendurable.  The  mighty  host  of 
the  enemy  is  ever  on  the  watch  and  exceedingly  persistent  j  their  con¬ 
stant  molestations  have  weakened  our  strength,  both  of  body  and  mind, 
and  deprived  us  of  the  power  to  prolong  the  struggle. 

^^Accordingly,  it  seems  expedient  to  the  chief  men  of  Ascalon,  if 
you  also  agree,  that  we  try  to  extricate  ourselves  at  this  time  from  our 
present  sufferings.  Let  us  send  envoys  on  behalf  of  the  whole  people 
to  that  powerful  king  who  is  besieging  us,  and  endeavor  to  obtain  on 
definite  terms  permission  to  depart  freely  with  our  wives  and  children, 
servants  and  maidservants,  and  all  our  goods.  In  return,  we,  on  our 
part,  will  agree  to  surrender  the  city  to  him — with  groans  do  we  utter 
these  words — in  order  to  put  an  end  to  such  terrible  misfortunes.” 

30.  Envoys  chosen  from  the  leading  men  of  the  city  are  sent  to 
the  king.  They  obtain  from  him  fer mission  to  defart  freely 
with  their  tvives  and  children  and  all  their  substance.  The 
city  is  surrendered. 

This  speech  seemed  good  in  the  eyes  of  all,  and  it  was  approved  with 
loud  shouts  of  assent,  as  is  usual  under  such  circumstances.  Wise  and 

This  speech  must,  of  course,  be  regarded  as  William’s  own  imaginative  recon¬ 
struction.  It  offers  an  interesting  instance  of  his  sympathetic  appreciation  of  the  plight 
of  the  enemy. 


232  CAPTURE  OF  ASCALON 

discreet  men  of  venerable  and  revered  appearance  were  chosen  from 
the  assembled  people  to  convey  to  the  king  and  his  nobles  the  proposi¬ 
tion  which  they  had  decided  upon.  These  envoys^  on  receipt  of  permis¬ 
sion  to  advance  under  safe  conduct,  issued  forth  from  the  gate  and 
approached  the  presence  of  the  king. 

When  all  the  princes  had  assembled,  as  requested  by  the  envoys,  the 
proposition  was  placed  before  them,  and  the  terms  stipulated  were  ex¬ 
plained  in  detail.  The  ambassadors  were  then  asked  to  retire  for  a 
time  while  the  king  conferred  with  his  leading  counsellors  as  to  their 
advice.  They,  however,  burst  forth  into  tears  of  joy  and,  with  eyes  and 
hands  raised  aloft  to  heaven,  returned  profound  thanks  to  their  Creator, 
who  had  deigned  to  bestow  upon  them,  all  unworthy  as  they  were,  such 
abundant  favor. 

The  messengers  were  then  recalled.  A  unanimous  answer  was  given 
them,  namely  that  the  terms  offered  would  be  accepted,  if,  within  the 
three  following  days,  they  should  vacate  the  entire  city.  To  this  the  en¬ 
voys  assented,  but  asked  that  it  be  confirmed  by  an  oath  to  give  strength 
to  the  treaty.  An  oath  was  accordingly  taken  with  due  solemnity,  the 
king  and  certain  chosen  nobles  giving  their  hand  that,  in  good  faith, 
without  evil  designs,  they  would  keep  all  the  terms  of  the  aforesaid 
agreement.  They  then  surrendered  the  hostages,  whom  the  king  had 
demanded  by  name,  and  returned  joyfully  to  their  own  domains.  A 
number  of  Christian  knights  accompanied  them  to  place  the  king’s 
standard  over  the  loftiest  tower  of  the  city  in  token  of  victory. 

When  our  army,  who  were  waiting  in  eager  expectation,  saw  the 
royal  standards  floating  from  the  highest  towers,  a  great  shout  burst 
from  the  exultant  company.  Cries  of  praise  not  unaccompanied  by  tears 
rose  to  heaven  as  from  one  voice,  saying,  ^^Blessed  be  the  God  of  our 
fathers  who  has  not  deserted  those  who  trusted  in  Him  5  and  blessed 
be  the  Name  of  His  Majesty  which  is  holy,  because  today  we  have 
seen  wondrous  things.” 

Although  according  to  the  treaty  a  truce  of  three  successive  days  had 
been  granted  to  the  townspeople,  yet  so  greatly  did  they  fear  the  pres¬ 
ence  of  the  Christians  that  within  two  days  all  their  preparations  were 
completed.  Then,  girt  for  the  journey,  they  set  out  with  their  wives 
and  children,  servants  and  maidservants,  and  all  kinds  of  paraphernalia. 
In  accordance  with  the  agreement,  the  king  furnished  them  guides  as 


CAPTURE  OF  ASCALON  233 

far  as  al-Arish,  an  ancient  city  lying  in  the  desert,  and  sent  them  away  in 
peace. 

The  king  and  the  patriarch,  accompanied  by  the  other  princes  of  the 
realm  and  the  prelates  of  the  church,  together  with  all  the  clergy  and 
the  entire  people,  then  entered  the  city  with  hymns  and  spiritual  songs, 
led  by  the  Cross  of  the  Lord.  The  Cross  was  borne  into  the  principal 
chapel  of  the  Turks,  a  building  of  exceeding  beauty,  later  consecrated 
in  honor  of  the  apostle  Paul.  After  the  divine  rites  and  services  of 
thanksgiving  had  been  solemnized  there,  all  withdrew  to  the  quarters 
assigned  to  them  and  passed  a  joyous  day,  memorable  forever.^ ^ 

Within  a  few  days  thereafter  the  patriarch  organized  the  church  in 
Ascalon.  He  established  there  a  definite  number  of  canons  and  gave 
them  fixed  incomes  called  prebends.  He  also  ordained  as  bishop  of  the 
city  one  Absalom,  a  regular  canon  of  the  church  of  the  Sepulchre  of  the 
Lord,  although  Gerald,  bishop  of  Bethlehem,  vigorously  protested 
against  this  appointment  and  forbade  that  it  be  made.  Later  the  case 
was  referred  by  appeal  to  the  pope  at  Rome.  The  latter  removed  the 
bishop  consecrated  by  the  patriarch  and  granted  to  the  bishop  of  Beth¬ 
lehem  the  church  at  Ascalon  with  all  its  possessions,  to  be  held  by  him 
and  the  church  at  Bethlehem  in  perpetual  right.®^ 

By  his  mother’s  advice,  the  king  distributed  possessions  and  the 
lands  dependent  thereon  both  within  and  without  the  city  to  those 
who  had  well  deserved  themj  to  some,  also  for  a  price.^^  The  city  of 
Ascalon  he  generously  bestowed  upon  his  young  brother  Amaury, 
count  of  Jaffa,  Ascalon  was  taken  on  the  twelfth  day  of  August  in  the 


William  had  seen  this  chapel  before  he  wrote  this  account,  which  is  another  evi¬ 
dence  of  his  unusual  interest  in  architecture.  The  vividness  of  his  description  of  the 
siege  almost  suggests  that  William  himself  was  present  during  part  of  it,  though  he 
nowhere  indicates  his  presence.  He  was  about  twenty-three  years  old  at  the  time  and 
still  a  student,  probably  at  Jerusalem,  which  was  not  very  far  away. 

The  relationship  of  Bethlehem  and  Ascalon  was  thus  reversed  from  its  traditional 
organization.  However,  this  problem  had  arisen  during  the  First  Crusade,  and  the 
precedent  was  then  established  for  the  papal  action  (see  Book  IX,  chap,  i,  note  zj  Book 
XI,  chap.  12).  Ascalon  might  have  been  maintained  as  a  separate  bishopric,  but  the  pro¬ 
tests  of  Gerald  and  Ralph,  who  became  his  successor  in  the  bishopric  of  Bethlehem, 
succeeded  in  having  it  made  subject  to  that  see.  The  question  was  decided  by  Pope 
Hadrian  IV. 

It  is  of  interest  to  note  that  the  king’s  mother  had  not  lost  her  interest  in  the 
management  of  affairs  despite  her  defeat  a  year  or  two  before.  The  sale  of  privileges 
indicated  by  William  reflects  the  importance  of  the  commercial  element  in  the  Latin 
states. 


234  CAPTURE  OF  ASCALON 

year  1154  of  the  Incarnation  of  the  Lord  and  the  tenth  year  of  the 
reign  of  King  Baldwin  III.®® 

A  deplorable  calamity  overtook  the  unfortunate  people  of  Ascalon 
on  their  journey  down  to  Egypt.  When  the  men  who  had  been  ap¬ 
pointed  by  the  king  to  guide  them  on  their  way  and  to  see  that  no  one 
molested  them  departed,  the  refugees  were  attacked  by  one  Nocquinus, 
a  Turk,  strong  in  arms  but  of  evil  life  and  utterly  disloyal.  This  man 
had  shared  their  hardships  and  for  a  long  time  had  fought  with  them 
for  pay.  He  pretended  that  he  wished  to  accompany  them  on  the  jour¬ 
ney  to  Egypt.  When  he  saw  that  the  guides  had  left  them,  however,  he 
scornfully  cast  aside  all  good  faith  and  humanity  and  fell  upon  them. 
Then,  after  robbing  them  of  all  their  goods,  he  departed  and  left  them 
to  wander  in  the  wilderness.®^ 

The  errors  in  this  date  may  be  due  to  copyists.  The  year  should  be  1153  and 
the  day  of  the  month  probably  August  22  instead  of  12  (see  Stevenson,  CrttsaderSy 
p.  171,  note  3). 

No  other  accounts  mention  this  incident  of  Nocquinus,  but  such  raids  were  proba¬ 
bly  too  common  to  arouse  comment  by  Arab  historians,  even  though  this  one  did  arouse 
William’s  sympathy. 


HERE  ENDS  THE  SEVENTEENTH  BOOK 


HERE  BEGINS  THE  EIGHTEENTH  BOOK 


LATIN  JERUSALEM  AT  ITS  HEIGHT  UNDER 
BALDWIN  III:  THE  LURE  OF  EGYPT 

I.  The  patriarch  of  Antioch  is  shamefully  abused  by  Renaud 
de  Chatillon.  He  takes  refuge  in  the  kingdom,  A  severe 
famine  sf reads  over  the  land, 

Renaud  de  Chatillon  had  married  the  widow  of  Raymond,  prince 
of  Antioch,  as  has  been  related  above.  From  the  first  he  had  perceived 
that  this  marriage  was  displeasing  to  the  patriarch,  and  as  the  prelate 
continued  to  maintain  the  same  attitude,  Renaud  looked  with  suspicion 
on  all  he  did.^  The  patriarch,  a  very  rich  and  powerful  man  whose  au¬ 
thority  was  supreme,  often  expressed  himself  rather  freely,  both  in 
public  and  in  private,  about  Renaud  and  his  doings,  and,  as  is  usually 
the  case,  these  remarks  were  reported  to  the  prince  by  persons  who 
sought  to  increase  the  hatred  between  the  two.  Thereupon,  Renaud 
was  moved  to  violent  and  inexorable  wrath.  He  laid  violent  hands 
upon  the  patriarch  and  with  diabolic  daring  caused  the  venerable  man 
to  be  seized  and  ignominiously  conducted  to  the  citadel  which  towers 
high  above  Antioch.  Then — a  most  abominable  act — he  forced  the 
aged  priest,  a  successor  of  Peter,  the  chief  of  the  apostles,  although  an 
almost  helpless  invalid,  to  sit  in  the  blazing  sun  throughout  a  summer’s 
day,  his  bare  head  smeared  with  honey.  No  one,  for  piety’s  sake,  offered 
him  any  relief  from  the  relentless  rays  of  the  sun  or  tried  to  drive 
away  the  flies. 

When  news  of  this  outrage  reached  the  king  of  Jerusalem,  he  was 
overwhelmed  with  amazement  and  dismay  at  the  mad  conduct  of  the 
foolish  prince.  Almost  beside  himself  with  consternation,  he  dispatched 
to  Renaud  two  venerable  envoys,  Frederick,  bishop  of  Acre,  and  Ralph, 
the  chancellor.  They  were  the  bearers  of  a  letter  in  which  the  king,  by 
virtue  of  his  royal  authority,  reproved  the  prince  for  his  outrageous 
act  and  warned  him  to  turn  from  his  wicked  ways.  When  the  prince 

^  This  episode  of  the  quarrel  of  Renaud  de  Chatillon  and  Patriarch  Aimery  extended 
over  a  number  of  years.  William’s  reason  for  placing  it  here  is  doubtless  the  fact  that 
Renaud  married  Constance  in  1153.  The  incidents  which  he  recites,  however,  extended 
all  the  way  to  1160  if  not  beyond. 


236  JERUSALEM  UNDER  BALDWIN  III 

had  heard  the  messengers  and  perused  the  king’s  letter,  he  released 
the  patriarch,  but  not  without  heaping  much  abuse  upon  him.  The 
goods  which  had  been  taken  by  violence  from  the  prelate  and  his  people 
were  also  completely  restored.  In  the  end,  however,  the  patriarch  left 
the  land  of  Antioch  and  repaired  to  the  kingdom  of  Jerusalem.  He 
was  kindly  received  by  the  king  and  his  wise  mother,  as  indeed  by  the 
patriarch  and  all  the  bishops  of  the  kingdom,  and  there  he  remained 
for  several  years. 

In  the  following  year,  a  severe  famine  spread  over  the  whole  land.^ 
The  Lord,  filled  with  anger  toward  us,  took  away  our  main  support, 
bread,  so  that  a  measure  of  wheat  was  sold  for  four  gold  pieces.  In  fact, 
had  it  not  been  that  a  supply  of  grain  was  found  in  Ascalon  when  that 
city  was  taken,  famine  would  have  invaded  the  land  and  the  people 
would  have  almost  wholly  perished.  For  fifty  years,  through  fear  of 
hostilities,  the  fields  around  Ascalon  had  lain  without  cultivation.  But 
during  the  years  following  its  capture,  the  land  was  under  the  care  of 
the  farmer,  and  the  people  of  that  district,  relieved  from  fear  of  the 
enemy,  could  freely  cultivate  the  ground.  Hence  the  entire  kingdom 
enjoyed  such  abundance  that  all  former  years,  in  comparison  with  the 
present,  might  with  justice  be  called  sterile  and  fruitless.  The  soil,  so 
long  uncultivated  and  deprived  of  the  care  of  the  plough,  had  retained 
within  itself  all  its  strength  j  as  a  result  it  responded  to  the  farmer’s 
care  with  multiplied  interest  and  produced  a  sixty  fold  crop. 

2.  On  the  death  of  Anastas'iusy  Hadrian  is  elected  fofe,  Em- 
feror  Frederick  is  crozuned  at  Rome,  A  serious  enmity  arises 

between  the  fofe  and  King  William  of  Sicily. 

% 

While  these  events  were  happening  in  the  lands  of  the  Orient,  Pope 
Anastasius  IV  died  at  Rome  and  Adrian  III  [Hadrian  IV]  was  chosen 
in  his  stead.^  This  pope  was  English  by  birth,  from  the  castle  of  St. 
Albans.  He  had  been  abbot  of  the  regular  canons  in  the  church  of  St. 

“This  famine  of  1154  is  also  mentioned  as  occurring  in  Damascus  in  that  year. 
Qalanisi,  however,  ascribes  it  there  to  a  deliberate  blockade  of  Damascus  by  Nureddin, 
who  forbade  the  usual  export  of  grain  from  the  north  (H.  A.  R.  Gibb,  The  Damascus 
Chronicle y  p.  317). 

»Had  rian  IV  (not-  III),  Nicholas  Breakspear,  was  elected  pope  toward  the  end  of 
the  year  1154.  He  was  the  first  and  thus  far  the  only  pope  of  English  birth.  The  main 
events  of  his  life  as  given  here  are  substantially  correct,  though  the  place  of  his  birth 
is  usually  given  as  Langley,  near  St,  Albans  (see  Dictionary  of  National  Biogra'phy ; 
also  Catholic  Encyclofedia) , 


JERUSALEM  UNDER  BALDWIN  III  237 

RufuSj  near  the  city  of  Avignon,  in  Provence,  in  the  diocese  of  Arles. 
Thence  he  was  called  to  the  church  of  Rome  by  Pope  Eugenius  of 
precious  memory  and  was  ordained  bishop  of  Albano  under  the  name 
Nicholas.  Later,  he  was  sent  as  legate  by  Anastasius,  the  successor  of 
Pope  Eugenius,  to  Norway,  the  most  remote  province  of  the  West.  On 
his  return  after  the  death  of  this  pope,  he  was  present  at  the  election 
and  was  unanimously  chosen  pope  by  the  clergy  and  people  and  given 
the  name  Hadrian. 

This  same  year,  it  happened  that  Frederick,  king  of  the  Teutons,  al¬ 
though  not  yet  emperor,  went  down  into  Italy  with  large  forces  and 
laid  siege  to  Tortona,  a  city  of  Lombardy.  The  siege  was  long  continued, 
but  when  the  place  was  finally  taken,  he  determined  to  go  to  Rome  and 
there  be  crowned  emperor.^ 

During  the  same  time,  also,  serious  enmity  arising  from  various 
causes  developed  between  Pope  Hadrian,  of  whom  we  have  been  speak¬ 
ing,  and  William,  king  of  Sicily,  son  of  Roger  of  good  memory.  The 
discord  between  the  two  had  reached  a  point  of  such  open  animosity 
that  the  pope  hurled  the  sentence  of  excommunication  against  the  king 
and  began  deadly  warfare  against  him.® 

Nevertheless,  Frederick,  bent  upon  his  purpose,  hastened  on  his  way 
and  within  a  few  days  advanced  from  Lombardy  to  Rome,  where  his 
sudden  arrival  gave  rise  to  some  suspicion  in  the  minds  of  the  pope  and 
the  whole  Roman  church.  At  last,  however,  through  the  work  of  cer¬ 
tain  mediators,  the  customary  terms  were  arranged,  and  on  the  sixth 
day  before  the  Kalends  of  July  [June  26]  Frederick  was  crowned  with 
great  ceremony  in  the  church  of  St.  Peter  and  proclaimed  emperor.® 

Three  days  later,  on  the  feast  day  of  the  holy  apostles  Peter  and 
Paul,  the  king,  adorned  with  the  imperial  insignia,  and  the  pope,  wear¬ 
ing  the  distinctive  decorations  of  the  supreme  pontifical  office,  joined 

^  Tortona  was  captured  April  1 8,  1155,  after  a  siege  of  nine  weeks.  After  a  short 
rest  in  Genoa,  Frederick  moved  toward  Rome,  visiting  a  number  of  towns,  including 
Bologna,  on  the  way  (see  H.  Simonsfeld,  Jahrbiicher  des  deutschen  Reiches  unter 
Friederich  /,  I,  301—36). 

®  The  trouble  between  William  I  of  Sicily  and  the  papacy  had  begun  before  the 
election  of  Hadrian  IV.  Hadrian  refused  to  recognize  William  as  king  and  continued 
the  struggle  which  now  became  open  warfare  (see  F.  Chalandon,  Histoire  de  la 
domination  normande  en  Italie  et  en  Sicile^  II,  194  ff.). 

®  The  meeting  of  Hadrian  and  Frederick  was  attended  with  a  series  of  misunder¬ 
standings.  The  famous  incident  of  Frederick’s  refusal  to  hold  the  pope’s  stirrup  oc¬ 
curred  at  this  time.  The  coronation  of  Frederick  as  emperor  took  place  somewhat 
earlier  than  William’s  date — ^June  18,  1155  (see  Simonsfeld,  Jahrhucher^  I,  335—36). 


238  JERUSALEM  UNDER  BALDWIN  III 

forces  at  a  place  called  the  Lucan  bridge,  near  the  city  of  Tivoli.  Thence, 
amid  the  rejoicing  of  clergy  and  people  and  crowned  with  the  laurel, 
they  proceeded  on  their  way  together,  and  when  the  festal  day  was 
over  parted  from  one  another  in  good  accord.  The  emperor  hastened 
to  Ancona,  whither  the  affairs  of  the  empire  called  him,  and  the  pope 
proceeded  to  the  vicinity  of  Rome,  where  he  tarried  for  a  while  in 
the  hill  cities. 

Meanwhile,  the  king  of  Sicily  had  ordered  his  nobles  to  lay  siege 
to  the  city  of  Benevento,  which  was  the  peculiar  property  of  the  Roman 
church,  and  to  blockade  the  town  as  closely  as  possible.  The  pope  was 
annoyed  beyond  measure  at  this  action.  Desirous  of  repaying  an  ill 
turn  with  equal  measure,  he  endeavored  to  stir  up  the  king^s  own  nobles 
against  him,  nor  were  his  wishes  in  that  respect  ungratified.  Success 
attended  his  efforts,  for  he  persuaded  the  most  powerful  count  of  Sicily, 
Robert  of  Bassavilla,  the  son  of  the  king’s  aunt,  and  many  other  nobles 
besides  to  rise  against  their  lord  by  promising  that  they  should  never 
lack  the  aid  and  counsel  of  the  Roman  church.*^  Moreover,  many  il¬ 
lustrious  and  powerful  nobles  who  had  been  deprived  of  their  patri¬ 
mony  and  driven  from  the  realm  as  exiles  by  William  and  his  father 
were  induced  by  the  pope’s  admonitions  to  return  to  the  kingdom  and 
resume  possession  of  the  property  which  belonged  to  them  by  heredi¬ 
tary  right.  In  the  number  were  Robert  of  Sorrento,  prince  of  Capua, 
Count  Andreas  of  Rapacanina,  and  many  others.  To  all  these  the  pope 
gave  his  solemn  assurance  as  pope  that  the  church  of  Rome  would 
never  fail  them.  Notwithstanding  this  promise,  he  urged  both  the 
Roman  emperor  and  the  emperor  of  Constantinople — the  former,  who 
was  still  in  Italy,  openly  by  word  of  mouth  and  the  latter  privately 
by  letters — to  seize  the  kingdom  of  Sicily.® 

^  The  revolt  of  William’s  cousin,  Robert  of  Loritello,  and  other  nobles  of  south¬ 
ern  Italy  created  a  critical  situation  into  which  either  Frederick  Barbarossa  or  Manuel 
might  inject  a  decisive  influence.  Manuel’s  representatives  were  quick  to  take  ad¬ 
vantage  of  the  situation,  although  Manuel  was  too  occupied  elsewhere  to  send  any 
considerable  army. 

®  Wliether  Hadrian  negotiated  with  both  at  the  same  time  or  with  Manuel  after 
Frederick  had  indicated  his  inability  to  interfere  at  the  moment  is  uncertain.  There 
is  some  question  whether  the  initiative  in  the  relations  between  Hadrian  and  the 
Greeks  was  taken  by  the  former  or  the  latter.  (F.  Chalandon,  Les  Commene^  II,  358- 
60). 


Donilseum 


tM 


< 
«  \n 

9  ui 

«•  o 

O  LU 

%  • 


2  « 

S  ” 
*0 


tfl  *3  C 

If  r  • 


Sa  lu 
^u3  4a: 

S*te  • 


ff 

2  *3  2  f, 
t  3%  Eg 

CQ  If  (f 


X  -e£ii£ 

1X3 


lA 

o 

tf) 

.*,9 


•  rt  "3  i  i!  •i 

F  *»££  »  «  3-£  « 

So  psfI  I  "5  . 

5»  >iw_3w  5  ■£  Tli  • 


1  i»ni 


•  « 


yi 


I 


lii  1' 


i 


!  ' 


(^aSD^ 


it 


# 


::  I  Nil 


s-f. 

<  A 

Q  <  01 


tu 

> 

H 

LJL 

O 

:e 

< 

* 

□ 


$ 


•iTJr 


</|B 
u  I 
«j  s| 


JERUSALEM  UNDER  BALDWIN  III 


239 


3.  An  altercation  arises  betzveen  the  'patriarch  and  the  brethren 
of  the  Hospital  over  the  question  of  tithes  and  also  over  cer¬ 
tain  injuries  done  to  the  churches  by  that  order. 

While  the  churches  of  Italy  were  in  this  unsettled  state  and  affairs 
in  the  kingdom  of  Sicily  were  likewise  disturbed,  our  part  of  the  Orient 
was  not  free  from  troubles.  For,  at  the  very  time  when,  by  divine  favor, 
the  city  of  Ascalon  was  restored  to  the  Christians,  when  the  affairs  of 

V 

the  kingdom  also  were  progressing  satisfactorily  and  crops  were  abun¬ 
dant,  the  enemy  of  man,  begrudging  the  tranquillity  granted  by  the 
Lord,  began  to  sow  tares.  For  Raymond,  master  of  the  house  of  the 
Hospital,  together  with  his  brethren  who  were  also  filled  with  the  same 
spirit  (although  in  other  respects  he  seemed  to  be  a  religious  and  God¬ 
fearing  man),  began  to  cause  great  trouble  to  the  patriarch  and  the 
other  prelates  of  the  church  over  matters  of  parochial  jurisdiction  and 
tithes.  The  Hospitallers  were  in  the  habit  of  receiving  to  the  celebra¬ 
tion  of  the  holy  sacrament,  without  discrimination  or  question,  those 
who  had  been  excommunicated  by  their  own  bishops  or  interdicted  by 
name  and  who,  thus,  in  punishment  for  their  sins,  were  cut  off  from  the 
church.  Neither  did  they  refuse  the  viaticum  and  extreme  unction  to 
these  same  persons  when  sick,  or  deny  them  burial.  When,  because  of 
crimes  committed,  silence  was  imposed  upon  all  the  churches  or  upon 
those  of  a  certain  city  or  castle,  the  Hospitallers  were  wont  to  ring 
their  bells  and  call  more  loudly  than  usual,  to  summon  those  under 
interdict  to  divine  service.  This  they  did  that  they  themselves  might 
enjoy  the  offerings  and  other  revenues  which  rightly  belonged  to  the 
mother  churches,  that,  while  others  were  sorrowing,  they  alone  might 
rejoice.®  They  forgot  the  words  of  the  illustrious  preacher  who  said, 
^^Rejoice  with  them  that  do  rejoice,  and  weep  with  them  that  weep.” 

Moreover,  they  did  not  present  their  priests  to  the  bishop  of  the 
place,  according  to  the  ancient  law  of  the  sacred  canons,  that  they  might 
have  the  consent  of  their  superiors  to  celebrate  the  holy  offices  in  their 
dioceses.  Nor  did  they,  when  it  became  necessary  to  remove  a  priest 

®  Great  friction  between  the  secular  and  regular  clergy  usually  arose  shortly  after 
the  founding  of  each  new  order.  This  was  aggravated  by  the  greater  mobility  of 
the  later  orders.  When  the  military  orders  were  given  the  right  to  have  their  own 
chaplains  and  their  exemption  from  local  prelates,  instances  of  conflicting  jurisdic¬ 
tion  were  certain.  William  here  recites  a  nearly  complete  list  of  grievances  which 
the  local  prelates  held  against  the  military  orders. 

Ro.  12 :  15. 


240  JERUSALEM  UNDER  BALDWIN  III 

from  his  parish,  whether  justly  or  unjustly,  make  this  known  to  their 
bishops.  They  absolutely  refused  to  give  tithes  from  their  own  bene¬ 
fices  and  from  all  the  revenues  devolving,  by  whatever  right,  upon 
them.  All  the  bishops  had  this  grievance  against  them  5  all  the  cathe¬ 
dral  churches  everywhere  suffered  this  same  loss.  The  most  intolerable 
wrong  of  all,  however,  a  thing  abhorrent  to  all  Christians,  was  done  to 
the  patriarch  and  the  holy  church  at  Jerusalem.  For,  before  the  very 
doors  of  the  church  of  the  Holy  Resurrection,  to  show  their  insolent 
contempt  for  the  church  itself,  they  began  to  erect  an  edifice  far  higher 
and  more  costly  than  that  church  which  had  been  consecrated  by  the 
precious  blood  of  our  Saviour,  who  hung  upon  the  cross — the  church 
which  afforded  Him  an  acceptable  sepulchre  within  its  walls  after  the 
agony  of  the  crucifixion.^^ 

Moreover^  whenever  the  lord  patriarch  went  up  to  speak  to  the 
people,  according  to  custom,  from  the  place  where  the  Saviour  of  man¬ 
kind  hung  for  our  salvation  and  thus  bought  complete  redemption  for 
the  whole  world,  they  endeavored  to  hinder  the  celebration  of  the  office 
entrusted  to  him.  With  intentional  malice  they  set  their  many  great 
bells  ringing  so  loudly  and  persistently  that  the  voice  of  the  patriarch 
could  not  rise  above  the  din,  nor  could  the  people,  in  spite  of  all  his 
efforts,  hear  him.  The  patriarch  often  complained  to  the  citizens  of  the 
outrageous  conduct  of  the  Hospitallers,  which  was  perfectly  obvious. 
Yet,  though  many  besought  them  to  cease,  they  remained  incorrigible, 
and  even  threatened  that  eventually  they  would  use  measures  still 
more  strenuous.  This  threat  they  carried  out  3  for  they  carried  their 
presumption  to  such  extremes  that,  in  a  spirit  of  audacious  fury,  they 
armed  and,  breaking  into  the  church  beloved  of  God  as  into  the  house 
of  a  common  person,  hurled  forth  showers  of  arrows,  as  if  against  a 
den  of  robbers.  These  arrows  were  later  collected  and  tied  into  a  bun¬ 
dle,  and  we  ourselves  as  well  as  many  others  saw  them  hanging  from 
a  rope  before  the  place  of  Calvary  where  the  Lord  was  crucified. 

This  was  the  main  building  of  the  Hospitallers  in  Jerusalem,  probably  in  all 
Palestine.  It  had  to  be  large  to  meet  their  expanded  needs,  the  housing  of  their 
knights,  the  care  of  the  sick,  as  well  as  their  business  interests.  Rabbi  Benjamin  of 
Tudela,  who  visited  Jerusalem  about  1163,  describes  it  as  housing  four  hundred 
knights  in  addition  to  the  sick  and  visiting  pilgrims.  Probably  no  offense  was  in¬ 
tended  by  this  enlargement  of  their  building,  but  during  the  quarrel  the  secular 
prelates  so  interpreted  it. 

Such  an  outrage  would  seem  to  represent  an  advanced  stage  in  the  friction  between 
the  Hospitallers  and  the  secular  church,  near  the  time  of  the  appeal  to  Rome.  The 
incident  attests  William’s  own  presence  in  Jerusalem  about  this  time. 


JERUSALEM  UNDER  BALDWIN  III  241 

Those  who  have  made  a  careful  study  of  this  subject  believe  that  the 
Roman  church  was  primarily  responsible  for  this  great  evil,  although 
perhaps  unwittingly  and  without  having  given  sufficient  consideration 
to  the  privilege  which  was  demanded.  For  it  was  the  church  which  un¬ 
justly  removed  the  house  of  the  Hospital  from  the  jurisdiction  of  the 
patriarch  of  Jerusalem,  to  whom  it  had  been  rightly  subject Hence 
the  Hospitallers  have  neither  reverence  toward  God  nor  regard  for  any 
man  except  those  whom  they  fear.  Yet  not  indiscriminately  do  we  ac¬ 
cuse  all  of  arrogance,  a  sin  most  odious  to  God,  and  the  mother  of  all 
vices.  We  believe,  indeed,  that  in  so  large  a  body  it  would  be  almost 
impossible  that  all  should  proceed  by  the  same  path  without  any  varia- 
tion  of  conduct. 

In  order  to  explain  in  this  history  how  from  a  modest  beginning  this 
house  has  developed  so  powerfully  and  how  unjustly  it  has  acted  and 
still  continues  to  act  against  the  churches  of  God,  it  is  necessary  to  begin 
the  story  somewhat  farther  backj  this,  with  the  help  of  God,  we  shall 
endeavor  to  do  without  deviating  in  the  least  from  the  truth. 

4,  The  origin  and  develofment  of  the  house  of  the  Hosfital  Is 
described. 

In  the  time  of  the  Roman  Emperor  Heraclius,  according  to  ancient 
histories,  the  power  of  the  people  of  Arabia  became  very  great  against 
him.  As  a  result,  the  kingdom  of  Jerusalem,  with  all  Syria  and  Egypt 
and  the  adjacent  provinces,  because  of  our  sins  fell  into  the  hands  of 
enemies  of  the  Christian  faith  and  name.  Nevertheless,  although  the 
holy  places  were  thus  under  the  power  of  the  enemy  from  time  to  time, 
many  people  from  the  West  visited  them  for  the  sake  of  devotion  or 
business,  possibly  for  both.  Among  those  from  the  West  who  ventured 
at  that  time  to  go  to  the  holy  places  for  the  purpose  of  trade,  were  cer¬ 
tain  men  from  Italy  who  were  known  as  Amalfitani  from  the  name  of 
their  city.^^ 

The  reference  is  to  the  various  papal  privileges  fronm  that  of  Innocent  II, 
March  29,  1139,  to  that  of  Anastasius  IV,  February  17,  1154.  Each  of  these  grants 
involved  some  extension  of  privilege,  and  it  was  doubtless  the  one  of  Anastasius  IV 
which  precipitated  the  trouble  in  Jerusalem  (see  F.  Lundgreen,  Wilhelm  von  Tyriis 
und  der  T emflerorden^  App.  I,  183-85). 

Amalfi  was  one  of  the  principal  commercial  cities  of  the  western  Mediter¬ 
ranean  before  the  crusades.  Its  affiliations  were  with  Constantinople,  but  it  was  prac¬ 
tically  independent  (see  W.  von  Heyd,  Hhtoire  du  commerce  du  Levant  au  moyen- 
dge,  I,  98—108). 


242  JERUSALEM  UNDER  BALDWIN  III 

The  city  of  Amalfi  lies  between  lofty  mountains  and  the  sea.  To  the 
eastj  about  seven  miles  distant  by  sea,  is  the  noble  city  of  Salerno.  To 
the  west  lie  Sorrento  and  Naples,  the  city  of  Virgil  j  to  the  south,  about 
two  hundred  miles  away  across  the  Tyrrhenian  sea,  is  Sicily.^®  The 
people  of  Amalfi,  as  has  been  said,  were  the  first  who,  for  the  sake  of 
gain,  attempted  to  carry  to  the  Orient  foreign  wares  hitherto  unknown 
to  the  East.  Because  of  the  necessary  articles  which  they  brought  thither, 
they  obtained  very  advantageous  terms  from  the  principal  men  of  those 
lands  and  were  permitted  to  come  there  freely.  The  people  also  were 
favorably  disposed  toward  them.^® 

At  that  epoch  the  prince  of  Egypt  held  all  the  coastal  region  from 
the  city  of  Jabala,  situated  on  the  shore  near  Laodicea  in  Syria,  as  far  as 
Alexandria,  the  last  city  in  Egypt.  Over  each  city  was  placed  a  governor 
who  made  the  power  of  the  prince  feared  far  and  wide.  The  Amalfitani, 
however,  enjoyed  the  full  favor  of  the  king  as  well  as  of  his  nobles  and 
were  able  to  travel  in  perfect  safety  all  over  the  country  as  traders  and 
dealers  in  the  useful  articles  which  they  carried.  Faithful  to  the  tradi¬ 
tions  of  their  fathers  and  the  Christian  profession,  these  merchants  were 
in  the  habit  of  visiting  the  holy  places  whenever  opportunity  offered. 
They  had  no  house  of  their  own  at  Jerusalem,  however,  where  they 
might  remain  for  a  while,  as  they  had  in  the  coast  cities.  To  carry  out 
a  long-cherished  plan,  therefore,  they  assembled  as  many  people  of 
their  own  city  as  possible  and  visited  the  caliph  of  Egypt.  They  gained 
the  good  will  of  the  people  of  his  household,  presented  a  petition  in 
writing,  and  received  a  favorable  response,  in  accordance  with  their 

desires. 

€ 

5.  Hovj  the  calif h  of  Egyfty  at  the  fetition  of  the  Amalfitani^ 
ordered  a  flace  to  be  set  aside  for  them  where  they  might 
build  a  church. 

A  WRITTEN  order  was  accordingly  sent  to  the  governor  of  Jerusalem, 
directing  that  a  very  ample  area  at  Jerusalem,  in  that  part  of  the  city 
occupied  by  the  Christians,  be  designated  at  their  request  for  the  people 

Here,  as  in  a  number  of  places,  William  reveals  a  familiarity  with  southern 
Italy  which  suggests  a  personal  acquaintance.  Why  he  regards  Naples  as  Virgil’s  city 
is  not  clear. 

William’s  sympathetic  appreciation  of  commerce  appears  here  as  elsewhere.  It 
is  doubtful  whether  the  people  of  Amalfi  were  the  first  or  only  people  to  bring  the 
products  of  the  West  to  the  Levant,  but  their  definite  connection  with  Jerusalem 
condones  this  exclusive  notice  by  William  (Heyd,  Histoire  du  commerce^. 


JERUSALEM  UNDER  BALDWIN  III  243 

of  Amalfi,  friends  and  carriers  of  useful  articles.  There  they  were  to 
erect  such  a  building  as  they  desired.  The  city  was  divided  at  that  time, 
as  it  is  today,  into  four  almost  equal  parts  5  of  these  that  quarter  alone 
which  contains  the  Sepulchre  of  the  Lord  had  been  granted  to  the  faith¬ 
ful  as  the  place  of  their  abode.  The  rest  of  the  city,  with  the  Temple  of 
the  Lord,  was  occupied  exclusively  by  infidels. 

In  accordance  with  the  caliph’s  command,  a  place  sufficiently  large 
for  the  necessary  buildings  was  set  aside  for  the  people  of  Amalfi.  Of¬ 
ferings  of  money  were  collected  from  the  merchants,  and  before  the 
door  of  the  church  of  the  Resurrection  of  the  Lord,  barely  a  stone’s 
throw  away,  they  built  a  monastery  in  honor  of  the  holy  and  glorious 
mother  of  God,  the  Ever  Virgin  Mary.^"^  In  connection  with  this  there 
were  suitable  offices  for  the  use  of  the  monks  and  for  the  entertainment 
of  guests  from  their  own  city. 

When  the  place  was  finished,  they  brought  an  abbot  and  monks  from 
Amalfi  and  established  the  monastery  under  a  regular  rule  as  a  place  of 
holy  life  acceptable  to  the  Lord.  Since  those  who  had  founded  the  place 
and  maintained  it  in  religion  were  men  of  the  Latin  race,  it  has  been 
called  from  that  time  until  this  the  monastery  of  the  Latins. 

Even  in  those  days  it  often  happened  that  chaste  and  holy  widows 
came  to  Jerusalem  to  kiss  the  revered  places.  Regardless  of  natural 
timidity,  they  had  met  without  fear  the  numberless  dangers  of  the  way. 
Since  there  was  no  place  within  the  portals  of  the  monastery  where  such 
pilgrims  might  be  honorably  received,  the  same  pious  men  who  had 
founded  the  monastery  made  a  suitable  provision  for  these  people  also, 
that  when  devout  women  came  they  might  not  lack  a  chapel,  a  house, 
and  separate  quarters  of  their  own.  A  little  convent  was  finally  estab¬ 
lished  there,  by  divine  mercy,  in  honor  of  that  pious  sinner,  Mary  Mag¬ 
dalene,  and  a  regular  number  of  sisters  placed  there  to  minister  to 
women  pilgrims. 

During  these  same  perilous  times  there  also  flocked  thither  people 
of  other  nations,  both  nobles  and  those  of  the  middle  class. As  there 

This  procedure  may  or  may  not  have  been  followed  at  the  time,  but  the  state¬ 
ment  sug^gests  what  was  probably  the  procedure  in  such  matters  in  William’s  own 
time.  Heyd  believes  that  most  of  the  credit  for  these  establishments  at  Jerusalem 
should  be  given  to  a  certain  lord  of  Amalfi,  Maurus,  who  died  in  1071  (Heyd, 
Histoire  du  commerce^  I,  104—6).  He  would  date  the  rebuilding  of  these  mon¬ 
asteries  between  1063  and  1071  during  the  reign  of  Caliph  Mustansir. 

Literally  of  the  second  class,  secundae  classis.  Social  classes  were  more  clearly 
differentiated  in  William’s  time  than  they  had  been  earlier,  even  as  late  as  iioo. 


244  JERUSALEM  UNDER  BALDWIN  III 

was  no  approach  to  the  Holy  City  except  through  hostile  lands,  pil¬ 
grims  had  usually  exhausted  their  travelling  money  by  the  time  they 
reached  Jerusalem.  Wretched  and  helpless,  a  prey  to  all  the  hardships 
of  hunger,  thirst,  and  nakedness,  such  pilgrims  were  forced  to  wait  be¬ 
fore  the  city  gates  until  they  had  paid  a  gold  coin,  when  they  were  per¬ 
mitted  to  enter  the  city.  Even  after  they  finally  gained  admission  and 
had  visited  the  holy  places  one  after  another,  they  had  no  means  of 
resting  even  for  a  single  day,  except  as  it  was  offered  in  a  fraternal 
spirit  by  the  brothers  of  this  monastery.  All  the  other  dwellers  in 
Jerusalem  were  Saracens  and  infidels  with  the  exception  of  the  patri¬ 
arch,  the  clergy  and  the  miserable  Syrian  people.  These  latter  were 
so  overburdened  by  daily  exactions  of  manifold  corvees  and  extra  serv¬ 
ices,  and  by  work  of  the  most  menial  nature,  that  they  could  scarcely 
breathe.  They  lived  in  the  direst  poverty  and  in  continual  fear  of 
death. 

Since  there  was  no  one  to  offer  shelter  to  the  wretched  pilgrims  of 
our  faith,  thus  afflicted  and  needy  to  the  last  degree,  the  holy  men 
who  dwelt  in  the  monastery  of  the  Latins  in  pity  took  from  their 
own  means  and,  within  the  space  allotted  to  them,  built  a  hospital 
for  the  relief  of  such  pilgrims.  There  they  received  these  people, 
whether  sick  or  well,  lest  they  be  found  strangled  by  night  on  the 
streets.  In  addition  to  offering  shelter  in  the  hospital,  they  arranged 
that  the  fragments  remaining  from  the  food  supplies  of  the  two  mon¬ 
asteries,  namely,  of  the  monks  and  of  the  nuns,  should  be  spared  for 
the  daily  sustenance  of  such  people. 

Furthermore,  they  erected  in  that  place  an  altar  in  honor  of  St. 
John  the  Almoner.  This  John  was  a  native  of  Cyprus,  a  holy  man 
and  worthy  of  praise  in  every  respect.  Later,  because  of  his  merits, 
he  became  patriarch  of  Alexandria.  He  was  especially  noted  for  his 
works  of  piety,  and  his  devoted  zeal  and  generous  almsgiving  will 
ever  be  celebrated  by  each  church  of  the  saints.  Hence  he  was  called 
by  the  holy  fathers  Eleymon,  which,  being  interpreted,  is  “merciful.” 

This  venerable  foundation  which  thus  stretched  out  the  hand  of 
charity  to  its  fellow  men  had  neither  revenues  nor  possessions  3  but 
each  year  the  citizens  of  Amalfi,  both  those  at  home  and  those  who 
followed  the  business  of  trading  abroad,  collected  money  from  their 
own  number  as  a  voluntary  offering.  This  they  sent  to  the  abbot  of 

See  Book  I,  note  52. 


JERUSALEM  UNDER  BALDWIN  III  245 

the  hospital,  whoever  he  might  be  at  the  time,  by  the  hands  of  those 
who  were  going  to  Jerusalem.  From  this  money  food  and  shelter  were 
provided  for  the  brethren  and  sisters  and  the  remainder  was  used  to 
extend  some  assistance  to  the  Christian  pilgrims  who  came  to  the 

20 

For  many  years  this  place  existed  under  those  conditions,  until  it 
pleased  the  Supreme  Maker  of  the  world  to  purge  from  the  supersti¬ 
tions  of  the  Gentiles  that  city  which  He  had  made  clean  with  His  own 
blood.  There  came  at  last  a  Christian  people,  led  by  chiefs  under  the 
protection  of  God,  to  whom  the  Saviour  willed  that  the  kingdom  be 
surrendered.  At  that  time  there  was  found  in  the  convent  for  women, 
serving  as  abbess,  a  certain  holy  woman  devoted  to  God,  named  Agnes. 
This  noble  woman,  a  Roman  by  birth  and  of  high  lineage  according 
to  the  flesh,  continued  to  live  at  Jerusalem  for  some  years  after  the 
city  was  restored  to  the  Christian  faith.- ^ 

In  the  hospital  also  was  found  one  Gerald,  a  man  of  upright  life 
who,  under  the  orders  of  the  abbot  and  monks,  had  long  rendered 
devoted  service  to  the  poor  in  that  place  during  the  supremacy  of 
the  enemy.  Gerald  was  later  succeeded  by  that  Raymond  of  whom 
we  are  now  speaking.^  ^ 

6.  The  fatrlarchy  %uith  most  of  the  bishofs  of  the  Easty  goes  to 
Rome  to  visit  Pofe  Hadrian, 

From  this  modest  beginning  the  importance  of  the  brethren  of  this 
house  increased  so  greatly  that  first  they  withdrew  from  the  jurisdic¬ 
tion  of  the  abbot,  and  then,  as  their  wealth  multiplied  greatly,  they 
were  released  from  the  hand  and  power  of  the  patriarch  by  the  Roman 
church.^^  After  this  dangerous  liberty  was  obtained,  they  never  again 
showed  any  reverence  to  the  prelates  of  the  church  and  absolutely 

William  has  oversimplified  the  support  of  these  monasteries.  There  is  evidence 
that  collections  of  money  were  made  in  southern  France  and  doubtless  elsewhere 
to  support  this  work  (see  Heyd,  Hlsloire  du  commerccy  I,  105). 

Agnes  and  Gerald  are  semilegendary  persons,  whose  memory  is  treasured  in 
the  history  of  the  Hospitallers  because  of  their  mention  here.  William  has  mentioned 
Gerald  earlier  (Book  VII,  chap.  235  see  E.  J.  King,  The  Knights  Hospitallers  in 
the  Holy  handy  chap.  2  passim.  Fulcher  of  Chartres  wrote  an  epitaph  for  Gerald 
at  the  time  of  his  death,  1120  (H.  Hagenmeyer,  ed.,  Fulcheri  Carnotensis  historia 
Hierosolymitanay  pp.  641—42,  note  25). 

Raymond  du  Puy,  second  master  of  the  Hospital,  1120—1160.  For  a  brief  sketch 
of  his  life  and  administration  of  the  order,  see  King,  HospitallerSy  chaps.  3  and  4. 

See  note  13. 


246  JERUSALEM  UNDER  BALDWIN  III 

refused  to  give  tithes  from  any  of  their  estates  regardless  of  conditions 
under  which  these  had  come  into  their  possession.  Influenced  by  this 
example^  many  of  those  places  which  are  called  venerable,  both  mon¬ 
asteries  and  hospitals,  eventually  fell  away  from  their  allegiance  be¬ 
cause  of  their  wealth.-^  Many  of  these  the  church  had  originally  es¬ 
tablished  out  of  pure  liberality,  in  her  usual  spirit  of  piety,  and  had 
led  them  along  to  an  enviable  state  of  prosperity.  But  they  abandoned 
their  pious  mother,  who  had  at  first  nourished  them  like  babes  on 
her  own  milk  and  later,  as  time  went  on,  had  supplied  them  with  more 
solid  food 3  so  that  with  justice  may  the  church  complain  of  them,  “I 
have  nourished  and  brought  up  children,  and  they  have  rebelled  against 
me.”  May  the  Lord  spare  such  and  permit  them  to  return  to  their 
right  mind,  that  they  may  learn  to  serve  with  reverence  the  mother 
whom  they  have  abandoned.  May  He  be  even  more  indulgent  than 
to  that  one  who,  although  he  himself  had  an  hundred  sheep,  desired 
the  one  ewe  lamb  of  the  poor  man.  To  that  man  the  Lord  said,  ^^Hast 
thou  killed  and  also  taken  possession?”  Woe  to  that  one,  whoever 
he  may  be!  For  according  to  the  word  of  the  prophet,  ^^He  is  a  man 
of  blood.” 

Again  and  again  the  patriarch  and  other  prelates  of  the  church  de¬ 
manded  their  rights  from  these  same  brethren,  but  ever  in  vain,  until 
at  last,  as  has  been  said,  both  parties  had  recourse  to  the  court  of  the 
pontiff  at  Rome.  The  patriarch,  although  a  very  aged  man,  indeed 
almost  a  centenarian,  set  out  thither.  He  took  with  him  some  of  the 
prelates  of  the  church:  namely,  Peter,  archbishop  of  Tyre,  with  his 
suffragans  3  Frederick,  bishop  of  Acre  j  and  Amalrich,  bishop  of  Sidonj 


Doubtless  such  establishments  as  the  bishopric  of  Bethlehem,  that  of  Nazareth, 
and  many  monasteries  such  as  those  on  Mt.  Sion,  Mt.  Tabor,  Mary  of  the  Valley 
of  Jehoshaphat  are  included  under  this  characterization.  William  never  was  disposed 
to  recognize  the  difficulties  which  these  foundations  caused  the  church.  Pious  pil¬ 
grims  from  all  parts  of  Christendom  insisted  upon  making  bequests  to  these  establish¬ 
ments.  These  grants  were  usually  in  the  form  of  income  from  properties  equally 
scattered,  or  even  of  pieces  of  land.  There  was  no  adequate  method  of  insuring 
the  permanence  of  such  grants  except  through  the  papacy,  whose  authority  was  ac¬ 
knowledged  universally.  The  patriarch  of  Jerusalem  was  scarcely  in  a  position  to 
guarantee  such  protection.  Hence  the  several  establishments  sought  privileges  from 
the  papacy.  As  has  been  indicated  a  number  of  times,  the  papal  curia  was  uncertain 
of  the  aspirations  of  the  patriarchs,  whether  of  Jerusalem  or  Antioch,  and  hence  was 
all  the  more  ready  to  grant  such  privileges  and  with  them  exemption  from  the  juris¬ 
diction  of  the  patriarch  and  from  that  of  local  bishop  and  archbishop.  It  was  this  last 
fact  which  Archbishop  William  especially  resented. 


Is. 


2. 


26 


I  Ki.  21:19. 


JERUSALEM  UNDER  BALDWIN  III  247 

Baldwin,  archbishop  of  Caesarea  j  Constantine,  bishop  of  Lydda^  R^- 
nier,  bishop  of  Sebastej  and  Herbert,  bishop  of  Tiberias.  As  soon  as 
the  pleasant  spring  weather  returned  and  the  turbulence  of  the  wintry 
waves  began  to  subside  under  the  influence  of  the  west  wind,  they 
set  forth  on  their  journey  and,  after  a  prosperous  voyage,  by  the 
will  of  God,  came  safely  to  the  coast  city  of  Otranto  in  Apulia.-’^ 

7.  The  emferor  of  C onstantinofle ^  with  the  fofe^s  consent ^ 
invades  AfuUa,  The  fatriarch  arrives  at  the  court  with  his 
escort. 

At  the  time  when  the  lord  patriarch  and  the  bishops  of  the  Orient 
landed  in  Apulia,  as  has  been  related,  the  emperor  of  Constantinople, 
at  the  suggestion  of  the  pope,  had  sent  some  of  his  nobles  with  a  vast 
sum  of  money  to  invade  that  region  by  armed  force.  This  was  done 
with  the  consent  of  the  chief  men  of  those  parts.  Consequently,  when 
the  patriarch  and  his  suite  arrived  at  Brindisi  from  Otranto,  the  em- 
peror^s  people  were  already  in  possession  of  that  city.  The  entire  place 
had  been  surrendered  by  the  citizens  with  the  exception  of  the  citadel, 
where  a  few  faithful  adherents  of  the  king  still  remained.  Moreover, 
Count  Robert,  who  was  mentioned  above,  together  with  those  who 
had  joined  him  more  through  hatred  of  the  king  than  through  at¬ 
tachment  to  himself,  had  seized  by  force  the  two  famous  cities,  Taranto 
and  Bari,  with  all  the  coast  region  to  the  very  boundaries  of  the  king¬ 
dom.  Robert,  prince  of  Capua,  and  Count  Andreas,  great  and  dis¬ 
tinguished  men,  had  taken  possession  of  the  entire  land  of  Campania, 
commonly  called  the  Land  of  Labor,  as  far  as  Salerno,  Naples,  and 
San  Germano.  The  whole  country,  in  fact,  was  in  such  an  unsettled 
state  that  those  who  wished  to  pass  through  it  found  no  peace  or  se¬ 
curity  anywhere.^®  Frederick,  the  emperor  of  the  Romans,  was  still 
in  the  vicinity  of  Ancona  with  his  legions,  but  the  forces  which  he  had 
brought  with  him  into  Italy  had  suffered  great  losses;  many  of  the 
greatest  and  most  noble  princes  of  the  empire  had  perished,  so  that 
barely  a  tenth  of  his  host  remained. The  survivors  wished  to  return 

This  journey  must  have  occurred  in  the  spring  of  1155  to  fit  in  with  the  events 
in  Italy  to  which  William  alludes. 

These  events  of  the  war  in  southern  Italy  are  described  at  length  by  Chalandon 
(see  Chalandon,  Normans^  Vol.  II,  chap.  7). 

Frederick  had  been  approached  both  by  emissaries  of  the  pope  and  later  of  Em¬ 
peror  Manuel  to  interfere  in  southern  Italy.  He  was  sorely  tempted  and  only  reluctantly, 


^48  JERUSALEM  UNDER  BALDWIN  III 

to  their  own  land,  and  the  emperor,  since  he  could  not  hold  them 
'back,  was  preparing  to  return  alsoj  very  unwillingly,  however,  for 
many  matters  still  remained  which  required  his  presence,  most  im¬ 
portant  of  all  the  campaign  against  the  king  of  Sicily. 

The  patriarch  and  his  fellow  travellers,  therefore,  anxiously  con¬ 
sidered  by  what  route  they  might  most  safely  pass  through  such  an 
unsettled  country  in  order  to  reach  the  pope,  for  war  and  sedition 
everywhere  seemed  to  cut  off  all  approach  to  him.  The  shortest  road 
was  by  way  of  Benevento,  but  that  city  was  under  siege  by  Arsequinus, 
chancellor  of  the  king  of  Sicily.^®  The  patriarch  sent  messengers  thither 
to  ask  for  an  escort,  but  the  chancellor  absolutely  refused  to  allow 
the  party  to  pass  through  that  region.  Finally,  by  the  advice  of  cer¬ 
tain  wise  men,  Patriarch  Fulcher  decided  to  follow  the  shore  route 
and  arrived  at  Ancona  with  all  his  suite.  Thence  he  sent  some  of  his 
bishops  to  convey  his  salutations  to  the  emperor  of  the  Romans  (who 
was  now  on  the  eve  of  departing  for  his  own  country,  as  has  been 
stated)  and  to  obtain  from  him  imperial  letters  for  the  pope,  in  con¬ 
nection  with  his  own  mission.  In  this  the  envoys  were  successful,  al¬ 
though  the  emperor,  anxious  to  return  home,  had  already  passed 
beyond  the  cities  of  Sinigaglia  and  Pesaro.*^^ 

The  patriarch  with  all  his  cortege  then  directed  his  journey  toward 
Rome,  in  close  pursuit  of  the  pope,  who  had  already  left  the  city 
of  Narni.  At  Rome  the  party  remained  for  several  days  j  learning,  how¬ 
ever,  that  the  pope  had  stopped  at  Ferentino,  the  patriarch  hastened 
thither  in  the  hope  of  accomplishing  the  matter  which  had  brought 
him  to  Italy.^^ 

Some  said  that  the  pope  intentionally  avoided  the  patriarch  in  order 
to  weary  him  and  increase  the  burden  of  his  expenses.  They  asserted 
that  long  ago  the  Hospitallers  had  visited  him  and  had  bribed  him 
by  the  lavish  use  of  gifts  so  that  he  was  most  favorably  inclined  toward 
them.  Others  said  that  the  pope  had  hastened  his  journey  in  be¬ 
half  of  Benevento,  which  was  under  siege.  The  fact  was  plain,  how- 

through  force  of  circumstances,  declined  their  invitation  (see  Simonsfeld,  Jahrbucher^ 
I,  367  et  fassim). 

This  was  Asclettin,  according  to  Chalandon. 

The  envoys  of  Patriarch  Fulcher  overtook  Frederick,  probably  early  in  August, 
1155.  William  appears  to  be  familiar  with  this  famous  old  Roman  road  whose  se¬ 
quence  of  towns  he  lists  correctly  (Simonsfeld,  Jahrbucher^  I,  371). 

Hadrian  must  have  reached  Benevento  about  October  i,  1155  (Chalandon,  Wor- 
mans^  Vol.  II,  chap.  7  fassim). 


JERUSALEM  UNDER  BALDWIN  III  249 

ever,  that  the  pope  and  his  entire  court  had  received  the  Hospitallers 
with  great  cordiality,  but  had,  on  the  contrary,  repelled  the  patriarch 
and  his  people  with  contemptuous  wrath,  like  illegitimate  and  un¬ 
deserving  sons.'^^ 

8.  Pofe  Hadrian  hurries  to  Benevento,  'The  'patriarch  also 
'makes  haste  thither  and  lays  the  case  be j ore  hhuy  but  the 
courty  bribed  by  lavish  gilts y  refuses  justice.  The  patriarch 
returns  without  accomplishing  his  object. 

t 

On  his  arrival  at  Ferentino,  the  patriarch  at  once  presented  himself 
before  the  pontiff,  according  to  custom.  He  was  not  favorably  re¬ 
ceived,  and  the  treatment  accorded  him  was  still  worse.  The  cardinals 
were,  for  the  most  part,  opposed  to  him.  He  arrived,  therefore,  at  a 
clear  understanding  of  the  pope’s  attitude  toward  him.  Nevertheless, 
being  a  man  of  resolute  character,  he  acted  on  the  advice  of  some  of 
his  wise  counsellors  and  concealed  his  feelings.  He  was  constantly  in 
attendance  on  the  pope  and  appeared  assiduously  in  the  consistory  on 
feast  days  surrounded  by  his  train  of  reverend  bishops.  He  was  always 
assisted  by  a  throng  of  advocates  ready  to  do  their  office  whenever  it 
should  be  necessary. 

An  audience  was  finally  granted  to  the  two  parties,  and  the  matter 
was  argued  for  many  days  without  result.  At  last  the  patriarch  per¬ 
ceived,  and  indeed  was  informed  by  some  of  his  intimate  friends,  that 
he  had  no  chance  of  success.  He  therefore  took  leave  and  started  on 
his  return  journey  in  embarrassment  and  fear,  his  situation  rather  in¬ 
jured  than  improved.  Of  all  the  throng  of  cardinals  only  two  or  three 
were  found  who,  following  after  Christ,  piously  desired  to  aid  His 
servant  in  that  cause.  These  were  Octavius  and  John  of  St.  Martin, 
who  had  been  an  archdeacon  of  the  patriarch  when  the  latter  was 
archbishop  of  Tyre.^^  All  the  others,  led  astray  by  gifts,  followed  the 

The  treatment  of  Patriarch  Fulcher  on  this  occasion  is  not  unlike  that  received 
by  other  Latin  patriarchs  at  the  papal  court.  That  the  Hospitallers,  like  the  Templars, 
were  in  great  favor  there  at  the  time  is  certain. 

The  presence  of  advocates  at  the  papal  court  to  aid  appellants  for  papal  attention 
and  favor  reflects  the  enormous  increase  of  business  which  claimed  the  pope’s  atten¬ 
tion.  These  “advocates”  professed  to  know  how  to  reach  the  pope’s  presence  and  offered 
their  services  for  a  price,  which  was  soon  to  lead  to  charges  of  venality  at  the  court. 

This  recital  affords  an  intimate  glimpse  of  the  practical  operation  of  the  papal 
curia.  In  the  course  of  time,  the  widespread  church  orders  tended  to  depend  upon  cer¬ 
tain  cardinals  for  aid.  The  secular  hierarchy  whose  business  with  the  curia  was  more 
intermittent  were  usually  not  so  fortunate. 


4 


250  JERUSALEM  UNDER  BALDWIN  III 

ways  of  Balaam,  the  son  of  Boson  But  the  pope,  actuated  by  responsi¬ 
bilities  at  home,  crossed  Campania  and  repaired  to  Benevento. 

In  the  meantime,  William,  king  of  Sicily,  had  been  informed  through 
numerous  messengers  of  the  troubles  in  Italy.  He  learned  that  Count 
Robert  of  Bassavilla,  aided  by  the  Greeks,  had  seized  the  land  of 
Apulia  by  force  of  arms  j  that  the  prince  of  Capua  and  Count  Andreas 
were  extending  their  rule  far  and  wide  in  Campania  3  and  that  the 
pope  had  repaired  to  Benevento,  whence  he  was  supplying  forces  and 
encouragement  to  all  the  rulers  just  mentioned.  Thereupon  William 
immediately  levied  troops  from  all  parts  of  Sicily  and  Calabria  and 
marched  into  Apulia  at  the  head  of  a  very  large  force.  Count  Robert 
immediately  fled.  In  the  first  battle  near  Brindisi,  William  defeated 
the  Greek  forces  and,  after  completely  destroying  that  army,  took 
their  commanders  captive  and  bound  them  in  chains.  Thus  by  force 
of  arms,  attended  by  good  luck,  he  turned  into  his  own  coffers  the 
vast  treasures  which  the  Greeks  had  brought  with  them.  Then,  having 
regained  the  whole  region  which  had  revolted  from  him  and  restored 
the  people  to  favor,  he  laid  siege  to  Benevento.  There  he  brought 
great  trouble  upon  the  pope  and  his  cardinals  as  well  as  upon  the  city 
itself 3  for  the  food  supply  began  to  fail  and  all  became  exceedingly 
anxious  about  their  safety.  Through  envoys  acting  as  mediators,  peace 
was  finally  concluded  between  the  pope  and  the  king,  under  certain 
secret  terms.  All  those,  however,  who,  at  the  pope’s  solicitation,  had 
become  involved  in  these  great  dangers  and  hardships  were  excluded 
from  the  treaty. 

Perceiving  that  matters  had  turned  out  contrary  to  their  expecta¬ 
tions  and  that  the  pope  had  made  a  peace  for  himself  and  the  church 
of  Rome  without  obtaining  grace  for  them  from  the  king,  the  nobles 
realized  that  they  were  in  a  desperate  plight.  Anxiously  they  sought 
to  find  some  way  by  which  they  might  be  able  to  retire  from  the 
kingdom  in  safety.  Robert  and  Andreas,  with  certain  other  nobles, 
hurried  into  Lombardy  and  presented  themselves  before  the  emperor. 
The  prince  of  Capua,  more  unfortunate  than  the  others,  was  taken 
prisoner  by  his  own  bearers,  while  he  was  preparing  to  cross  the 
Gariglano  river  by  boat.  He  had  sent  his  people  on  ahead  and  was 

There  is  some  uncertainty  about  the  exact  dates  of  these  events.  The  defeat  of 
the  Greeks  at  Brindisi  is  dated  in  April,  1156,  the  treaty  of  Hadrian  with  William  I, 
June  18,  1156  (Chalandon,  Les  Comneney  II,  361-70). 


JERUSALEM  UNDER  BALDWIN  III  251 

himself  waiting  with  a  few  knights  to  cross  to  the  opposite  shore  when 
he  was  seized.  He  was  handed  over  to  loyal  subjects  of  the  king  and 
carried  to  Sicily,  where  he  was  cruelly  blinded  and  confined  in  prison 
until  his  miserable  existence  ended. 

9,  A  cknl  outbreak  occurs  in  Egyft,  The  sultan  flees  and  is  slain 
by  the  Christians.  His  soUy  HosceredinuSy  is  taken  frisofier. 

At  this  time,  by  the  mercy  of  God,  the  kingdom  of  Jerusalem  was 
enjoying  a  fair  degree  of  prosperity,  but  the  neighboring  regions  on 
either  side  were  greatly  agitated  because  of  an  unexpected  occurrence. 
The  caliph,  the  ruler  of  the  land,  whom  the  Egyptians  are  accustomed 
to  cherish  and  revere  as  a  supreme  divinity,  was  treacherously  slain 
by  a  certain  powerful  Egyptian  lord  who  held  the  office  of  vizier  and 
as  such  had  charge  of  his  lord’s  private  affairs.^®  One  day  this  man 
came  to  the  caliph  familiarly  in  one  of  the  most  retired  rooms  of  the 
palace  and  treacherously  slew  him.  He  is  said  to  have  committed  this 
crime  in  the  hope  of  raising  his  own  son  Nosceredinus  [Nasr  al-Din] 
to  the  caliphate,  that  thus  he  himself,  under  the  rule  of  his  son,  might 
continue  to  administer  the  kingdom  without  care  or  trouble.  He  trusted 
that  the  deed  would  not  be  discovered  for  several  days,  until  he  had 
seized  the  greater  palace  and  gained  possession  of  the  entire  treasure. 
Then,  with  the  aid  of  a  band  of  friends  and  retainers  whom  he  had 
assembled,  he  expected  to  be  strong  enough  to  resist  those  who  would 
put  him  to  death  for  the  murder.  But  the  affair  turned  out  quite  dif¬ 
ferently.  For  within  a  short  time  the  crime  became  known,  and  a 
crowd  of  people,  both  great  and  small,  gathered  as  one  man.  They 
completely  surrounded  the  house  to  which  he  had  fled  after  com¬ 
mitting  the  crime,  and  with  one  voice  demanded  that  the  man  of 
blood,  the  dastard  who  had  assassinated  the  lord  of  the  land,  should 
be  given  up  for  punishment.  These  threats  were  so  persistently  con¬ 
tinued  that,  finally,  seeing  no  other  way  of  escape,  he  ordered  the 

For  a  more  extended  account  of  William’s  treatment  of  the  conquered  country,  see 
Chalandon,  'Normans y  II,  232—35. 

Abbas,  a  member  of  a  famous  north  African  family,  had  gained  prominence  at 
Cairo  as  a  military  commander.  He  had  been  ordered  to  take  command  of  the  garrison 
in  Ascalon  in  1153  but  refused  and  murdered  the  vizier,  who  was  his  father-in-law, 
and  seized  his  office.  His  position,  however,  was  insecure,  and  he  therefore  plotted  to 
murder  the  caliph,  Zafir.  Even  the  murder  of  Zafir  and  the  substitution  of  young  Faiz 
was  not  sufficient,  so  he  had  to  flee  for  his  life  as  here  indicated. 


252  JERUSALEM  UNDER  BALDWIN  III 

gold,  gems,  and  whatever  other  valuables  he  possessed  to  be  thrown 
out  of  the  window  to  the  howling  mob.  He  hoped  that  while  they 
were  busy  picking  up  the  spoils,  he  might  find  some  way  of  escape. 
What  more  need  be  said?  In  spite  of  the  besieging  mob,  he  succeeded 
in  escaping  from  the  city  and,  attended  by  a  noble  escort  of  sons  and 
nephews,  took  the  road  toward  the  desert,  bound  for  Damascus,  it 
was  said.  The  avengers  were  not  slow  in  pursuing  him  and  made 
vigorous  attempts  to  prevent  his  escape.  But  his  oldest  son  and  some 
of  his  retainers,  wise  and  valiant  men,  kept  the  foe  back  at  some  distance, 
sustained  the  attacks  themselves,  and  prevented  the  pursuers  from 
gaining  on  the  fugitive.  From  time  to  time,  also,  they  craftily  left 
behind  vases  of  gold  and  silver,  precious  robes  and  silken  stuffs  of 
great  value,  in  order  to  tempt  those  following  to  stop  and  gather 
them  up,  whereby  a  quarrel  might  arise  over  the  division  of  the  spoils.^® 

The  Egyptians  finally  realized  that  pursuit  was  futile  and  returned 
home  baffled.  The  vizier,  believing  himself  safe  and  confident  that 
no  further  trouble  would  arise,  continued  on  his  way.  While  fleeing 
from  Scylla,  however,  he  fell  into  Charybdis.  For  the  Christians, 
apprised  of  his  approach,  had  laid  an  ambush  for  him,  a  common 
device  for  injuring  an  enemy j  and  there  they  were  stealthily  lying 
in  wait.  The  vizier,  all  unsuspecting,  fell  into  the  trap.  At  the  first 
encounter  he  was  fatally  wounded  by  a  sword  thrust  and  at  once 
perished.  The  name  of  this  noble  Egyptian  was  Habeis  [Abbas] 
His  son  Nasr  and  all  his  household,  together  with  the  immense  riches 
which  they  had  carried  away  with  them  out  of  Egypt,  fell  into  the 
hands  of  the  Christians,  and  the  booty  was  divided  among  them  ac¬ 
cording  to  custom.  Consequently,  our  people  returned  home  laden 
with  the  richest  spoils,  indeed  fairly  bending  under  the  burden  of 
treasures  hitherto  unknown  to  our  land. 

Among  others  who  participated  in  that  affair  were  many  Knights 
Templars.  These,  by  virtue  of  their  numbers,  carried  off  the  largest 
portion  of  the  plunder,  including  slaves.  In  the  distribution  of  the 

39  source  of  information  about  these  events  is  the  account  of  Usamah,  who 

was  in  Cairo  at  the  time  and  an  intimate  friend  of  Abbas  (P.  K.  Hitti,  An  Arab-Syrian 
Gentleman  and  Warrior  in  the  Period  of  the  Crusadesy  Memoirs  of  Usatnah  ibn~ 
Mnnqidhy  pp.  43—55). 

Habeis  is  William’s  approximation  of  Abbas  and  Nosceredinus  for  Nasr  al-Din  or 
Nasr.  These  were  father  and  son  as  William  states.  The  battle  and  death  of  Abbas 
are  dated  June  7,  1154. 


JERUSALEM  UNDER  BALDWIN  III 


spoils,  beside  other  things  there  fell  to  them  by  lot  Nasr,  the  son  of 
Abbas,  a  man  of  great  daring  and  unusual  military  prowess  among 
the  Egyptians.  His  very  name  was  dreaded  by  the  people  of  that  region, 
and  at  sight  of  him  their  hearts  quailed  with  terror  unspeakable.  The 
brothers  of  the  Temple  held  this  man  a  prisoner  for  a  long  time.  He 
professed  an  ardent  desire  to  be  reborn  in  Christ  and  had  already 
learned  the  Roman  letters  and  been  instructed  in  the  rudiments  of 
the  Christian  faith  when  he  was  sold  by  the  Templars  for  sixty  thou¬ 
sand  pieces  of  gold  to  the  Egyptians,  who  demanded  him  for  the  death 
penalty.  Heavily  chained  hand  and  foot,  he  was  placed  in  an  iron 
cage  upon  the  back  of  a  camel  and  carried  to  Egypt,  where,  to  satisfy 
their  savage  passions,  the  people  literally  tore  him  to  pieces  bit  by 
bit  with  their  teeth.^^ 


10.  Prince  Kenaud  seizes  the  island  of  Cyf7‘us  by  force  of  arms 
and  des foils  the  inhabitants » 

During  the  following  year,  Renaud  de  Chatillon,  prince  of  Antioch, 
on  the  advice  of  evil  men  by  whom  he  was  too  greatly  influenced,  was 
again  guilty  of  a  shameful  deed.  He  sent  forth  his  legions  as  against 
an  enemy  and  laid  violent  hands  on  Cyprus,  the  neighboring  island 
which  had  always  been  useful  and  friendly  to  our  realm  and  which 
had  a  large  population  of  Christians,  The  causes  leading  to  this  out¬ 
rageous  invasion  seem  to  have  been  as  follows.  In  the  land  of  Cilicia, 
near  Tarsus,  there  dwelt  a  powerful  Armenian  noble,  called  Thoros. 
This  man  by  his  capricious  and  unloyal  acts  had  often  fallen  under 
the  displeasure  of  the  emperor  and  incurred  his  rebuke.  Since  his 
lands  were  far  distant  from  the  empire  and  his  residence  in  the  high 
mountains  was  difficult  of  access,  he  often  descended  into  the  plain 
of  Cilicia  and  carried  off  booty  and  spoils.  He  preyed  without  scruple 
upon  the  land  of  his  lord  in  every  way  and  brought  heavy  and  un¬ 
merited  trouble  upon  the  faithful  subjects  of  the  empire,  without  re¬ 
gard  to  rank  or  condition.  The  emperor,  on  being  informed  of  this 
situation,  wrote  to  Renaud  to  send  forth  his  knights  and  keep  Thoros 
away  from  the  lands  of  the  empire,  that  the  possessions  of  his  Cilician 
subjects  might  be  safe  from  such  raids.  If  money  were  needed  for  the 

The  details  of  this  story,  especially  those  which  reflect  on  the  Templars  are  denied 
by  Lundgreen  as  preposterous  (see  Lundgreen,  Wilhelm  von  Tyrus  und  der  Temfler- 
ordeuj  pp.  93-96). 


254  JERUSALEM  UNDER  BALDWIN  III 

purpose,  he  himself  would  send  a  suiEcient  sum  from  his  own  treasures 
at  a  convenient  season. 

In  obedience  to  the  imperial  command,  Renaud  at  once  summoned 
a  large  force  of  cavalry  and  proceeded  to  Cilicia,  where  he  repulsed 
Thoros  and  completely  destroyed  his  army.  But  the  honorable  rec¬ 
ompense  which  he  hoped  to  receive  for  his  valiant  deed  seemed  slow 
in  arriving  5  hence,  impatient  of  delay,  he  committed  the  crime  alluded 
to  above.^^ 

The  people  of  Cyprus  had  been  warned  of  the  danger  by  some  of 
the  faithful,  and  all  the  forces  of  the  island,  such  as  they  were,  had 
been  assembled  5  but  Prince  Renaud,  marching  upon  them,  at  once 
defeated  their  army  and  shattered  their  forces  completely  so  that 
thereafter  no  one  might  dare  to  raise  a  hand  against  him.  He  then  com¬ 
pletely  overran  the  island  without  meeting  any  opposition,  destroyed 
cities,  and  wrecked  fortresses.  He  broke  into  monasteries  of  men  and 
women  alike  and  shamefully  abused  nuns  and  tender  maidens.  Al¬ 
though  the  precious  vestments  and  the  amount  of  gold  and  silver 
which  he  carried  off  were  great,  yet  the  loss  of  these  was  regarded  as 
nothing  in  comparison  with  the  violence  done  to  chastity.^^ 

For  several  days  Renaud’s  forces  continued  to  ravage  the  whole 
country  j  and,  since  there  was  none  to  offer  resistance,  they  showed 
no  mercy  to  age  or  sex,  neither  did  they  recognize  difference  of  con¬ 
dition.  Finally,  laden  with  a  vast  amount  of  riches  and  spoils  of  every 
kind,  they  returned  to  the  seashore.  When  the  ships  were  ready,  they 
embarked  and  set  sail  for  Antioch.  There,  within  a  short  time  all  the 
wealth  which  had  been  so  wickedly  acquired  was  dissipated  j  for,  as 
says  the  proverb,  “Booty  wickedly  acquired  brings  no  good  results.’^ 

There  is  some  uncertainty  regarding  the  date  of  these  events.  William  places 
them  “in  the  year  following”  the  death  of  Abbas,  which  would  presumably  be  in 
1155.  After  defeating  Thoros  and  rccoyering  several  castles  for  the  Templars,  Renaud 
seems  to  have  formed  an  alliance  with  the  Armenian,  and  the  two  collaborated  in  the 
raid  on  Cyprus  (see  Chalandon,  Les  Comnene^  II,  436—39). 

This  charge  of  atrocities  committed  by  Renaud  de  Chatillon  is  confirmed  by 
Syrian  historians.  To  what  extent  William’s  recital  was  influenced  by  the  fact  that 
Renaud  was  a  political  opponent  of  Raymond  of  Tripoli  is  difficult  to  determine,  for 
Renaud’s  ruthless  treatment  of  opposition  is  abundantly  attested  by  others.  This  expe¬ 
dition  occurred  either  late  in  1155  or  early  in  1156  (Chalandon,  Les  Comnene,  II,  438). 

Ovid  Amor,  I.  x.  48. 


JERUSALEM  UNDER  BALDWIN  III 


255 


II.  The  king  caftures  certain  Turks  and  Arabs  in  the  forest  of 
Banyas  in  defiance  of  the  treaty  which  he  had  freviously 
made  with  them. 

About  this  same  time  an  immense  company  of  Arabs  and  Turko¬ 
mans,  in  far  larger  numbers  than  ever  before,  had  assembled  in  a 
forest  near  the  city  of  Banyas.  These  people,  like  the  Arabs,  habitually 
live  in  tents  and  sustain  life  on  milk.'**^  The  forest  is  now  generally 
known  as  the  forest  of  Banyas  from  the  city  of  that  name,  but  in 
olden  times  the  entire  tract,  including  those  parts  which  extend  toward 
both  north  and  south  as  well  as  that  which  covers  Lebanon  itself,  was 
called  the  forest  of  Lebanon.  It  is  written  in  the  scriptures  that  in  this 
forest  Solomon  built  a  magnificent  mansion  of  marvellous  workman¬ 
ship  which  was  called  the  house  of  the  forest  of  Lebanon.'*®  Now, 
however,  as  has  been  said,  the  entire  forest  is  called  by  the  name 
of  the  neighboring  city.  Into  this  wood,  after  first  obtaining  the  king’s 
permission  and  a  solemn  treaty  of  peace,  the  people  just  mentioned 
had  driven  a  large  number  of  animals,  principally  horses,  because  of 
the  excellent  pasturage  it  afforded. 

But  certain  wicked  men,  sons  of  Belial,  who  had  no  fear  of  God 
before  their  eyes,  approached  the  king  and  easily  persuaded  him  to 
fall  in  with  their  evil  schemes.  They  suggested  that,  regardless  of 
his  faithful  promise  and  the  treaty  made  with  these  nomads,  he  should 
make  a  sudden  attack  upon  them  after  they  had  driven  their  flocks 
and  herds  into  the  forest  to  graze  and  give  them  and  their  beasts  as 
prey  to  his  own  people.  This  plan  was  adopted.  The  king,  burdened 
by  debt  and  held  fast  by  many  obligations  which  he  had  no  means  of 
satisfying,  easily  inclined  to  this  as  to  any  scheme  by  which  he  might 
relieve  the  pressure  upon  him.  He  lent  a  ready  ear  to  the  wicked 
counsellors  and  acquiesced  in  their  suggestion.  Led  astray  by  the 
counsel  of  evil  men,  he  summoned  his  knights  and  made  a  sudden 
raid  upon  those  people.  Finding  them  unprepared,  without  thought 
of  any  attack,  he  charged  them  as  enemies  and  delivered  them  over 
to  the  rapacity  of  his  followers.  Some,  thanks  to  their  swift  horses, 
were  able  to  save  their  lives  by  flight  j  others,  spurred  on  by  necessity, 

Turkomans,  a  branch  of  the  Iranian  Turks,  were  devoted  to  horse  breeding,  and 
the  milk  referred  to  was  probably  mare’s  milk  or  possibly  camel’s. 

I  Ki.  10 :  175  II  Chron.  9 :  20. 


256  JERUSALEM  UNDER  BALDWIN  III 

escaped  by  hiding  in  the  woods  j  but  all  the  rest  were  either  slain  by 
the  sword  or  led  into  cruel  servitude.^'^ 

It  is  said  that  the  number  of  captives  and  the  amount  of  booty  taken 
in  this  raid  was  never  equalled  in  our  land.  A  very  large  number  of 
horses  was  distributed  by  lot,  and  in  this  division  every  individual, 
even  those  of  the  lowest  rank,  shared.  Yet  this  deed  brought  no  glorious 
or  laudable  renown  to  our  people,  for  they  had  violated  a  treaty  of 
peace  and  had  maltreated,  as  they  would,  an  unsuspecting  people — 
men  who  relied  upon  the  good  faith  of  the  king  and  who  had,  more¬ 
over,  no  means  of  resisting. 

But  the  Lord,  the  God  of  vengeance.  He  who  brings  just  retribu¬ 
tion  on  sinners,  did  not  suffer  us  to  enjoy  the  rewards  of  our  sin  longj 
indeed  He  soon  made  it  plain  that,  even  with  infidels,  faith  must  be 
kept.  As  punishment  for  that  crime.  He  took  vengeance  upon  us 
to  our  undoing  and,  for  our  many  sins.  He  doubled  our  punishment 
and  brought  confusion  upon  us,  as  will  be  shown  in  the  following  pages. 

12.  Hunifhrey^  the  constable y  grants  to  the  Hosfitallers  a  half 
fart  of  the  city  of  B  any  as,  Suf  flies  which  are  being  brought 
thither  are  caftured  by  Nureddiny  and  the  city  itself  is 
besieged. 

About  the  same  time,  Humphrey  of  Toron,  the  king’s  constable, 
became  weary  of  the  continual  responsibility  and  expense  which  de¬ 
volved  upon  him  in  the  care  of  the  city  of  Banyas,  his  hereditary 
possession.  Since  he  could  not  without  aid  suitably  rule  and  protect 
it,  with  the  king’s  consent  he  decided  to  share  it  equally  with  the 
brothers  of  the  Hospital.  The  terms  agreed  upon  under  this  arrange¬ 
ment  were  as  follows:  the  brothers  were  to  own  one  half  of  the  city 
and  all  outlying  dependencies,  they  were  to  pay  one  half  of  the 
expenses  for  all  necessary  and  useful  outlay,  and  to  bear  due  responsi¬ 
bility  for  one  half  the  city. 

Banyas  lay  on  the  confines  of  the  enemy’s  country  and  very  close  to 
it,  so  that  no  one  could  approach  or  leave  the  city  without  danger  unless 
in  a  strong  company  or  by  following  secret  ways.  After  the  brothers 

Nureddin,  according  to  Qalanisi,  had  made  a  truce  with  Baldwin  III  for  a  year 
beginning  September,  1156.  This  raid,  which  the  same  writer  also  describes,  occurred 
in  February,  1157.  His  explanation  of  Baldwin’s  act  is  that  the  arrival  of  new  troops 
from  the  West  had  emboldened  him  to  disregard  the  truce  (see  Gibb,  Chronicle^ 
pp.  327-28). 


JERUSALEM  UNDER  BALDWIN  III  257 

had  assumed  the  charge  of  their  part  of  the  city,  they  desired  to  put 
the  place  in  a  good  state  of  defense  and  for  that  purpose  assembled 
supplies  of  provisions  and  arms  and  also  a  body  of  troops.  On  a  cer¬ 
tain  day,  with  an  adequate  train  of  camels  and  other  pack  animals 
loaded  with  supplies  under  convoy  of  a  body  of  knights  who  were 
to  conduct  the  entire  expedition  to  the  city  by  force  (if  necessary), 
they  were  proceeding  to  Banyas  with  the  intention  of  provisioning 
the  place  with  all  necessary  supplies  for  a  long  time  thereafter.  As 
they  drew  near  the  city  with  all  their  train,  however,  the  infidels,  who 
had  been  advised  of  their  approach,  fell  upon  them.  Vigorously  using 
their  swords,  the  Turks  broke  up  the  Christians’  line  of  march  and 
killed  many  of  their  number.  They  then  seized  the  baggage,  while 
the  survivors  fled  for  their  lives.  Those  whom  the  furious  attack  of 
the  foe  prevented  from  escaping  were  either  slain  by  the  sword  or 
made  prisoners.  Thus,  all  the  supplies  which  had  been  collected  for 
provisioning  the  city  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  infidels  to  be  used 
against  it.  After  this  disaster,  the  brothers,  fearing  the  cost  of  similar 
misfortunes,  withdrew  from  the  agreement  which  they  had  made  and 
returned  Banyas  with  its  burdens  and  emoluments  to  the  constable.^® 

Elated  by  this  success,  Nureddin  decided  to  take  advantage  at  once 
of  the  opportunity  to  invest  Banyas  while  it  was  prostrated  by  the 
catastrophe.  He  summoned  his  cavalry,  had  his  engines  of  war  moved 
to  the  place,  and  suddenly  appeared  before  the  city.  The  forces  were 
placed  in  a  circle  around  it  and  siege  operations  begun.  There  was  a 
citadel  in  one  part  of  Banyas  well  equipped  with  arms  and  men  and 
with  sufficient  food  for  a  short  time.  This  would  have  afforded  refuge 
for  the  citizens  even  if  the  city  were  taken.  But  the  people  had  great 
confidence  in  the  fortifications  of  their  city,  especially  as  they  had 
frequently  suffered  similar  attacks,  and  accordingly  they  decided  to 
make  a  vigorous  attempt  to  defend  the  place.  They  might,  in  fact, 
have  succeeded  as  they  hoped,  had  they  not  felt  too  much  confidence 
in  themselves  and  so  proceeded  to  act  without  due  discretion. 

Nureddin  attacked  with  the  machines  and  hurling  engines  and  at 
the  same  time  kept  up  a  steady,  incessant  shower  of  arrows  which  gave 

The  destruction  of  this  band  of  Hospitallers  and  Templars  was  a  cause  of  great 
rejoicing  at  Damascus.  Nureddin’s  brother  led  the  Muslim  detachment  which  had 
gained  the  victory,  and  the  captives  as  well  as  the  severed  heads  of  the  slain  were 
carried  through  the  city  in  a  great  procession.  The  battle  occurred  April  26,  1157 
(Gibb,  Chronicle^  pp.  330-32). 


258  JERUSALEM  UNDER  BALDWIN  III 

the  besieged  no  respite.  Night  and  day  they  were  forced  to  fight  with¬ 
out  intermission  until  they  were  exhausted  to  the  point  of  fainting. 
For  so  many  had  been  slain  and  so  many  fatally  wounded,  that  few 
were  left  to  carry  on  the  work  of  defense.  Had  not  the  constable  and 
his  son,  who  nobly  emulated  his  father’s  valor ,  shown  themselves 
ready  to  fight  zealously  for  their  hereditary  possessions  and  by  their 
example  encouraged  others  to  resist,  without  doubt  the  citizens,  ex¬ 
hausted  by  their  heroic  efforts,  would  have  given  way  before  the  su¬ 
perior  strength  of  their  foes.  But,  as  has  been  said,  the  presence  of 
their  lords  restrained  them, .  and  the  unflagging  courage  of  their  su¬ 
periors,  successful  in  animating  others,  restored  their  failing  strength 
and  gave  them  fresh  courage  for  resistance. 

One  day,  while  the  foe  was  pressing  them  more  fiercely  than  usual, 
the  besieged  opened  the  city  gate  and  made  a  sally  against  the  enemy 
outside.  Since  they  offered  battle  without  due  caution,  however,  they 
roused  a  multitude  of  the  enemy  against  them.  The  Turks  rushed 
upon  them,  and  the  citizens,  unable  to  maintain  their  position,  tried 
to  withdraw  into  the  city.  The  gate  could  not  be  shut,  however,  be¬ 
cause  the  pressure  of  the  crowd  trying  to  enter  was  so  great.  Con¬ 
sequently,  the  enemy,  intermingling  with  the  townspeople,  entered 
in  such  numbers  that  the  town  was  taken  by  force.  The  Christians, 
at  great  risk  and  with  much  loss  of  life,  were  forced  to  retreat  to 
the  citadel.^® 

Meanwhile  the  king  had  learned  that  Banyas  was  suffering  dire 
straits  at  the  hand  of  Nureddin — ^that  it  was,  in  fact,  about  to  fall.  As 
quickly  as  possible,  he  mustered  all  the  troops  available  at  the  time,  both 
knights  and  foot  soldiers,  and  marched  rapidly  to  Banyas  with  his 
legions.  He  was  determined  either  to  raise  the  siege  or  to  try  the  fortune 
of  battle  with  Nureddin. 

13.  The  king  hastens  to  Banyas  and  raises  the  siege*  On  the 
return  march  our  army  advances  without  due  caution  and 
jails  into  dangerous  ambushes* 

As  soon  as  Nureddin  learned  that  the  king  was  coming  with  a  fixed 
purpose,  he  raised  the  siege,  for  he  was  unwilling  to  trust  himself  to 

According  to  Qalanisi,  Humphrey  had  already  offered  to  capitulate  provided  he 
and  his  men  in  the  citadel  be  permitted  to  withdraw  in  safety,  an  offer  which  Nureddin 
rejected.  Baldwin’s  arrival,  recounted  in  the  following  chapter,  thus  saved  Humphrey. 


JERUSALEM  UNDER  BALDWIN  III  259 

the  uncertain  chances  of  battle.  Before  he  retiredj  however,  he  under¬ 
mined  and  set  fire  to  the  city  which  he  had  taken  by  assault.  He  did 
not,  however,  permit  the  forces  which  he  had  assembled  to  disband, 
but,  with  keen  foresight,  kept  them  with  him.  He  summoned  even 
larger  forces  and  lay  in  ambush  in  the  neighboring  forest  to  await 
the  outcome  of  events. 

The  arrival  of  the  king  at  Banyas  brought  the  succor  so  eagerly 
desired  by  the  besieged.  He  promised  that  he  would  remain  until  the 
fallen  places  had  been  raised,  the  breaches  mended,  and  the  city,  its 
walls  repaired,  restored  to  its  former  state.  From  the  neighboring  cities 
and  the  whole  region,  he  summoned  masons  and  all  who  had  some 
experience  in  the  art  of  building.  The  walls  and  towers  were  thor¬ 
oughly  repaired  and  the  ramparts  renewed.  Within  the  circuit  of  the 
walls,  the  houses  of  the  inhabitants  were  rebuilt  and  the  public  build¬ 
ings  restored  to  their  original  condition,  for  Nureddin,  during  his 
occupancy  of  the  city,  had  taken  great  care  to  destroy  them  completely. 

When  all  was  finished,  the  king  and  his  nobles  felt  that  a  longer 
sojourn  there  in  the  interests  of  the  citizens  was  unnecessary.  Every¬ 
thing  was  now  entirely  restored  and  the  fortress  sufficiently  equipped 
for  the  time  being  with  arms,  food,  and  men.  He  accordingly  dis¬ 
missed  the  infantry  forces  and  determined  to  return  to  Tiberias  ac¬ 
companied  by  the  cavalry  squadrons  only.  Setting  out  from  Banyas, 
he  directed  his  march  toward  the  south  and  encamped  by  a  lake  called 
Michel.  There  the  army  rested  that  night,  but  without  taking  proper 
precautions  or  observing  the  regulations  for  camps,  in  fact,  far  other¬ 
wise  than  the  requirements  of  military  discipline  demanded. 

It  often  happens  that  when  affairs  are  moving  successfully  and  hap¬ 
pily  people  become  somewhat  careless.  In  adversity  men  ordinarily 
exercise  more  care  in  their  affairs.^^  The  same  thought  is  contained 
possibly  in  this  well-known  saying,  ^^A  thousand  shall  fall  at  thy  side’’ 
(at  the  left,  probably)  “and  ten  thousand  at  thy  right  hand.”  For 
under  prosperous  conditions,  the  majority,  elated  by  success,  generally 
rush  headlong  to  destruction  5  while,  on  the  contrary,  those  who  are  ex¬ 
hausted  by  losses  and  misfortune  have  been  taught  by  their  own  danger 
to  conduct  themselves  prudently  under  dubious  conditions  and  always 


Banyas  had  been  under  siege  almost  a  month,  May  to  June,  1157  (Gibb,  Chronicley 

PP-  333“36). 

Ovid  Met.  vi.  576. 


Ps.  91:7. 


26o  JERUSALEM  UNDER  BALDWIN  III 

to  distrust  fortune,  which,  as  their  own  experience  shows,  is  often  cruel. 

Reflecting  on  the  fact  that  he  had  forced  this  great  prince  to  with¬ 
draw  from  the  siege  of  Banyas,  the  king  felt  confident  that  Nureddin 
was  now  far  away  with  his  forces  and  could  not  readily  reassemble 
so  many  nations  against  him  and  his  people.  Accordingly,  he  began 
to  exercise  too  little  caution,  as  we  have  said,  and  was  inclined  to  be 
too  indulgent  to  the  whims  of  individuals.  News  soon  reached  the 
enemy  who  were  lurking  in  ambush  that  the  king’s  infantry  forces 
had  been  dismissed  and  that  the  rest  of  the  army  was  encamped  in  a 
careless  and  unguarded  fashion  near  lake  Michel.  Some  of  the  leaders, 
as  Philip  of  Nablus  and  various  others,  were  also  reported  to  have 
left  with  their  contingents.  Perceiving,  therefore,  that  matters  had 
turned  out  according  to  their  wishes,  the  infidels  speedily  moved  their 
camp.  Their  shrewd  leader  hastened  matters  along,  as  he  knew  was 
expedient,  and  led  the  army  at  a  rapid  march  in  that  direction.  They 
soon  arrived  at  the  Jordan,  which  lay  between  the  two  armies,  crossed 
the  river,  and  placed  themselves  in  ambush  at  a  spot  commonly  called 
Jacob’s  ford,  on  this  side  Jordan,  where  the  king’s  army  would  cross 
the  following  day. 

At  daybreak,  the  Christian  army,  all  unaware  of  the  ambush  laid 
during  the  night  and  of  the  schemes  of  their  foes,  resumed  their  march 
toward  the  place  which  the  Turk  had  already  secretly  taken.  They 
were  marching  along  in  fancied  security,  fearing  no  untoward  accident, 
when  suddenly  those  who  had  been  stationed  there  for  the  purpose 
of  surprising  the  incautious  Christians  rushed  forth  from  their  hiding 
places.  As  the  Christians  advanced,  carefree  and  without  apprehension 
of  danger,  they  were  met  by  the  drawn  swords  of  an  enemy  intent  on 
either  slaying  or  wounding.  Roused  to  the  danger,  although  too  late, 
the  Christians  perceived  that  a  serious  encounter  was  imminent  j  they 
ceased  their  trivial  chatting,  ran  to  their  horses,  and  took  arms.  Before 
they  could  range  themselves  in  battle  formation,  however,  and  rally 
for  defense,  their  ranks  were  broken^  the  foe  attacked  them  furiously 
at  close  quarters  with  sword  play,  so  that  it  was  impossible  for  our 
men  to  hold  together  anywhere,  except  in  very  small  groups. 


JERUSALEM  UNDER  BALDWIN  III 


261 


14.  The  king  flees  jrom  the  field  of  battle  and  retires  to  the 
fortress  of  Safed,  The  army  is  defeated y  and  most  of  the 
commanders  are  caftured. 

The  king  remained  surrounded  by  a  few  knights  who  still  clung  to 
him.  He  perceived,  however,  that  the  lines  were  broken  and  that  the 
army,  disorganized,  was  everywhere  exposed  to  the  fury  of  the  enemy. 
Moreover,  the  strength  of  the  enemy  was  increasing  from  every  direc¬ 
tion  while  our  ranks  were  giving  way,  as  in  fact  had  been  the  case 
from  the  beginning.  Accordingly,  he  wisely  withdrew  to  a  hill  near 
by,  to  provide  for  his  own  safety.  From  there,  with  great  difficulty 
avoiding  the  enemy  now  on  his  right  and  again  on  his  left,  he  suc¬ 
ceeded,  thanks  to  the  horse  which  carried  him,  in  reaching  the  fortress 
of  Safed,  which  is  on  the  same  mountain.  A  very  large  number  of  our 
leaders  were  taken  prisoners  that  day,  but  very  few  were  killed.  For 
all  indiscriminately,  warriors  renowned  for  wisdom  and  experience 
in  war  and  common  soldiers  alike,  to  save  their  miserable  lives  sur¬ 
rendered  without  resistance  like  the  lowest  slaves,  utterly  regardless 
of  the  shameful  yoke  of  slavery  and  the  ignominy  which  would  cling 
to  their  names  forevermore. 

Among  the  prisoners  were  the  noble  and  distinguished  Hugh 
dTbelinj  Eudes  de  Saint-Amand,  the  king’s  marshal;  John  Gotmanus; 
Rohard  of  Jaffa  and  Balian,  his  brother;  Bertrand  de  Blanquefort,  the 
master  of  the  Knights  of  the  Temple,  a  religious  and  God-fearing 
man;  and  many  others  whose  names  are  unknown  to  us. 

Justly  as  our  ways  deserved,  the  Lord  rendered  to  us  the  fruits  of 
our  evil  doing;  and  we,  who  in  scorn  of  the  laws  of  humanity  had 
wrongfully  oppressed  the  innocent  and  those  who  relied  on  our  good 
faith,  were  ourselves  overwhelmed  with  confusion  in  like  measure. 
As  penalty  for  our  sins,  our  illustrious  leaders  were  made  a  reproach 
to  the  Gentiles  and  were  exposed  to  the  derision  of  the  enemy.  “Thou 
makest  us  a  by-word  among  the  heathen,  a  shaking  of  the  head  among 
the  people.” 

Yet  in  His  great  compassion,  not  wholly  without  pity  hath  He  dealt 
with  us,  neither  hath  He  withheld  His  mercy  in  anger,  since  He  saved 
the  king.  If  our  lord  had  fallen  that  day,  the  whole  realm  would, 
without  question,  have  been  plunged  into  the  deepest  peril.  Which  may 

Ps.  44 :  14. 


262  JERUSALEM  UNDER  BALDWIN  III 

God  avert!  For  in  the  case  of  a  knight,  however  great,  the  fortune  of 
one  man  only  is  concerned  j  but  the  peril  of  the  king  involves  danger 
to  the  entire  nation.  Thus,  loyal  David,  when  full  of  anxiety  about 
his  king,  implored,  ^^Lord,  preserve  the  king.” 

During  this  time,  rumors  of  varying  import  concerning  the  king’s 
safety  caused  great  anxiety  throughout  the  realm.  Some  said  that  he 
had  perished  by  the  sword,  others  that  he  had  been  carried  away  cap¬ 
tive  among  the  other  prisoners,  although  the  enemy  were  not  aware 
of  his  identity.  It  was  also  rumored  that,  through  the  protection  of 
divine  mercy,  he  had  escaped  uninjured  from  the  tumult  of  battle. 
The  entire  people  felt  deep  concern  on  their  king’s  behalf  like  that 
of  a  devoted  mother  for  an  only  son.  Ignorant  of  his  fate,  they  imagined 
the  worst  that  could  happen  and  in  their  loving  sympathy  feared  lest 
this  had  been  his  fate. 

When  he  found  himself  at  some  distance  from  the  enemy,  the 
king,  with  the  few  who  had  followed  him  to  Safed  and  some  others 
who  had  escaped  the  perils  of  the  previous  day,  hastened  to  Acre, 
where  the  people  welcomed  him  with  enthusiastic  shouts  of  joy  as 
one  returned  from  the  dead. 

This  happened  in  the  fourteenth  year  of  King  Baldwin,  in  the  month 
of  June,  on  the  thirteenth  day  before  the  Kalends  of  July.®^ 

15.  Nureddin  besieges  B  any  as  a  second  timey  but  without  sue- 
cesSy  for  the  king  marches  forth  against  him, 

Nureddin,  an  indefatigable  warrior,  eager  to  continue  his  successes, 
overran  the  entire  country  and  enriched  himself  with  booty,  taken 
now  in  one  place  and  now  in  another.  Again  he  called  forth  his  bat¬ 
talions  and  caused  still  larger  forces  to  be  levied  from  Damascus  and 
from  all  the  lands  subject  to  his  control,  for  he  was  determined  to 
besiege  Banyas  a  second  time.  Nothing  was  further  from  his  thoughts 
than  that  the  king  and  the  nobles  whose  forces  he  had  utterly  crushed 
would  again  come  to  the  rescue  of  the  besieged.  In  pursuance  of  his 
design,  therefore,  he  again  established  a  blockade  around  Banyas  and 
set  up  his  numerous  engines  in  strategic  positions.  The  mighty  blows 

William’s  date  here  agrees  exactly  with  that  of  Qalanisi,  June  19,  1157,  which 
was  the  fourteenth  year  of  Baldwin’s  reign.  The  latter,  however,  says  that  Baldwin 
did  not  rebuild  the  walls  of  Banyas.  He  also  says  that  the  Muslims  thought  they  had 
slain  Baldwin  but  were  unable  to  find  his  body.  The  parade  of  prisoners  and  booty 
was  held  at  Damascus  five  days  after  the  battle  (see  Gibb,  Chronicle y  pp.  336-37). 


JERUSALEM  UNDER  BALDWIN  III  263 

of  the  stone  missiles  shook  the  towers  and  weakened  the  walls.  At  the 
same  time,  showers  of  darts  and  arrows  fell  like  hail  and  prevented 
all  resistance  on  the  part  of  those  within.  The  people  of  Banyas,  how¬ 
ever,  remembering  how  futile  had  been  their  earnest  efforts  to  save 
the  city  during  the  siege  just  past,  voluntarily  retreated  to  the  citadel 
in  a  body  to  forestall  a  similar  experience. 

When  the  constable  left  the  city  to  attend  to  other  affairs,  he  had 
placed  in  supreme  control  a  kinsman  of  his  own  called  Guy  of  Scanda- 
lium,  a  man  of  wide  experience  in  war,  but  of  doubtful  loyalty  and 
one  who  feared  not  God.  This  man,  for  the  sake  of  him  who  had 
placed  him  in  charge  and  also  with  a  view  to  his  own  reputation,  lest 
the  fame  which  his  warlike  prowess  had  won  him  might  be  diminished, 
endeavored  by  word  and  example  to  inspire  the  others  to  resistance. 
He  assured  them  that  relief  would  soon  arrive  and  that  a  glorious 
renown  forevermore  awaited  those  who  should  deserve  it.  As  a  re¬ 
sult,  all  fought  as  for  their  personal  advantage,  and  their  ability  to 
endure  long  vigils  and  continual  hardships  excited  the  wonder  and 
admiration  of  the  enemy.  Nevertheless,  the  Turks,  determined  to  fight 
with  all  their  might  against  an  adversary  who  likewise  resisted  to 
the  utmost,  inflicted  endless  woes  upon  the  defenders.  Their  numbers 
were  larger,  and  they  could  relieve  each  other  in  turn.  The  Christians, 
on  the  contrary,  had  no  reserves  with  which  to  recruit  their  strength, 
and  the  daily  pressure  was  forcing  them  almost  to  the  point  of  giving 
way. 

Meanwhile  news  reached  the  king  that  Banyas  was  in  dire  straits, 
nor  was  that  fact  hidden  from  the  nobles  of  the  kingdom  who  still 
survived.  Messengers  were  immediately  dispatched  to  the  prince  of 
Antioch  and  the  count  of  Tripoli  to  urge  that  they  hasten  without 
delay  to  the  relief  of  the  city.  Heralds  were  also  sent  out  by  the 
king  to  summon  the  few  remaining  knights  in  the  kingdom.  Thus, 
it  happened  by  divine  mercy  that  within  a  short  time,  indeed  sooner 
than  was  expected,  both  these  illustrious  princes  with  their  noble 
retinues  arrived  at  the  royal  camp.  From  this  position,  which  was 
located  near  Chastel  Neuf,  at  a  place  called  Noire  Garde,  the  be¬ 
sieged  city  could  be  seen  not  far  away.^^ 

Nureddin  was  soon  informed  that  the  two  leaders  had  joined  the 

This  second  attack  on  Banyas  is  not  specifically  mentioned  by  Qalanisi,  who  al¬ 
ludes  only  vag'uely  to  Nureddin’s  efforts  to  follow  up  the  earlier  victory  over  the  king*. 


264  JERUSALEM  UNDER  BALDWIN  III 

king  and  were  preparing  to  march  with  him  to  Banyas.  The  prince 
was  a  man  of  much  foresight  and  discretion  in  the  management  of  his 
affairs.  Although  he  had  already  succeeded  in  making  many  breaches 
in  the  stronghold  and  the  besieged  had  lost  all  hope  of  resistance,  yet 
he  thought  it  wise  to  avoid  the  vicissitudes  of  battle  with  its  perils  and 
uncertainties.  He  therefore  abandoned  the  siege  and  withdrew  to  a 
remote  part  of  his  own  kingdom. 

16.  Thierry y  count  of  Flanders y  lands.  Ambassadors  are  sent  to 
Constantinople  to  seek  a  wife  for  the  king. 

Thus  many  events  of  widely  differing  character  were  taking  place 
in  the  kingdom,  and,  since  most  of  our  leaders  were  in  captivity,  the 
land  was  lying  in  desolation.  Just  at  this  time  it  chanced,  by  divine 
mercy,  that  Thierry,  count  of  Flanders,  landed  at  the  port  of  Beirut 
with  his  wife  Sibylla,  the  king’s  half  sister  by  the  same  father.  The 
visits  of  this  eminent  and  distinguished  man  had  more  than  once  been 
of  much  assistance  and  solace  to  us. 

The  entire  people  welcomed  him  with  great  joy,  for  his  arrival  with 
his  following  seemed  to  promise  that  the  intolerable  distress  of  the 
realm  would  now  be  relieved  in  large  measure.  Nor  were  the  ardent 
hopes  of  those  who  so  devotedly  longed  for  the  peace  of  the  kingdom 
disappointed,  for  immediately  on  his  arrival,  like  an  angel  of  good 
counsel,  he  assumed  the  direction  of  their  affairs  and  led  them  forward 
for  the  good  of  the  realm  and  the  glory  of  the  Christian  profession, 
as  will  be  related  hereafter.*^^ 

About  this  time,  the  fact  that  the  king,  although  he  had  now  arrived 
at  the  age  of  manhood,  was  still  unmarried  began  to  be  a  matter  of 
much  concern  to  the  princes  of  the  realm,  both  secular  and  ecclesiastical. 
It  was  most  important  that  he  have  children,  that  a  son  might  succeed 
him  as  the  legitimate  heir  to  the  kingdom.  They  accordingly  met  to 
deliberate  about  an  honorable  marriage  for  their  lord,  who  was  as  yet 

were  brought 

into  harmony,  and  it  was  unanimously  agreed  to  confer  with  the 
emperor  of  Constantinople  on  this  matter.  In  his  palace  there  were 

Thierry’s  arrival  must  be  dated  toward  the  end  of  the  summer,  1157.  Several 
circumstances  caused  the  scene  of  activities  to  shift  to  northern  Syria,  where  Qilij 
Arslan  II  had  invaded  the  territory  of  Antioch,  while  Nureddin,  who  had  gone  to  the 
relief  of  the  earthquake-stricken  cities  along  the  upper  Orontes,  found  it  more  con¬ 
venient  to  attack  the  same  territory  from  the  south. 


childless.  After  long  consideration,  the  various  opinions 


JERUSALEM  UNDER  BALDWIN  III  265 

many  noble  maidens  closely  related  to  him  by  ties  of  blood,  and 
furthermore  it  would  be  possible  for  him,  as  the  most  powerful  and 
wealthy  prince  of  the  world,  to  relieve  from  his  own  abundance  the 
distress  under  which  our  realm  was  suffering  and  to  change  our  poverty 
into  superabundance.  By  common  consent,  therefore,  envoys  were  sent 
to  carry  out  this  design,  with  the  aid  of  God.  Attard,  archbishop  of 
Nazareth,  and  Humphrey  of  Toron,  the  royal  constable,  were  chosen 
for  this  task.  After  providing  for  their  affairs  meanwhile,  they  pro¬ 
ceeded  to  the  coast  and  there  embarked.'*^^ 

ly*  The  kingy  accomf anted  by  the  count  of  Flanders y  hastens 
to  Antioch  with  all  the  forces  of  the  kingdom,  Nureddin  is 
stricken  with  a  serious  malady. 

It  was  the  unanimous  opinion  that  the  arrival  of  such  a  great  prince 
with  so  many  noble  and  valiant  men  in  his  train  ought  not  to  be  futile 
and  without  result.  It  was  therefore  determined  by  common  consent, 
under  the  inspiration  of  divine  grace,  that  they  proceed  to  the  land  of 
Antioch  with  the  united  fighting  forces.  This  purpose  was  comm'uni- 
cated  to  the  prince  of  that  land  and  to  the  count  of  Tripoli,  and  both 
were  cordially  invited  to  have  their  troops  in  readiness  on  an  appointed 
day  to  invade  the  enemy’s  country.  Accordingly,  led  by  divine  favor, 
all  the  Christians  from  the  various  parts  assembled  at  a  place  known  as 
La  Boquea,  in  the  land  of  Tripoli.  Thence  in  battle  array,  they  marched 
into  hostile  territory.  At  first,  however,  success  did  not  attend  them. 
A  vigorous  attack  was  made  upon  one  of  the  enemy’s  strongholds 
called  Chastel  Rouge,  but  nothing  was  accomplished.  ‘‘Better  luck  fol¬ 
lowed  a.  poor  beginning,”  however.  Accordingly,  at  the  suggestion 
and  earnest  entreaty  of  Renaud,  prince  of  Antioch,  the  assembled 
princes  proceeded,  under  more  favorable  auspices,  toward  the  land  of 
Antioch. 

While  they  .were  tarrying  there  to  work  out  the  plan  most  expedient 
under  the  circumstances,  a  messenger  charged  with  most  agreeable 
news  came  to  the  king  and  the  lords.  He  affirmed  as  a  fact  that  Nured¬ 
din,  our  most  powerful  enemy,  who  had  been  encamped  with  a  great 
host  near  Castle  Nepa,  was  either  dead  or  lying  desperately  ill  of  an 

This  embassy,  according  to  the  context,  must  have  started  for  Constantinople 
shortly  after  the  arrival  of  Thierry,  perhaps  in  September,  1157,  though  it  may  have 
been  later. 

Ovid  Met.  Vii.  518. 


266  JERUSALEM  UNDER  BALDWIN  III 

incurable  disease.  In  proof  of  his  assertion,  the  messenger  stated  that 
on  the  day  previous  he  had  witnessed  great  confusion  in  Nureddin’s 
camp.  Apparently  his  slaves,  even  his  most  trusted  retainers,  and  all 
his  private  possessions,  had  been  given  over  indiscriminately  to  be 
pillaged  at  the  will  of  anyone.  He  furthermore  reported  that  the 
troops,  weeping  and  wailing  in  deepest  sorrow,  had  dispersed  hither 
and  yon  in  the  utmost  confusion.’^® 

The  report  brought  by  the  messenger  proved  in  fact  to  be  true. 
Nureddin  had  been  attacked  by  a  most  serious  malady  j  the  ranks  had 
become  disorganized,  and,  as  is  the  custom  among  them  when  the 
master  dies,  plundering  and  unrestrained  violence  was  rife  in  his  army. 
Nureddin  himself,  disabled  in  body  and  entirely  helpless,  had  been 
carried  in  a  litter  to  Aleppo  by  his  faithful  attendants. 

At  this  report  of  the  state  of  affairs,  the  Christians  perceived  that 
all  things  were  working  together  for  the  success  of  their  enterprise. 
By  unanimous  agreement,  therefore,  messengers  were  dispatched  to 
Thoros,  a  very  powerful  Armenian  prince,  with  a  most  friendly  invi¬ 
tation  that  he  deign  to  join  them  in  an  undertaking  which  promised  to 
be  very  fruitful.  The  envoys  were  instructed  to  use  every  means  to 
induce  him  to  cast  aside  all  excuses  and  join  the  allied  forces  at  Antioch 
with  reinforcements.  Thoros  received  the  message  with  alacrity.  A  man 
of  prompt  and  energetic  character,  he  at  once  assembled  a  great  army 
and  made  a  forced  march  to  Antioch.  The  Christians  greeted  him  with 
rejoicings  the  troops  were  immediately  led  forth  from  the  city  and 
the  march  directed  toward  Shayzar. 

1 8.  Shayzar  is  besieged  andy  within  a  short  timey  is  taken  by 
storm. 

The  city  of  Shayzar  lies  upon  the  same  Orontes  river  which  flows 
by  Antioch.  It  is  called  by  some  Caesarea,  and  by  them  is  believed  to  be 
the  famous  metropolis  of  Cappadocia  over  which  the  distinguished 
teacher  St.  Basil  once  presided  s  but  those  who  hold  this  view  are  in  ' 
grave  error.  For  that  Caesarea  is  a  fifteen  days  journey  or  more  from 
Antioch.  This  city  is  in  Coelesyria,  a  province  which  is  separated  from 
Cappadocia  by  many  intervening  provinces.  Nor  is  the  name  Caesarea, 
but  rather  Caesara.  It  is  one  of  the  suffragan  cities  belonging  to  the 

®®This  severe  illness  overtook  Nureddin  early  in  October,  1157,  and  led  to  the 
confusion  here  described  (see  Gibb,  Chronicley  pp.  341-42). 


JERUSALEM  UNDER  BALDWIN  III  267 

patriarchate  of  Antioch.  It  is  very  conveniently  situated.  The  lower 
part  extends  along  the  plain,  while  upon  the  heights  of  the  upper  part 
is  the  citadel,  fairly  long  in  extent  but  rather  narrow.  It  is  well  fortified, 
for  in  addition  to  its  natural  defenses,  the  river  protects  it  on  one  side 
and  the  city  on  the  other,  so  that  it  is  entirely  inaccessible. 

The  Christians  advanced  with  ranks  drawn  up  according  to  the  rules 
of  military  discipline.  As  soon  as  they  reached  the  city  the  several  lead¬ 
ers  at  once  disposed  their  troops  in  the  best  order  and  blockaded  the 
place.  Fear  of  the  enemy  caused  the  citizens  to  withdraw  within  the 
walls  as  soon  as  the  siege  began.  The  king  and  those  encamped  outside 
immediately  set  up  their  engines  and  hurling  machines.  Never  for  a 
moment  did  they  relax  their  efforts  but  endeavored  to  do  all  possible 
harm,  that  the  strength  of  the  defenders  might  be  exhausted  by  unre¬ 
mitting  toil  and  hardship.  Each  commander  exerted  himself  valiantly 
in  the  special  sector  to  which  he  had  been  assigned  at  the  outset  and  by 
words  of  encouragement  and  promises  of  reward  cheered  his  men  on 
to  ever  more  vigorous  efforts.  Each  desired  to  be  the  first  to  break 
through  into  the  city,  and  each  sought  to  win  for  himself  the  glory  of 
being  the  first  to  enter.  Hence  they  wrought  such  havoc  that  death 
seemed  to  threaten  the  townspeople  from  every  direction. 

The  inhabitants  of  Shayzar  had  but  little  knowledge  of  armsj  their 
attention  was  devoted  almost  entirely  to  trading.  Furthermore,  com¬ 
pletely  ignorant  of  the  recent  misfortune,  there  was  nothing  they 
feared  less  than  a  siege.  They  had  confidence  in  the  defenses  of  their 
city  and  in  the  strength  of  their  lord,  who  was,  as  they  supposed,  in 
good  health.  Hence  they  were  unable  to  sustain  burdens  of  this  kind 
and  could  not  hold  out  under  the  continual  assaults  and  skirmishes. 
After  a  few  days,  they  gave  way  under  the  constant  pressure  of  their 
assailants  j  whereupon  the  Christians,  breaking  through  the  fortifica¬ 
tions,  rushed  into  the  midst  of  the  city  and  took  it  by  force.  The  people 
retreated  to  the  citadel,  all  that  remained  of  the  lower  city  was  aban¬ 
doned,  and  everything  without  exception  was  given  over  to  the  enemy 
for  pillage.  For  several  days,  therefore,  the  Christians  used  the  houses 
of  the  people  with  all  that  they  contained,  according  to  their  own  good 
pleasure. 

But  just  when  it  seemed  certain  that,  under  the  continued  pressure, 
the  citadel  also  might  be  taken  easily  together  with  all  who  had  fled 
thither  for  refuge,  an  insignificant  but  most  annoying  source  of  friction 


268 


JERUSALEM  UNDER  BALDWIN  III 

arose  among  our  leaders.  The  king  was  anxious  to  provide  for  the  wel¬ 
fare  of  the  lands.  Knowing  that  the  count  of  Flanders  with  his  large 
force  of  knights  and  abundant  means  would  be  fully  able  to  protect 
the  city  against  the  strength  and  intrigues  of  the  Turks,  he  had,  from 
the  first,  destined  Shayzar  for  him.  With  this  in  view,  therefore,  he 
determined  to  make  a  more  vigorous  assault  upon  the  citadel,  that  he 
might  put  both  the  city  and  the  fortress  under  the  protection  of  the 
count,  to  be  held  by  him  as  a  hereditary  possession  forever.  This  ar¬ 
rangement  seemed  most  suitable  to  all  the  leaders,  and  they  unani¬ 
mously  agreed  to  it. 

Prince  Renaud  alone  raised  difficulties  j  he  declared  that  Shayzar 
with  its  dependencies  had,  from  the  beginning,  formed  a  part  of  the 
heritage  of  the  prince  of  Antioch  3  hence,  whoever  held  it  must  pledge 
loyalty  to  him  as  lord.  Although  Count  Thierry  was  ready  to  do  loyal 
homage  to  the  king  for  the  possession  of  Shayzar,  he  absolutely  refused 
to  swear  fealty  to  the  prince  of  Antioch,  whether  it  be  to  Renaud, 
who  was  now  administering  the  principality,  or  to  the  young  Bohe- 
mond,  who,  it  was  hoped,  would  soon  take  over  the  power.  Never,  he 
said,  had  he  done  homage  except  to  kings. 

In  punishment  for  our  sins,  a  controversy  thereupon  arose  among 
the  leaders  over  this  question.  The  enterprise,  so  important  and  almost 
within  their  grasp,  was  abandoned,  and  the  Christians  returned  to  An¬ 
tioch  with  their  legions,  laden  with  plunder  and  booty  even  to  the  point 
of  satiety. 


19.  The  brother  of  Nureddin  moves  against  us.  Fulcher^  'patri¬ 
arch  of  Jerusalem  dies.  The  fortress  cave  beyond  Jordan  is 
restored  to  us.  The  king  lays  siege  to  the  castle  of  Harirny  in 
the  country  of  Antiochy  and  takes  it. 

About  this  time,  Mirmiran  [Musrat  al-Din],  Nureddin’s  brother, 
learning  of  his  brother's  misfortune  and  believing  him  dead,  came  to 
Aleppo.  The  citizens  immediately  surrendered  the  city  to  him  without 
making  any  difficulty.  But,  while  he  was  vigorously  storming  the  cita¬ 
del  to  force  the  surrender  of  that  also,  he  heard  that  his  brother  was 

This  new  failure  of  the  Christians  to  capture  Shayzar,  Qalanisi  again  ascribes 
to  the  arrival  of  Muslim  reinforcements  (Gibb,  Chronicle^  p.  342). 


JERUSALEM  UNDER  BALDWIN  III  269 

still  living.  Accordingly,  he  at  once  disbanded  his  troops  and  de- 
parted.^^® 

At  this  same  time  also,  Fulcher,  the  eighth  Latin  patriarch  of  Jeru¬ 
salem,  a  religious  man  who  feared  God,  went  the  way  of  all  flesh.  His 
death  occurred  in  the  twelfth  year  of  his  patriarchate,  on  the  twelfth 
day  before  the  Kalends  of  December.®^ 

About  the  same  time,  likewise,  the  Christians  regained  a  stronghold 
on  the  other  side  of  Jordan  in  the  land  of  Gilead.  This  place,  a  well- 
fortified  cave,  through  the  carelessness  of  our  forces  had  been  taken 
a  few  years  earlier  by  the  trickery  of  the  enemy.  Its  recovery  was 
largely  due  to  the  zealous  efforts  of  Queen  Melisend,  aided  by  the 
vigorous  work  of  those  who  were  left  in  the  kingdom  j  in  particular, 
by  the  care  and  vigilance  of  Baldwin  de  Lille,  to  whom  the  king  had 
entrusted  the  responsibility  of  the  realm  during  his  own  absence.  News 
of  this  success  was  sent  to  the  king 5  it  brought  great  joy  to  the  entire 
army  and  was  a  source  of  much  happiness  to  all. 

In  the  meantime,  the  Christian  leaders  were  still  lingering  at  Anti¬ 
och.  Notwithstanding  the  fact  that  they  had  been  somewhat  at  variance 
before  Shayzar,  they  had  now,  by  the  grace  of  God,  arrived  at  una¬ 
nimity  of  spirit.  They  therefore  resolved  in  the  bonds  of  peace  to 
undertake  again  some  notable  work  which  would  be  worthy  of  re¬ 
membrance  forever.  With  the  approval  and  aid  of  all,  it  was  deter¬ 
mined  to  lay  siege  to  a  fortress  about  twelve  miles  from  Antioch.  This 
place  exercised  great  power  and  jurisdiction  over  the  villages,  called 
casaliay  and  was  very  troublesome  to  the  city  itself.  Accordingly,  upon 
the  day  of  the  Lord’s  nativity,  the  entire  army,  as  with  one  mind,  re¬ 
paired  thither  and  encamped  before  the  place. 

Meanwhile,  Nureddin  was  still  held  in  the  grasp  of  the  illness 
which  had  attacked  him.  The  wisest  physicians  had  been  summoned 
from  all  over  the  Orient,  but  his  infirmity  still  failed  to  respond 
to  the  remedies  which  they  applied  and  his  life  was  now  despaired  of. 
This  seemed  to  the  Christians  an  especially  favorable  manifestation  of 
the  divine  will,  working  with  them  in  their  undertaking.  For,  had 
Nureddin  been  in  the  enjoyment  of  his  usual  health  and  strength,  it 

Amir  Miran,  Musrat  al-Din,  the  brother  of  Nureddin^  had  been  the  victor  over 
the  Hospitallers  early  in  1157.  William’s  account  of  his  seizure  of  Aleppo  and  volun¬ 
tary  withdrawal  is  almost  a  summary  of  Qalanisi’s  v^ersion  (Gibb,  Chronicle^  p.  342). 

November  20,  1157.  See  chap.  22. 


270  JERUSALEM  UNDER  BALDWIN  III 

would  hardly  have  been  possible  for  our  army  to  have  acted  so  freely 
in  the  districts  subject  to  him. 

The  king  and  those  who  accompanied  him  on  this  expedition  turned 
the  opportunity  to  their  own  advantage.  The  definite  knowledge  that 
this  great  warrior  was  unable  to  take  any  part  in  his  own  affairs  led 
them  to  pursue  their  project  with  greater  fervor  and  to  press  forward 
the  siege  more  ardently.  Accordingly  they  encircled  the  fortress  on  all 
sides,  set  up  their  engines,  and  prepared  all  the  instruments  which  are 
customarily  used  in  besieging  a  citadel. 

The  fortress  under  discussion  was  situated  on  a  low-lying  hill,  which 
presented  the  appearance  of  a  mound  artificially  built  there  as  a  founda¬ 
tion  for  the  structure.  The  wisest  men  in  the  army  devoted  themselves 
to  constructing  covered  passages  from  suitable  material,  in  which  the 
soldiers  who  were  to  undermine  the  embankment  might  lie  securely 
hidden.  It  seemed  to  them — and  they  were  not  far  from  right — that 
if  the  hill  were  mined  by  concealed  passages,  some  portion  of  the  build¬ 
ings  superimposed  upon  it  must  fall.  Wickerwork  of  osiers,  ladders  of 
moderate  height,  and  all  other  instruments  that  might  be  of  service  in 
such  work  were  hastily  prepared.  When  everything  had  been  made 
ready  with  the  greatest  care,  the  chiefs  of  both  the  infantry  battalions 
and  the  cavalry  squadrons  were  directed  by  the  voice  of  the  herald  and 
also  by  secret  instructions  to  apply  themselves  promptly  and  diligently 
to  the  work  of  attack.  A  definite  place  was  assigned  to  each  chief,  and 
there  he,  with  his  own  retainers  and  friends,  pressed  on  the  work  with 
fury  as  if  the  success  of  the  whole  matter  rested  upon  himself  alone. 
Each  commander  was  anxious  to  prove  that  his  own  followers  were 
the  best;  consequently  by  constant  attacks  and  daily  skirmishes  they 
kept  up  the  work  so  persistently  that  an  undertaking  which  would 
ordinarily  have  occupied  many  days  was  by  vigilant  attention  accom¬ 
plished  within  two  months. 

One  day  a  huge  stone  cast  forth  from  a  hurling  machine  which  was 
battering  the  citadel  night  and  day  chanced  to  fall  upon  the  chief  com¬ 
mander  of  the  castle  upon  whom  the  entire  defense  rested.  He  was 
instantly  ground  to  bits.  Upon  his  death  the  people  dispersed  like 
sheep  when  the  shepherd  is  struck  down,  and,  as  sand  without  lime 
cannot  hold  together,  so  the  obstinate  resistance  which  they  had  hith¬ 
erto  shown  ceased. 

As  soon  as  this  was  realized,  the  Christians  redoubled  their  efforts. 


JERUSALEM  UNDER  BALDWIN  III  271 

and  the  resistance  of  the  besieged  correspondingly  slackened.  Very 
soon  after — ^in  fact,  within  a  few  days — they  sent  a  deputation  to  the 
king  and  offered  to  resign  the  place  to  him,  on  condition  that  they  be 
permitted  to  go  home  freely  and  peaceably  with  all  their  goods.  They 
also  asked  that  guides  be  furnished  to  protect  them  from  attack  and  to 
conduct  them  safely  to  their  desired  destination. 

Thus  the  fortress  was  taken.  It  was  delivered  to  the  prince  of  Anti¬ 
och,  under  whose  jurisdiction  it  had  formerly  been,  and  the  leaders 
returned  to  Antioch  after  completing  a  successful  campaign.  There, 
after  words  of  farewell  had  been  exchanged,  the  king  left  them  and 
returned  to  the  kingdom,  accompanied  by  the  magnificent  count  of 
Flanders.  The  count  of  Tripoli  courteously  attended  them  on  the  way 
as  far  as  Tripoli.®^ 


20.  Amalrichy  quondam  frior  of  the  canons  of  the  church  of  the 
Holy  Sepulchre  at  J erusalemy  u  elected  patriarch.  His  elec¬ 
tion  causes  strife  among  the  bishops. 

At  this  time,  because  of  the  death  of  Fulcher  of  precious  memory, 
the  church  at  Jerusalem  was  without  a  patriarch.  The  prelates  of  the 
church  assembled  therefore  at  the  Holy  City  to  act  on  the  matter  of 
choosing  an  incumbent  for  this  important  see,  in  accordance  with  ca¬ 
nonical  rules.  It  is  claimed  that,  through  the  intervention  of  a  sister  of 
Queen  Melisend  and  Sibylla,  countess  of  Flanders,  the  king’s  sister, 
the  choice  was  irregularly  made,  and  Amalrich,  prior  of  the  church  of 
the  Sepulchre  of  the  Lord,  was  elected.®^ 

Amalrich  was  a  Frank  by  birth,  from  the  town  of  Nesle,  in  the 
bishopric  of  Noyon.  He  was  a  man  of  good  education,  but  very  simple 
and  of  little  advantage  to  the  church.  He  was  elected  to  the  position  in 
opposition  to  the  wishes  of  Hernesius,  archbishop  of  Caesarea,  and 
Ralph,  bishop  of  Bethlehem,  who  appealed  from  the  decision.  After 
he  took  possession  of  the  see,  Amalrich  placed  the  matter  in  the  hands 

This  fortress,  whose  siege  and  capture  are  described  in  such  detail,  has  not  been 
definitely  identified,  unless  it  be  Harim  (see  W.  B.  Stevenson,  The  Crusaders  in  the 
Easty  p.  179,  note  i).  If  so,  it  must  have  been  recently  lost,  perhaps  to  Qilij  Arslan 
earlier  in  the  year. 

It  is  strange  that  William  does  not  mention  which  of  the  queen^s  sisters  is  meant. 
It  was  probably  Iveta,  the  youngest,  who  was  now  abbess  of  her  convent.  Sibylla  of 
Flanders  was  especially  devoted  to  this  sister  of  her  stepmother,  Melisend,  and  is 
said  to  have  remained  with  her  when  her  husband  returned  to  Flanders  (see  L.  Delisle, 
ed.,  Chronique  de  Robert  de  Torigniy  abbe  du  Mont-Saint-Michely  I,  325). 


272  JERUSALEM  UNDER  BALDWIN  III 

of  Frederick,  bishop  of  Acre,  who  went  to  the  Roman  church  then 
ruled  over  by  Hadrian.  By  the  lavish  use  of  gifts,  it  is  claimed,  Fred¬ 
erick  secured  for  Amalrich,  in  the  absence  of  his  adversaries,  the  favor 
of  the  Roman  pontiff  and  brought  back  with  him  the  pallium  in  full 
recognition  of  Amalrich’s  claim  to  the  office  of  patriarch. 

21.  Nureddin  lays  siege  to  a  cave  in  the  region  of  Suita^  belong¬ 
ing  to  the  Christians,  The  king  marches  out  agmnst  him  and 
succeeds  in  raising  the  siege,  Nureddin  fights  with  the  Chris¬ 
tians  and  is  defeated. 

In  the  meanwhile,  however,  Nureddin  had  been  cured  of  his  malady 
through  the  careful  treatment  of  his  physicians.  The  king  had  now  re¬ 
turned  to  his  own  realm,  and  the  Turkish  prince,  in  full  vigor  of  health, 
repaired  to  Damascus.  In  the  course  of  the  following  summer,  that 
he  might  not  pass  the  time  in  idleness  there  and  be  accused  of  relaxing 
his  usual  vigilance,  he  summoned  his  army,  mustered  a  large  force  of 
reserves,  and  made  a  sudden  attack  upon  one  of  our  fortresses.  This 
was  a  cavern  in  the  district  called  Suita  [Sawad],  situated  on  the  side 
of  a  high  and  very  steep  hill.  There  was  no  access  to  this  place  from 
above  or  below  but  only  from  the  side,  by  way  of  a  narrow  and  danger¬ 
ous  path  along  a  precipice.  Within  were  rooms  and  sleeping  arrange¬ 
ments  which  afforded  the  necessary  accommodation  for  those  living 
there.  There  was  also  a  spring  of  living  water  which  never  failed,  so 
that,  as  far  as  the  narrow  limits  of  the  place  permitted,  it  was  fairly  well 
equipped  and  was  regarded  as  very  useful  to  the  district. 

The  news  of  this  siege  was  brought  to  the  king  by  a  reliable  report. 
He  at  once  mustered  the  forces  of  the  realm  and  hurried  thither,  ac¬ 
companied  by  the  count  of  Flanders,  The  people  within,  unable  to 
endure  the  rigors  of  a  siege,  had  already  made  tentative  conditions  of 
surrender  such  as  necessity  usually  imposes  j  namely,  that  unless  help 
arrived  within  ten  days,  they  would  without  fail  surrender  the  forti¬ 
fications  at  the  expiration  of  that  time.  This  fact  also  was  made  known 
to  the  king.  He  therefore  made  all  possible  haste  to  their  relief  and 
with  his  army  encamped  near  Tiberias,  by  the  bridge  where  the  waves 
of  the  Jordan  separate  from  those  of  the  lake  of  Gennesaret. 

But  as  soon  as  Nureddin  learned  that  the  king  was  at  hand,  on  the 
advice  of  Siraconus  [Shirkuh],  his  commander  in  chief,  a  man  of  great 


JERUSALEM  UNDER  BALDWIN  III  273 

valor  but  of  overweening  self-confidence,  he  left  the  siege  and  marched 
forth  with  his  army  against  the  Christians. 

The  king,  learning  that  Nureddin  intended  to  attack  him,  sum¬ 
moned  his  lords  to  his  quarters  at  earliest  dawn.  Humble  adoration  was 
first  rendered  to  the  Life-giving  Cross,  which  Peter,  of  precious  mem¬ 
ory,  our  predecessor  as  archbishop  of  Tyre,  was  bearings  then  by  unan¬ 
imous  consent  battle  was  declared.  The  ranks  were  put  in  motion,  and, 
in  exultation  of  spirit  as  if  already  assured  of  victory,  they  marched 
forth  to  the  place  where  Nureddin^s  hosts  were  said  to  be.  When  close 
upon  the  foe,  according  to  their  wish,  the  Christian  battalions,  in  battle 
array  and  armed  to  the  teeth,  dashed  en  masse  upon  the  Turks  and 
made  furious  use  of  their  swords,  as  if  determined  to  fight  to  the  death. 
But  the  undaunted  Turks  sustained  the  charge  without  wavering.  They 
counterattacked  with  the  sword  and  with  gallant  resistance  endeavored 
to  repel  the  assault  of  their  adversaries. 

After  varying  tides  of  fortune,  victory  was  finally  vouchsafed  from 
on  high  to  the  Christians.  The  enemy  was  routed  with  heavy  losses, 
and  the  king  as  victor  held  the  field  with  his  army.  This  battle  took 
place  at  Puthaha  on  the  Ides  of  July,  in  the  fifteenth  year  of  King 
Baldwin’s  reign.^^ 

Thence,  Baldwin  deemed  it  expedient  to  march  on  with  his  army  to 
the  fortress  which  had  been  under  siege.  There  he  repaired  the  dam¬ 
age  that  had  been  done  and  carefully  supplied  the  place  with  arms, 
food,  and  valiant  men.  He  then  disbanded  his  army,  sent  them  away 
to  their  homes,  and  returned  to  the  realm  after  a  successful  campaign. 

22.  The  envoys  sent  to  C onstantmofle  on  the  matter  of  the 
king^s  marriage  return.  They  bring  with  them  a  niece  of  the 
emferor  as  a  wife  for  the  king. 

As  has  been  mentioned,  envoys  had  gone  to  Constantinople  to  ar¬ 
range  a  marriage  for  the  king.  One  of  their  number,  Attard,  archbishop 
of  Nazareth,  died  there,  and  his  body  was  brought  back  to  his  own 
church  by  the  zealous  care  of  his  faithful  companions.  He  was  succeeded 
by  Letard,  prior  of  the  canons  of  the  same  church,  a  very  kindly  man, 
gentle  and  affable,  who  still  remains  in  the  same  charge  in  the  twenty- 

July  15,  1158.  Qalanisi’s  account  of  Nureddin’s  defeat  is  somewhat  briefer  (Gibb, 
Chronicle y  p.  347). 


274  JERUSALEM  UNDER  BALDWIN  III 

third  year  of  his  pontificate.*^^  The  surviving  envoys,  namely,  Hum¬ 
phrey  the  constable,  Joscelin  Pisellus,  and  William  de  Barris,  noble 
and  illustrious  men,  well  versed  in  secular  affairs,  pursued  with  due 
diligence  the  task  entrusted  to  them  at  the  court  of  the  emperor.  After 
numberless  delays  and  equivocal  answers  expressed  in  mystifying  cir¬ 
cumlocutions  such  as  the  subtle  Greeks  delight  in  and  usually  employ, 
their  request  was  gratified.  Arrangements  concerning  the  dowry  and 
the  donation  for  the  marriage  having  been  concluded,  an  illustrious 
maiden,  a  princess  who  had  been  reared  in  the  strictest  seclusion  of  the 
imperial  palace,  was  named  as  the  king’s  bride.  She  was  in  fact  a  niece 
of  the  emperor,  the  daughter  of  his  elder  brother  Isaac,  and  was  called 
Theodora.  She  was  in  her  thirteenth  year,  a  maiden  of  unusual  beauty, 
both  of  form  and  feature,  whose  entire  appearance  favorably  impressed 
all  who  saw  her.  Her  dowry  consisted  of  a  hundred  thousand  hyper- 
peres,  of  standard  weight,  and  in  addition  ten  thousand  of  the  same 
coins,  which  the  emperor  generously  granted  for  her  marriage  expenses. 
The  bridal  outfit  of  the  maiden,  in  gold  and  gems,  garments  and  pearls, 
tapestries  and  silken  stuffs,  as  well  as  precious  vessels,  might  by  a  just 
estimate  be  valued  at  an  additional  fourteen  thousand  hyperperes.®® 

The  king  had  sent  a  guarantee  to  the  emperor  in  his  own  handwrit¬ 
ing  that  whatever  his  envoys  should  agree  to  on  his  part  he  himself 
would  ratify.  On  his  behalf,  they  faithfully  promised  that,  in  case  of 
the  king’s  death,  the  queen  should  hold  as  a  marriage  portion  with 
life  tenure,  in  all  tranquillity  and  without  contest,  the  city  of  Acre 
with  all  its  appurtenances.  Thus,  with  settlements  satisfactory  to  both 
parties  the  matter  was  concluded.  Bridal  attendants  selected  from  the 
highest  peers  of  the  empire  were  assigned  to  accompany  the  lady  on 
her  journey  to  the  king,  and  she  set  out  for  Syria,  under  the  escort  of 
the  envoys,  to  go  to  her  husband. 

During  the  course  of  the  following  September  she  landed  safely  at 
Tyre  with  all  her  retinue.  Within  a  few  days  thereafter  she  was  conse¬ 
crated  at  Jerusalem  as  the  custom  of  the  realm  decreed  and  crowned 

This  allusion  to  Letard’s  twenty-third  year  in  office  dates  the  time  of  William’s 
writing  of  this  passage  in  1 1 8 1 . 

®®The  embassy  to  Constantinople  presumably  left  late  in  1157  and  returned  with 
the  Greek  princess  as  the  prospective  bride  of  Baldwin  III  in  September,  1158  (Chalan- 
don,  Les  Comnene^  II,  439—40).  The  hyperperus,  nomisma,  or  solidus  was  at  one 
time  a  gold  coin  worth  about  two  dollars.  It  was,  however,  somewhat  debased  by  the 
Comneni  and  issued  also  as  a  silver  coin  (A.  A.  Vasiliev,  A  History  of  the  Byzantine 
Empire j  II,  149). 


JERUSALEM  UNDER  BALDWIN  III  275 

with  the  royal  diadem.  Then,  after  the  solemn  rites  of  marriage  had 
been  accomplished,  she  was  given  to  her  husband.  The  patriarch-elect 
of  Jerusalem  had  not  at  that  time  received  the  gift  of  consecration,  for 
the  envoys  sent  to  the  pope  on  behalf  of  his  cause  had  not  yet  returned. 
Aimery,  patriarch  of  Antioch,  was  therefore  summoned  by  royal  man¬ 
date  to  confer  the  grace  of  royal  unction  upon  the  queen  and  to  cele¬ 
brate  the  customary  rites  of  marriage. From  the  time  that  he  took  a 
wife,  the  king  laid  aside  all  the  levity  which,  according  to  rumor,  he 
had  hitherto  unduly  displayed.  Thenceforward  he  might  say  with  the 
apostle,  ^^When  I  was  a  child  I  spake  as  a  child,  I  understood  as  a  child, 
I  thought  as  a  child  j  but  when  I  became  a  man,  I  put  away  childish 
things.”  He  is  said  to  have  cherished  his  wife  ever  after  with  affec¬ 
tion  worthy  of  praise  and  is  believed  to  have  been  faithful  to  her  even 
to  the  end.  Having  thus  laid  aside  light  conduct,  as  if  changed  from 
that  former  man,*^^  he  began  to  undertake  important  works  and  to 
occupy  himself  entirely  with  serious  matters. 

23.  The  emferor  of  C onstantinofle  corner  to  Antioch.  Prince 
Renaud  makes  amends  for  the  outrages  he  committed  in 
Cyfrus  and  is  restored  to  favor. 

During  the  course  of  that  same  year,  the  emperor  of  Constantinople 
determined  to  go  down  into  Syria.  He  mustered  troops  from  all  the 
provinces  of  his  realm,  in  keeping  with  his  imperial  magnificence,  and 
with  this  great  army  gathered  from  all  tribes  and  peoples,  tongues  and 
nations,  he  crossed  the  Hellespont,  passed  swiftly  through  all  the  in¬ 
tervening  country  and  about  the  beginning  of  December  appeared  at 
the  head  of  his  armies  in  Cilicia  so  suddenly  that  it  seemed  almost  in¬ 
credible.  The  immediate  reason  for  this  hurried  march  was  as  follows: 
a  powerful  Armenian  prince  named  Thoros,  of  whom  mention  has 
been  made,  had  seized  by  force  the  entire  land  of  Cilicia  bordering  on 
the  mountains  in  which  he  owned  several  strongly  fortified  castles. 
Not  a  single  walled  city  or  the  most  distant  village  escaped.  Tarsus  and 
Anavarza,  the  capitals  of  Cilicia  Prima  and  Secunda  respectively,  had 
fallen  under  his  power  j  and  other  cities  also,  among  them  Mamistra, 
Adana,  and  Sisium,  where  he  had  driven  out  the  governors  placed 

Aimery  was  present  in  Jerusalem  in  September  of  1158. 

I  Cor.  13:11.  ^^YivgWAen.  ii.  274. 


276  JERUSALEM  UNDER  BALDWIN  III 

there  in  charge  of  imperial  affairs.  The  emperor  had,  therefore,  has¬ 
tened  his  march  and  concealed  his  purpose  in  order  to  take  the  Arme¬ 
nian  unaware. 

His  journey  had  another  purpose  also.  His  compassion  had  been 
roused  by  the  pitiful  case  of  the  Cyprians,  who  had  well  deserved  his 
favor  and  who,  as  has  been  related,  had  been  subjected  to  the  mon¬ 
strous  tyranny  of  the  prince  of  Antioch,  who  treated  them  as  if  they 
had  been  enemies  of  the  faith  and  detestable  parricides. 

So  unexpected  was  the  coming  of  the  imperial  armies  that  Thoros, 
who  was  then  staying  at  Tarsus,  had  barely  time  to  flee  to  the  neigh¬ 
boring  mountains  before  the  legions  and  the  chiefs  of  the  army  were 
spreading  over  the  open  plain. 

When  Renaud,  prince  of  Antioch,  heard  this  news,  he  was  assailed 
by  the  stings  of  a  guilty  conscience.  Shortly  before  the  coming  of  the 
emperor,  he  had  wreaked  his  fury  upon  the  innocent  Cyprians  and  had 
perpetrated  upon  them  and  upon  their  wives  and  children  outrages 
abominable  in  the  sight  of  both  God  and  men.  Consequently,  he  feared 
the  arrival  of  the  emperor,  lest,  moved  by  the  loud  complaints  of  an 
injured  people,  he  should  undertake  to  avenge  their  injuries.  Straight¬ 
way,  the  prince  began  to  ponder,  now  in  his  own  mind,  and  again  in 
consultation  with  intimate  friends  whom  he  summoned,  as  to  his  course 
of  action  and  how  he  might  satisfactorily  atone  to  his  imperial  magnifi¬ 
cence  for  so  deep  an  injury.  The  arrival  of  the  emperor  had  terrified 
him  so  greatly,  it  is  said,  that  he  would  not  wait  for  the  king  [of 
Jerusalem],  who  was  soon  to  arrive,  even  though  he  knew  that  through 
the  latter^s  intercession  and  influence,  increased  as  it  was  by  the  new 
alliance,  he  might  secure  far  better  terms  for  himself. 

Following  the  advice  of  his  staff,  therefore,  he  chose  certain  nobles 
from  among  their  number  to  accompany  him  and  started  for  Cilicia 
where  the  emperor  was  at  the  time  with  his  forces.  Gerard,  the  vener¬ 
able  bishop  of  Laodicea,  also  attended  him  on  his  journey.  Having  first 
won  the  favor  of  some  of  the  members  of  the  emperor’s  court  to  inter¬ 
cede  for  his  petition,  he  proceeded  to  the  city  of  Mamistra,  where,  after 
making  many  elaborate  explanations  fraught  with  shame  and  disgrace 
to  the  Christians,  he  was  restored  to  the  favor  of  his  imperial  majesty. 

Emperor  Manuel  reached  Cilicia  in  the  fall  of  1158  and  remained  in  the  neigh¬ 
borhood  for  more  than  half  a  year  (see  Chalandon,  Les  Comnene^  II,  441  j  also  Gibb, 
Chronicle^  p.  349). 


JERUSALEM  UNDER  BALDWIN  III  277 

For  in  view  of  the  assembled  legions,  he  is  said  to  have  appeared  be¬ 
fore  the  emperor  barefooted  and  clothed  in  a  woolen  tunic  short  to  the 
elbows,  with  a  rope  around  his  neck  and  a  naked  sword  in  his  hand. 
Holding  this  by  the  point,  he  presented  the  hilt  to  the  emperor.  As  soon 
as  he  had  thus  surrendered  his  sword,  he  threw  himself  on  the  ground 
at  the  emperor’s  feet,  where  he  lay  prostrate  till  all  were  disgusted  and 
the  glory  of  the  Latins  was  turned  into  shame  j  for  he  was  a  man  of 
violent  impulses,  both  in  sinning  and  in  repenting.^ ^ 

24*  The  king  hastens  to  the  land  of  Antioch  and  is  graciously 
received  by  the  emferor^  who  lavishes  gifts  ufon  him* 

On  learning  of  the  emperor’s  arrival,  the  king,  accompanied  by  his 
brother  and  attended  also  by  an  escort  selected  from  the  greatest  nobles 
of  the  realm,  repaired  to  Antioch.  The  count  of  Flanders  had  decided 
to  return  home  by  the  next  crossing  and  therefore  remained  behind. 

On  his  arrival,  the  king  sent  an  embassy  to  the  emperor,  consisting 
of  Geoffrey,  abbot  of  the  Temple  of  the  Lord,  a  man  well  versed  in 
the  Greek  tongue,  and  the  noble  Jpscelin  Pisellus.  They  were  to  con¬ 
vey  in  a  courteous  manner  the  salutations  due  to  his  imperial  highness 
and  to  inquire  whether  it  was  his  good  pleasure  that  the  king  should 
appear  before  his  presence.  In  reply  to  their  message,  the  envoys  were 
instructed  to  invite  the  king  most  urgently  to  come  immediately.  In 
addition,  the  emperor  sent  his  illustrious  chancellor  as  the  bearer  of  a 
letter  from  himself  and  charged  him  to  urge  the  king  by  word  of 
mouth  also,  as  a  beloved  son  of  the  empire,  not  to  delay  to  come  to  him. 

Upon  the  appointed  day,  therefore,  the  king,  with  a  chosen  escort 
of  very  distinguished  lords,  went  thither  and  was  received  in  most 
honorable  fashion.  By  the  emperor’s  orders,  he  was  met  by  two  nobles 
of  the  highest  position  among  the  illustrious  men  of  the  sacred  palace  j 
John  the  frotosebastos  and  Alexius  the  chamberlain,  brothers  born  of 
the  same  mother  and  nephews  of  the  emperor  himself.  A  splendid 

According  to  the  Greek  historians,  Patriarch  Aimery  had  offered  to  deliver  Renaud 
de  Chatillon  to  the  emperor,  and  Baldwin  III  had  been  partner  to  the  offer,  hoping 
thereby  to  gain  the  principality  of  Antioch.  Manuel  refused  the  offer,  preferring  to 
have  Antioch  separately  ruled,  even  by  Renaud  (see  Chalandon,  hes  Comnene^  II, 
443—48).  Greek  and  Syrian  historians  insist  that  Baldwin  sought  to  ameliorate  the  con¬ 
ditions  imposed  on  Renaud,  which  included,  among  others,  the  removal  of  the  Latin 
patriarch  and  the  substitution  of  the  Greek  patriarch  of  Antioch.  On  this  point,  Baldwin 
could  make  no  gain,  though  the  actual  arrival  of  the  Greek  patriarch  did  not  occur 
until  some  years  later. 


278  JERUSALEM  UNDER  BALDWIN  III 

retinue  of  nobles  attended  them.  Under  this  escort,  the  king  was  con¬ 
ducted  to  the  entrance  of  the  tent  where  the  emperor  and  his  most 
distinguished  nobles  temporarily  resided. 

He  was  presented  with  much  ceremony.  The  emperor  greeted  him 
graciously,  gave  him  the  kiss  of  peace,  and  placed  him  by  his  side  in 
a  seat  of  honor  although  in  a  somewhat  lower  position  than  his  own. 
He  then  honored  the  king’s  companions  with  fitting  salutations  and 
gave  them,  too,  the  kiss  of  peace.  At  the  same  time  he  made  solicitous 
inquiries  about  the  king’s  own  health  and  that  of  the  members  of  his 
staff.  The  joyous  expression  of  his  countenance,  as  well  as  his  words 
and  general  attitude,  showed  that  he  was  greatly  pleased  at  their  com¬ 
ing  and  that  he  rejoiced  in  the  presence  of  such  an  illustrious  king  and 
his  retinue.  For  ten  days  Baldwin  was  constantly  with  the  emperor; 
he  enjoyed  agreeable  intercourse  with  him  and  they  had  frequent 
colloquies  both  in  private  and  in  the  assembly  of  the  nobles.  The  king 
was  of  an  affable  and  friendly  disposition,  and  during  his  stay  he  won 
great  favor  with  the  emperor  and  his  nobles,  whose  hearts  were  drawn 
to  him  by  ties  of  deep  affection ;  in  fact,  ever  after,  as  long  as  he  lived, 
he  was  cherished  by  them  as  a  son.  Even  to  the  present  day,  though  he 
is  now  dead,  they  have  never  ceased  to  hold  him  in  precious  remem¬ 
brance. 

Baldwin  was  an  energetic  man  of  shrewd  insight  with  respect  to 
worldly  affairs,  and  he  desired  that  his  sojourn  with  the  emperor  might 
be  turned  to  good  account.  He  observed  that  the  emperor  had  ordered 
forces  to  be  assembled  in  a  camp  outside  the  city  for  the  purpose  of 
sending  an  expedition  against  Thoros,  whom  he  was  pursuing  with 
insatiable  hatred.  After  first  asking  permission,  Baldwin  undertook  to 
bring  about  a  good  understanding  between  the  emperor  and  that 
nobleman.  He  called  Thoros  to  him  and  arranged  an  agreement,  by 
which  the  prince  surrendered  the  fortress  which  the  emperor  de¬ 
manded  and  thereupon  was  restored  to  full  favor.  Thus,  through  the 
king’s  mediation  Thoros,  before  returning  to  his  own  domains,  took  an 
oath  of  liege  fealty  to  the  emperor.*^^ 

At  length  the  king  and  his  train  returned  to  Antioch,  followed  by 
the  good  will  of  all.  With  them  they  carried  rich  gifts  most  liberally 
bestowed  by  the  emperor,  as  beseemed  imperial  magnificence. 

^2  The  negotiations  with  Thoros  were  conducted  jointly  by  Baldwin  III  and  thu 
Templars  (Chalandon,  Les  Comnene^  II,  448—50). 


JERUSALEM  UNDER  BALDWIN  III  279 

We  have  learned  from  certain  people  whose  testimony  is  entirely 
reliable  that  in  addition  to  the  gifts  showered  with  profuse  generosity 
upon  the  king’s  followers — and  these  were  said  to  be  countless — the 
treasure  bestowed  upon  the  king  alone  was  reputed  to  amount  to 
twenty-two  thousand  hyperperes  and  three  thousand  marks  of  silver 
of  standard  weight.  Garments,  silken  stuffs,  and  precious  vases  also 
formed  a  part  of  the  treasure  bestowed.*^^ 

At  Antioch  the  king  found  his  brother  Amaury,  count  of  Jaffa  and 
Ascalon.  With  him  was  Hugh  d’lbelin,  who  had  lately  been  released 
from  captivity  among  the  enemy  and  had  returned  to  reestablish  him¬ 
self  in  his  former  position.  As  they  also  desired  to  visit  the  emperor, 
they  soon  set  out  thither  and  were  well  received  by  his  imperial  maj¬ 
esty.  Great  honor  was  shown  them  in  accordance  with  imperial  custom 
and,  at  the  close  of  their  visit,  they  were  presented  with  rich  gifts  and 
sent  back  to  the  kingdom  rejoicing. 


25,  The  emferor  enters  Antioch.  He  shows  great  liberality 
toward  the  citizens.  Thence y  soon  ajtery  he  returns  to  his 
own  land. 

The  emperor  celebrated  the  holy  season  of  Easter  in  Cilicia  and 
passed  several  days  in  that  land.  He  then  led  his  armies  on  to  Antioch 
and  stood  before  the  gates  of  the  city,  formidable  because  of  his  vast 
array  of  troops.  The  patriarch,  bearing  the  books  of  the  Evangels,  and 
the  clergy  surrounded  by  all  the  ceremonial  splendor  of  the  church, 
went  forth  to  meet  him  accompanied  by  the  entire  people.  The  king 
also  issued  forth  with  great  ceremony  to  welcome  him,  attended  by  the 
prince  of  Antioch  and  the  count  of  Ascalon  and  followed  by  all  the 
chief  men  of  the  kingdom  and  the  principality  of  Antioch.  To  the 
martial  sound  of  trumpets  and  drums,  the  emperor  in  all  the  splendor 
of  the  imperial  insignia  and  crowned  with  the  diadem  of  the  empire, 
was  led  into  the  city  j  first  to  the  cathedral,  that  is,  to  the  church  of  the 
Chief  of  the  Apostles,  and  then  to  the  palace,  accompanied  by  the  same 
escort  of  city  fathers  and  people.'^^ 

It  is  not  unlikely  that  William  obtained  this  information  from  Amaur}’^,  the 
brother  of  Baldwin  III. 

ManuePs  entry  into  Antioch  and  his  stay  there  were  somewhat  in  the  spirit  of  a 
military  triumph  which  Renaud  tried  in  vain  to  prevent.  Manuel  took  the  precaution 
of  requiring  hostages  for  his  stay  there.  It  was  on  this  occasion  that  Manuel  held  a 


28o  JERUSALEM  UNDER  BALDWIN  III 

After  several  days  spent  in  the  enjoyment  of  the  baths  and  other 
pleasures,  during  which  time  he  showered  gifts  most  liberally  upon 
the  people  of  the  town,  according  to  his  usual  custom,  the  emperor 
determined  to  make  a  hunting  trip  to  while  away  the  time.  So,  accom¬ 
panied  by  the  king,  he  visited  a  place  where  there  was  good  game.  They 
were  riding  through  the  forest,  as  hunters  do  in  pursuance  of  that  sport, 
when,  on  the  solemn  day  of  the  Ascension  of  our  Lord,  an  accident  be¬ 
fell  them.  The  king,  borne  along  on  his  fleet  horse,  was  riding  over 
rough  ground  covered  with  low-growing  shrubs  and  brambles,  when 
he  was  flung  headlong  to  the  ground  from  his  horse  and  suffered  a 
fractured  arm. 

As  soon  as  the  emperor  learned  of  the  accident,  he  took  upon  himself, 
with  the  most  gracious  sympathy,  the  office  of  surgeon  j’  he  knelt  down 
by  the  king  and  attentively  ministered  to  him,  as  if  he  himself  were 
merely  an  ordinary  person.  Meanwhile,  his  nobles  and  kinsmen  were 
dumb  with  wonder  and  dismay.  That  the  emperor,  regardless  of  his 
imperial  majesty,  should  lay  aside  his  august  dignity  and  show  him¬ 
self  so  devoted  and  friendly  to  the  king  appeared  to  all  unseemly. 
When,  on  account  of  this  accident,  they  returned  to  Antioch,  he  visited 
the  king  daily,  himself  renewed  the  poultices  and  healing  ointments, 
and  then  carefully  replaced  the  bandages.  Indeed,  he  could  scarcely 
have  shown  more  solicitude  had  Baldwin  been  his  own  son.’^’^ 

When  the  king  had  completely  recovered,  the  emperor  proclaimed 
by  the  voice  of  the  heralds  that  the  commanders  of  the  legions  were  to 
send  ahead  the  machines  and  engines  of  war  and  on  a  certain  day  con¬ 
duct  the  army  to  Aleppo.  Soon  after,  he  himself,  accompanied  by  the 
king  arid  the  rulers  of  the  two  kingdoms,  left  Antioch  to  the  sound  of 
trumpets  and  drums,  the  challengers  to  battle.  At  the  ford  of  Balena, 
so  called  in  common  parlance,  the  entire  army  halted. 

From  that  place  the  emperor  sent  messengers  to  Nureddin,  who 
chanced  to  be  at  Aleppo  at  the  time,  and  through  these  envoys  arranged 
that  one  Bertram,  a  natural  son  of  the  count  of  St.  Gilles,  with  certain 
other  prisoners  should  be  released.*^®  Shortly  after  this,  the  monarch 

tournament  in  Western  fashion  and  himself  took  part  in  the  event  (see  Chalandon, 
Les  Comnhiey  II,  450-52). 

Manuel  seems  to  have  prided  himself  upon  his  knowledge  of  medicine  and  his 
skill  in  treating  wounds  (see  also  Book  XVI,  note  45). 

Bertram,  the  son  of  Alphonse,  had  been  captured  by  Nureddin  in  1149,  a  fact 
which  William  failed  to  mention  at  the  time  (see  Book  XVII,  note  18).  Nureddin, 


JERUSALEM  UNDER  BALDWIN  III  281 

returned  to  his  own  realm,  whither  his  private  affairs  called  him.  After 
his  departure,  the  king  also  returned  to  his  land,  together  with  those 
who  had  accompanied  him. 

26.  On  the  death  of  Pofe  Hadrian y  a  dangerous  schism  arises' 
in  the  church  of  Rome, 

About  this  time  Pope  Hadrian  died  of  quinsy  at  Anagni  in  Cam¬ 
pania.  His  body  was  borne  to  Rome  and  there  buried  with  great  honor 
in  the  church  of  St.  Peter,  the  chief  of  the  apostles.  The  cardinals  there¬ 
upon  assembled  to  discuss  the  question  of  his  successor,  and  it  happened, 
as  it  often  does  under  such  circumstances,  that  their  wishes  were  at 
variance.  One  faction  chose  Roland,  cardinal-priest  of  the  same  church 
of  St.  Peter,  with  title  St.  Mark,  who  had  been  chancellor  of  the  holy 
seej  and,  laying  hands  upon  him,  ordained  him  pope  under  the  name 
Alexander.  The  other  party,  however,  chose  Octavianus,  a  nobleman 
according  to  the  flesh,  cardinal-priest  of  the  same  church  with  title 
St.  Cecilia  beyond  the  Tiber  j  he  too  was  consecrated  in  the  same  man¬ 
ner  and  constituted  pope  under  the  name  Victor.'^ 

This  schism,  because  of  our  sins,  practically  caused  a  division  and 
an  irrevocable  separation  in  the  entire  Latin  church  j  the  greatest  nobles 
of  the  land  formed  into  factions  and  allied  themselves  to  one  side  or 
the  other. 

This  condition  lasted  almost  nineteen  years.  Finally,  Frederick,  the 
emperor  of  the  Romans,  who  had  been  aiding  and  advising  the  party 
of  Victor,  brought  about  unity  in  the  church  by  becoming  fully  recon¬ 
ciled  to  Pope  Alexander.*^®  Thus  harmony  was  restored  to  the  church 
of  God  and,  the  shades  of  error  having  been  dispelled,  peace  shone 
forth,  as  ^^the  morning  star  in  the  midst  of  the  clouds.’^ 


who  was  loath  to  give  up  captives,  released  a  number  of  prisoners  at  Manuel’s  request, 
perhaps  a  condition  of  peace  between  them. 

The  death  of  Hadrian  IV  occurred  in  1159  and  was  follow'ed,  as  William  says, 
by  the  schism  which  Frederick  Barbarossa  for  political  reasons  helped  to  keep  alive 
for  many  years. 

This  reconciliation  occurred  some  time  after  the  battle  of  Legnano,  1176,  in 
which  Frederick’s  troops  had  suffered  a  severe  defeat  from  the  Lombard  cities.  The 
Lateran  council  of  1179,  at  which  William  was  present,  was  in  a  sense  a  celebration 
of  the  restored  unity  of  the  church. 

Ecclus.  50:6. 


282 


JERUSALEM  UNDER  BALDWIN  III 


27.  Nureddin  Invades  the  country  of  the  sultan  of  Iconuim  and 
takes  a  fart  of  it  by  force.  The  king  ravages  the  land  of 
Damascus, 

Meanwhile,  Nureddin  was  greatly  delighted  at  the  departure  of  the 
emperor.  The  arrival  of  that  mighty  potentate  had  caused  him  great 
fear,  and  his  sojourn  in  the  country  had  agitated  him  still  more.  He 
now  felt  secure  from  the  dreaded  power  of  the  great  monarch  and, 
perceiving  that  the  king  had  returned  to  his  own  land,  thought  that 
the  opportunity  he  had  so  long  desired  had  come.  He  accordingly 
summoned  troops  from  all  over  his  dominions  and  directed  a  campaign 
against  the  land  of  the  sultan  of  Iconium,  which  bordered  on  his  own 
territory.  The  city  of  Marash  as  well  as  the  two  strongholds,  Cresson 
and  Beherselin,  fell  under  his  power,  for  the  sultan  was  far  distant  from 
these  parts  and  could  not  easily  render  them  aid.  It  was  with  full 
knowledge  of  this  situation,  in  fact,  that  Nureddin  had  ventured  to 
attack  Iconium  against  one  stronger  than  himself. 

News  of  this  campaign  was  brought  to  the  king,  who  was  still  de¬ 
tained  with  all  his  forces  in  those  parts.  Well  knowing  that  the  land  of 
Damascus,  stripped  of  its  military  forces,  would  lie  exposed  as  an  easy 
prey  to  the  wiles  of  an  enemy,  the  king  resolved  to  turn  the  fact  to  his 
own  advantage.  Gathering  an  army,  he  invaded  the  land  of  Damascus, 
where  without  opposition  he  burned  and  laid  waste  everything  accord¬ 
ing  to  his  good  pleasure.  The  entire  land  from  Ostro  [Bostra?],  that 
famous  city  of  Arabia,  even  to  Damascus  was  given  over  to  the  soldiers 
to  burn  and  plunder  at  will. 

There  was  at  Damascus  a  nobleman  named  Negem-ed-Din  [Najm 
al-Din],  to  whom,  because  of  his  reputation  for  experience  in  worldly 
matters,  Nureddin  had  entrusted  his  personal  affairs  and  the  charge 
of  the  city  with  its  dependencies,  to  be  governed  according  to  his  own 
good  pleasure.  Najm  realized  that  his  master  was  occupied  with  im¬ 
portant  affairs  at  a  distance  while  he  himself  had  only  a  small  force 
with  which  to  resist  the  king.  He  therefore  wisely  sought  other  means 
of  avoiding  the  dangers  which  beset  him.  He  offered  the  king  four 
thousand  pieces  of  gold  and  gave  up  six  knights  of  ordinary  rank  whom 
he  was  holding  and,  in  return,  demanded  a  truce  of  three  months.  By 
the  judicious  use  of  money  he  had  bribed  many  to  Intercede  for  him, 


JERUSALEM  UNDER  BALDWIN  III  283 

and  consequently  his  request  was  granted.  By  these  prudent  measures 
he  succeeded  in  relieving  the  country  of  the  king’s  army.®^ 

During  this  time  Queen  Melisendj  a  woman  of  unusual  wisdom 
and  discretion,  fell  ill  of  an  incurable  disease  for  which  there  was  no 
help  except  death.  Her  two  sisters,  the  countess  of  Tripoli  and  the 
abbess  of  St.  Lazarus  of  Bethany,  watched  over  her  with  unremitting 
carej  the  most  skilful  physicians  to  be  found  were  summoned,  and 
such  remedies  as  were  judged  best  assiduously  applied.^^  For  thirty 
years  and  more,  during  the  lifetime  of  her  husband  as  well  as  after¬ 
wards  in  the  reign  of  her  son,  Melisend  had  governed  the  kingdoms 
with  strength  surpassing  that  of  most  women.  Her  rule  had  been  wise 
and  judicious.  Now,  wasted  in  body  and  somewhat  impaired  in  memory, 
she  had  lain  on  her  bed  for  a  long  time  as  if  dead,  and  very  few  were 
allowed  to  see  her. 

Meanwhile,  the  time  of  the  truce  had  elapsed  which  had  been  agreed 
on  with  Najm,  the  governor  of  Damascus,  and  Nureddin,  not  yet 
having  completed  his  undertaking,  was  still  detained  in  the  parts 
mentioned  above.  The  king,  therefore,  entered  the  land  of  the  enemy 
by  force  of  arms  and  devastated  the  country  as  he  would.  He  drove 
off  cattle  and  slaves,  burned  and  plundered  without  hindrance.  Then, 
having  laid  waste  the  land,  destroyed  the  surrounding  fields,  and  taken 
the  inhabitants  captive,  he  again  returned  in  safety  to  his  realm. 

28.  Prince  Renaud  of  Antioch  is  caftured  by  the  Turks  and 
thrown  into  frison  at  Aleffo, 

Not  long  after  this,  Renaud,  prince  of  Antioch,  was  informed  by 
his  scouts  that  in  the  country  which  had  formerly  belonged  to  the 
count  of  Edessa,  between  Marash  and  Tulupa,  there  was  a  land  full 
of  flocks  and  herds.  Since  this  locality  was  without  military  forces  and 
the  people  were  unaccustomed  to  the  use  of  arms,  it  lay  easily  exposed 
to  pillage.  The  credulous  Renaud  lent  a  ready  ear  to  this  report.  He 
at  once  mustered  a  large  force  and  under  evil  auspices  set  out  on  the 
march.  On  reaching  the  place,  he  found  that  the  story  was  correct. 

These  events  at  Damascus  took  place  too  late  to  be  included  in  the  chronicle  of 
Qalanisi,  who  died  March  i8,  ii6o.  The  lieutenant  whom  Nureddin  had  left  in  charge 
of  Damascus  was  Najm  al-Din,  according  to  Gibb  (see  Gibb,  Chronicle^  pp.  357—68). 

The  two  sisters  were  Hodierna  and  Iveta.  William’s  statement  of  the  length  of 
her  rule  would  imply  the  year  1 161  as  the  date  of  her  illness. 


284  JERUSALEM  UNDER  BALDWIN  III 

There  was  indeed  an  enormous  number  of  flocks  and  herds,  but  the 
people  to  whom  they  belonged  were  Christians.  For,  except  in  the 
fortresses,  there  were  no  Turks  in  all  that  region.  Even  these  were 
few  in  number,  since  they  were  merely  stationed  in  those  places  to 
protect  the  strongholds,  collect  tribute  from  the  people,  and  guard 
it,  when  paid,  for  the  great  lords  whose  agents  they  were.  The  fields 
around  were  occupied  entirely  by  Syrian  and  Armenian  Christians, 
who  tilled  the  soil  and  devoted  themselves  to  agriculture. 

Renaud  and  his  forces,  without  the  slightest  opposition,  seized 
plunder  and  spoils  on  all  sides.  Loaded  with  booty  and  enriched 
by  all  kinds  of  stolen  goods,  they  were  returning  home  in  safety  and 
tranquillity  when  suddenly  they  were  met  by  Megedin  [Majd  al- 
Din],  the  governor  of  Aleppo,  a  true  friend  and  loyal  ally  of  Nured- 
din.  Having  learned  that  Renaud  was  returning  from  his  foray,  he 
had  hastened  against  him  with  all  the  light-armed  cavalry  of  that 
region.  His  purpose  was  to  surprise  the  Christians  in  some  narrow 
defiles  and  rout  them  while  they  were  encumbered  with  baggage  and 
booty,  or  at  least  to  compel  them  by  force  to  relinquish  the  plunder. 

Following  out  the  shrewd  plan  of  the  governor,  the  Turks  had 
marched  forth  against  Renaud  under  the  guidance  of  the  scouts  who 
had  brought  the  news  and  were  now  at  the  place  named,  near  which 
the  prince  with  all  his  plunder  was  encamped. 

On  learning  that  the  enemy  was  at  hand,  the  prince  consulted  with 
his  people  as  to  what  was  best  to  be  done  under  the  circumstances. 
The  wisest  plan  was  to  abandon  the  booty  and  hasten  home  unen¬ 
cumbered,  which  could  easily  have  been  donej  but  instead  they  pre¬ 
ferred  to  keep  the  plunder  and,  if  necessary,  put  up  a  vigorous  fight. 
The  next  morning,  when  the  day  was  somewhat  advanced,  the  hostile 
forces  met  in  battle.  The  enemy  attacked  with  bows  and  swords  and 
fought  most  pugnaciously.  At  first  the  Christians  tried  to  make  a 
stout  resistance,  but  finally  they  gave  way  to  panic,  abandoned  the 
spoils,  and  fled.  In  punishment  for  his  sins,  the  prince  was  forced 
to  expiate  in  his  own  person  all  the  crimes  which  he  had  committed. 
A  captive,  bound  with  the  chains  of  the  foe,  he  was  led  to  Aleppo 
in  most  ignominious  fashion,  there  to  become,  with  his  fellow  captives, 
the  sport  of  the  infidels. 

This  disaster  occurred  on  November  23  in  the  eighteenth  year  of 


JERUSALEM  UNDER  BALDWIN  III  285 

King  Baldwin’s  reign,  at  a  place  called  Commi,  between  Cresson  and 
Marash.®^ 

i 

29.  One  Johny  cardinal-friest  of  the  church  of  RonWy  comes  to 
Syria  as  legate;  an  altercation  arises  among  the  bishops  in 
regard  to  his  being  received,  A  sony  Baldwiny  is  born  to  the 
king^s  brother y  A maurjy  count  of  Jaffa. 

During  this  same  period  a  certain  John,  a  man  of  much  learning, 
cardinal-priest  of  the  church  at  Rome,  of  title  Saints  John  and  Paul, 
landed  with  some  Genoese  at  Jubail.  He  had  been  sent  by  Pope  Alex¬ 
ander  as  legate  to  the  countries  of  the  Orient.  Wishing  to  obtain 
permission  to  enter  the  country  as  legate,  he  endeavored  to  ascertain 
the  sentiments  of  the  king  and  the  princes  of  the  realm,  both  ec¬ 
clesiastical  and  secular,  in  regard  to  his  coming  to  them.  For,  as  has 
been  mentioned,  a  schism  had  arisen  which  involved  the  whole  world 
— some  favoring  Pope  Alexander,  and  others,  the  opposite  party. 
After  long  consideration  had  been  given  to  the  problem,  the  legate 
was  directed  to  remain  at  Jubail  for  a  timcj  he  was  not  to  venture  to 
enter  the  kingdom  until  the  prelates  of  the  church  and  the  princes 
of  the  realm  had  considered  the  matter  more  fully.  He  would  then 
be  instructed  what  was  their  pleasure  in  the  matter. 

Accordingly,  the  patriarch  and  all  the  other  prelates  of  the  church 
were  summoned  to  Nazareth,  where  in  conference  with  the  king  and 
some  of  the  barons  also,  they  began  to  consider  what  course  to  pursue 
in  such  a  difficult  situation.  For  while  all  the  prelates  of  the  East  in 
the  two  patriarchates  openly  preserved  neutrality,  as  private  in¬ 
dividuals,  some  secretly  favored  one  side,  some  the  other. 

As  is  usual  under  such  conditions,  they  could  not  agree  and  were 
swayed  by  their  wishes  in  many  directions.  Some  declared  that  Alex¬ 
ander  and  his  legate  should  be  received,  as  having  the  better  cause. 
The  chief  partisan  of  this  view  was  Peter,  of  pious  memory  in  the 
Lord,  our  predecessor  as  archbishop  of  Tyre.  Others,  on  the  contrary, 
preferred  the  cause  of  Victor,  on  the  ground  that  he  had  always  been 

The  year  is  somewhat  uncertain,  for  William’s  usual  list  of  the  years  of  Baldwin’s 
reign  would  make  this  ii6i,  which  is  also  given  by  several  Arabic  historians.  Both 
Chalandon  (^Les  Cojnnena^  II,  520)  and  Stevenson  {CrttsaderSy  p,  183,  note  2)  prefer 
1160  as  the  year,  accepting  William’s  statement  of  day  and  month. 


< 


286  JERUSALEM  UNDER  BALDWIN  III 

a  friend  and  protector  of  the  kingdom  j  the  latter  party  maintained 
that  the  legate  should,  under  no  circumstances,  be  received. 

The  king,  supported  by  some  of  the  barons  and  church  dignitaries, 
advised  that  a  middle  course  be  adopted  and  neither  party  received  j 
he  feared  a  division  of  the  bishops  which  would  cause  a  schism  in  the 
church.  If  the  legate,  laying  aside  his  official  rights  and  dignities,  de¬ 
sired  to  go  as  a  pilgrim  to  the  holy  places  for  the  sake  of  prayer,  per¬ 
mission  should  be  given  and  liberty  granted  him  to  tarry  in  the  king¬ 
dom  until  the  first  crossing,  at  which  time  he  must  return.  The  king 
gave  the  reason  for  his  decision  as  follows:  ‘^The  schism  is  of  recent 
date,  nor  does  the  world  as  yet  know  which  faction  has  the  stronger 
cause.  In  a  doubtful  matter,  it  is  dangerous  to  adopt  an  opinion  in¬ 
dependently,  to  venture  to  pronounce  in  advance  a  definite  decision, 
while  the  result  is  still  uncertain.  Moreover,  there  is  no  need  of  a 
legate  in  the  kingdom  to  burden  the  churches  and  monasteries  with 
expenses  and  weaken  them  by  his  extortions.” 

This  was  the  opinion  of  the  king.  It  seemed  most  sensible,  yet  the 
advice  of  the  party  which  maintained  that  the  legate  should  be  received 
prevailed.  He  was,  therefore,  invited  to  enter  the  kingdom  and  later 
proved  a  heavy  burden  to  many  who  had  approved  of  his  being  re¬ 
ceived.®^ 

About  this  time  a  son  was  born  to  Amaury,  count  of  Jaffa,  and  his 
wife  Agnes,  the  daughter  of  the  count  of  Edessa.  At  the  father^s  re¬ 
quest,  the  king  received  the  child  at  the  baptismal  font  and  gave  him 
his  own  name.  When  he  was  asked  in  jest  what  he  would  bestow  upon 
his  nephew,  the  son  whom  he  had  received  at  the  holy  font,  Baldwin 
answered  in  his  customary  merry  and  afEable  manner,  ^‘The  kingdom 
of  Jerusalem.”  This  remark  struck  deep  into  the  hearts  of  some  of 
the  wise  men  who  heard  it,  for  it  seemed  to  them  an  ominous  predic¬ 
tion  that  the  king,  despite  his  youth  and  that  of  his  wife,  would  die 
without  children,  which  proved  to  be  the  case.®^ 

83  Th  is  council  was  held  in  i  i6o,  probably  late  in  the  year  (see  R.  Rbhricht,  Regesta 
regni  Hierosolymitaniy  no.  357i  J.  D.  Mansi,  Sacrorufn  conciltorum  nova  et  am- 
fUssima  collection  XXI,  col.  1145—46). 

®‘^Amaury’s  son  Baldwin  became  Baldwin  IV,  king  of  Jerusalem  1174—1185.  By 
inference  from  William’s  later  statements  that  young  Baldwin  was  nine  years  old  in 
1170  and  thirteen  at  the  death  of  his  father,  1174,  his  birth  occurred  in  1161. 


1 


JERUSALEM  UNDER  BALDWIN  III  287 

30.  The  king  is  summoned  by  the  feofle  of  Antioch  and  hastens 
thither,  Imferial  envoys  arrive  to  request  a  kinswoman  of 
the  king  as  a  consort  for  their  lord. 

The  imprisonment  of  the  prince  deprived  the  province  of  Antioch 
of  the  support  of  a  leader,  and  fear  and  anxiety  again  laid  hold  on 
the  people  of  that  land.  From  day  to  day,  in  painful  suspense,  they 
awaited  the  destruction  of  the  land,  unless  perchance  the  Lord  should 
become  their  defender.  At  length  they  determined  to  have  recourse 
to  their  usual  source  of  aid  and  to  seek  help  against  the  evils  which 
threatened  them  by  appealing  to  him  to  whom  they  had  so  often  ap¬ 
plied  and  never  in  vain.  A  delegation  was  accordingly  sent  to  implore 
the  king  of  Jerusalem  with  tears  and  prayers  to  come  without  delay 
to  the  help  of  a  despairing  people,  a  people  about  to  perish,  whereby 
he  might  win  for  himself  honor  and  glory  in  the  eyes  of  men  and 
eternal  reward  from  God. 

On  learning  of  the  desperate  situation  at  Antioch,  the  king  was 
moved  with  the  deepest  compassion  for  the  troubles  of  that  people. 
Following  the  example  of  his  predecessors,  he  wholeheartedly  as¬ 
sumed  the  task  and  hastened  to  Antioch,  accompanied  by  a  noble  escort 
of  knights,  where  he  was  received  with  manifestations  of  extreme  joy 
and  exultation  by  the  elders  and  people.  At  Antioch  he  remained  as 
long  as  the  exigencies  of  time  and  place  required  and  displayed  the 
utmost  care  for  the  affairs  of  the  principality  as  if  they  had  been  his 
own.  Then  he  committed  the  government  of  the  land  temporarily 
to  the  patriarch,  until  he  himself  could  return,  and  after  arranging 
for  the  support  of  the  princess  as  befitted  her  position,  he  returned  to 
his  kingdom,  where  his  own  affairs  demanded  his  presence. 

After  his  return  imperial  envoys,  nobles  of  high  position  and  renown 
in  the  sacred  palace,  arrived  from  the  emperor  of  Constantinople. 
They  were  the  bearers  of  a  letter  with  a  golden  seal  and  also  of  private 
messages  for  the  king.  The  leader  of  the  embassy  was  the  illustrious 
Gundostephan  [Contostephanus],  a  blood  relation  of  the  emperor  j 
the  other  was  the  supreme  interpreter  of  the  palace,  Trifulus  [Theo- 
phylact]  by  name,^^  a  shrewd  man  and  very  zealous  on  behalf  of  the 

These  envoys  were  named  John  Contostephanus  and  Theophylact,  the  latter  an 
Italian.  William’s  spelling'  of  the  names  suggests  that  he  obtained  this  information 
orally.  Bertha  of  Sulzbach,  or  Irene  as  she  was  renamed,  the  first  wife  of  Manuel, 
had  died. 


288  JERUSALEM  UNDER  BALDWIN  III 

imperial  interests.  These  envoys,  as  we  have  said,  bore  sacred  dis¬ 
patches,  the  tenor  of  which  was,  in  substance,  as  follows:  “Know,  O 
dearest  friend,  most  beloved  of  our  empire,  that  our  imperial  consort, 
the  illustrious  Irene,  of  precious  memory  in  the  Lord,  has  finished 
her  allotted  days  on  earth  and  henceforward  dwells  with  the  spirits 
of  the  elect.  She  has  left  us  an  only  daughter  as  the  heir  to  the  empire. 
But  as  we  have  no  male  offspring,  we  are  filled  with  solicitude  about 
the  succession  and  have  frequently  held  earnest  conference  with  the 
most  illustrious  nobles  of  the  court  in  regard  to  a  second  alliance.  With 
the  consent  and  approval  of  all  our  princes,  it  has  finally  been  judged 
desirable  that  we  take  as  our  imperial  consort  a  lady  of  your  lineage, 
since,  of  all  our  empire,  we  hold  you  in  the  deepest  affection.  Whomso¬ 
ever  of  your  kinswomen  you  shall  choose  for  us,  be  she  the  sister  of 
the  illustrious  count  of  Tripoli,  or  the  younger  sister  of  the  magnificent 
prince  of  Antioch,  her  we  shall  receive,  with  entire  confidence  in  your 
loyalty  and  your  choice,  as,  by  the  will  of  God,  our  imperial  consort 
and  companion  in  the  realm.” 

When  the  emperor’s  intention  was  made  known  to  the  king,  both 
by  letter  and  by  word  of  mouth  from  the  envoys,  he  promised  obedience 
and  assistance.  Most  earnestly  he  thanked  his  imperial  majesty:  first 
because  he  proposed  to  ally  with  himself  in  such  an  exalted  position 
one  of  the  king’s  own  lineage,  and  secondly,  because,  in  recognition 
of  Baldwin’s  loyalty,  the  choice  of  the  emperor’s  future  bride  and 
imperial  consort  was  left  to  the  king  alone. 

31.  The  king  designates  as  the  emferor^s  bride  the  illustrious 
maiden  Melisendy  sister  of  the  count  of  Tripoli;  but  after  a 
year* s  delay y  the  emperor  declines  the  king*s  choice  and  mar-' 
ries  Mariay  daughter  of  Prince  Raymond, 

> 

After  conferring  with  his  advisers  as  to  the  alliance  which  would 
be  most  desirable  for  his  own  interests  and  those  of  his  imperial  majesty, 
the  king  called  the  emperor’s  deputies  and,  with  persuasive  words, 
directed  them  to  receive  as  the  wife  of  their  lord  Melisend,  a  sister 
of  the  count  of  Tripoli,  a  maiden  of  fine  character  and  ability.  They 
received  the  communication  of  the  king  with  due  reverence  and  gave 
assent,  but  requested  that  the  decision  be  announced  to  the  emperor 
both  by  messengers  and  letters. 

Meanwhile,  an  enormous  array  of  ornaments,  surpassing  those  of 


JERUSALEM  UNDER  BALDWIN  III  289 

royalty  itself,  was  prepared  at  inifinite  expense  by  the  mother  and 
aunt  of  the  maiden  destined  for  this  exalted  position,  and  by  her 
brother  and  her  many  friends  as  well:  bracelets,  earrings,  pins  for 
her  headdress,  anklets,  rings,  necklaces,  and  tiaras  of  purest  gold. 
Silver  utensils  of  immense  weight  and  size  were  prepared  for  use  in 
the  kitchen  and  for  the  service  of  the  table  and  the  toilet,  besides 
bridles  and  saddles — in  short,  every  kind  of  furnishing.  All  these 
things  were  prepared  at  vast  expense  and  with  great  zealj  the  work¬ 
manship  alone  was  evidence  of  their  exceeding  great  cost  and  easily 
surpassed  the  luxury  of  kings.  During  this  time,  the  Greeks  carefully 
scrutinized  each  detail  and  inquired  into  the  life  and  conduct  of  the 
damsel  even  to  the  most  secret  physical  characteristics.  While  awaiting 
their  return,  they  were  in  constant  communication  with  the  emperor. 
And  thus  a  year  glided  by. 

The  king  and  the  court,  as  well  as  the  other  relations  and  friends 
of  the  maiden,  were  very  indignant  at  this  delay.  They  summoned 
the  imperial  messengers  publicly  and  pronounced  an  ultimatum :  either 
they  must  reject  the  marriage  long  since  arranged  and  refund  the 
money  spent,  or  cease  to  invent  inexplicable  reasons  for  delay  and  end 
the  matter  by  consummating  the  marriage  according  to  the  condi¬ 
tions  originally  agreed  upon.  The  count  had  been  put  to  vast  ex¬ 
pense  3  he  had  ordered  twelve  galleys  to  be  built  and  completely 
equipped,  for  he  intended  to  accompany  his  sister  to  her  husband.  In 
addition,  all  the  most  important  lords,  both  of  the  principality  and 
of  the  kingdom  had  come  to  Tripoli  in  anticipation  of  the  lady’s  ap¬ 
proaching  departure  j  and  for  these  guests  the  count  was  defraying 
the  necessary  expenses,  either  wholly  or  in  part. 

As  always,  however,  the  Greeks  gave  evasive  answers  and  tried  to 
drag  the  matter  along  still  longer.  To  checkmate  their  wily  designs 
the  king  dispatched  Otto  of  Risberg  as  a  special  envoy  to  Constanti¬ 
nople.  He  was  empowered  to  make  an  eloquent  demand  that  the 
actual  intentions  of  the  emperor  be  made  known  to  him  as  deputy  and 
that  without  circumlocutions.  Sooner  than  had  been  anticipated  the 
envoy  returned.  He  brought  a  letter  from  the  emperor  and  messages 
also  to  the  effect  that  all  which  had  been  done  in  regard  to  this  alliance 
was  wholly  displeasing  to  his  imperial  highness. 

When  the  king  received  this  news,  he  withdrew  from  the  negotia¬ 
tions.  That  an  alliance  which  had  been  arranged  through  his  own 


290  JERUSALEM  UNDER  BALDWIN  III 

mediation  and  completed  as  far  as  his  own  part  was  concerned  should 
come  to  naught  seemed  most  insulting  and  would  unquestionably  re¬ 
flect  unfavorably  upon  himself. 

The  imperial  envoys,  fearing  that  the  indignation  of  the  count  of 
Tripoli  would  be  vented  upon  them,  hastily  departed  for  Cyprus  in 
a  small  boat  which  they  had  the  good  luck  to  find  ready. 

As  soon  as  the  company  of  nobles  gathered  at  Tripoli  had  departed, 
the  king  repaired  to  Antioch  3  for,  as  was  mentioned,  at  the  earnest 
entreaty  of  that  people  he  had  assumed  the  charge  of  the  principality. 
On  his  arrival  he  found  there  the  same  envoys  of  the  emperor  who 
were  supposed  to  have  left  Tripoli  [for  home].®®  They  were  holding 
daily  and  intimate  conferences  with  the  princess  in  reference  to  her 
youngest  daughter,  Maria.  Moreover,  they  had  in  their  possession 
letters  sealed  with  gold  in  the  presence  of  the  emperor  in  which  he 
guaranteed  to  ratify  whatever  agreement  should  be  made  by  them 
with  the  princess  and  her  friends  on  the  subject  of  this  marriage.  These 
negotiations  were  made  known  to  the  king  immediately  on  his  arrival. 
He  had  been  so  deeply  offended  in  regard  to  the  former  affair  that 
he  would  have  been  justified  in  refusing  to  interest  himself  for  the 
emperor  in  the  present  matter.  Yet,  out  of  consideration  for  his  orphaned 
kinswoman,  who  was  without  a  father  to  protect  her,  he  undertook 
that  role  and,  after  many  delays,  succeeded  in  arranging  the  marriage.®^ 

As  soon  as  the  matter  was  concluded,  the  galleys  were  made  ready 
at  a  place  called  the  Port  of  St.  Simeon  at  the  mouth  of  the  Orontes 
river.  The  maiden  was  delivered  over  to  the  envoys,  and,  attended 
by  an  honorable  retinue  of  the  greatest  nobles  of  the  land,  who  were 
to  escort  her  to  her  husband,  she  set  forth  on  her  journey. 

The  chronological  interrelationship  of  these  events  is  of  great  importance,  but 
William  does  not  furnish  the  precise  information  needed  to  establish  it.  He  himself  was 
probably  studying  in  the  schools  of  the  West  during  1161-1163  and  was  therefore 
out  of  touch  with  local  gossip  in  Palestine.  Apparently  Manuel  had  sent  an  embassy 
to  Baldwin  some  time  before  he  knew  of  the  capture  of  Renaud  de  Chatillon.  The 
negotiations  for  the  marriage  of  Melisend  of  Tripoli  were  in  progress  when  Constance 
sent  an  appeal  for  aid  to  Manuel.  She  may  have  offered  her  daughter,  Maria,  in  mar¬ 
riage  at  the  same  time.  At  any  rate,  the  two  negotiations  crossed  each  other,  and  the 
alliance  with  Antioch  offered  greater  attractions  to  Manuel.  William  must  be  in 
error  in  his  implication  that  Manuel  did  not  begin  negotiations  with  Baldwin  until 
after  the  capture  of  Renaud  (see  Chaiandon,  Les  Comnene^  II,  517—25). 

The  marriage  of  Manuel  and  Maria  took  place  at  Constantinople  on  December 
25,  1161  (Chaiandon,  Les  Coinneney  II,  523).  William  is  here  glossing  over  some 
embarrassing  details.  It  is  doubtful  whether  Manuel  sought  or  used  Baldwin’s  help 
in  these  negotiations. 


JERUSALEM  UNDER  BALDWIN  III 


291 


32.  The  king  rebuilds  a  stronghold  near  Antioch  called  the 
bridge  of  Iron,  His  mother^  Queen  Melisendy  dies. 

In  order  to  make  his  presence  at  Antioch  of  service  to  the  land,  the 
king,  while  sojourning  there,  rebuilt  a  fortress  which  had  formerly 
stood  at  a  bridge  over  the  Orontes  river,  commonly  called  the  Iron 
bridge.  This  place,  about  six  or  seven  miles  from  the  city  of  Antioch, 
was  of  great  use  in  preventing  hostile  raids  and  also  served  as  an 
obstacle  against  the  surreptitious  entrance  of  bandits. 

While  the  king  was  occupied  thus  with  the  affairs  of  the  principality, 
his  pious  mother,  wasted  by  the  constant  suffering  attendant  on  a 
lingering  illness,  went  the  way  of  all  flesh.  Her  death  occurred  on 
the  eleventh  day  of  September.  When  the  king  received  the  news, 
he  gave  himself  up  to  grief  and  by  the  depth  of  his  emotion  clearly 
showed  how  sincerely  he  had  loved  her  j  in  fact,  for  many  days  there¬ 
after  he  was  inconsolable. 

Queen  Melisend  of  illustrious  memory,  thenceforward  to  dwell 
with  the  angelic  host,  was  buried  in  the  valley  of  Jehoshaphat  on  the 
right  as  one  descends  to  the  sepulchre  of  the  Blessed  and  Immaculate 
Virgin  Mary,  the  mother  of  our  Lord.  Her  body  rests  in  a  stone 
crypt  with  iron  gates.  Near  by  is  an  altar  where  mass  is  celebrated 
daily  for  the  healing  of  her  soul  and  for  the  souls  of  all  Christians 
who  had  died  in  the  Lord.®® 


33.  The  count  of  Tripoliy  enraged  at  the  rejection  of  his  sister y 
endeavors  to  harm  the  emperor  in  every  possible  way. 

Meanwhile,  the  heart  of  the  count  of  Tripoli  was  rent  with  grief 
and  anger  because  he  had  been  mocked  by  the  emperor,  who,  after 
putting  him  to  such  enormous  expense,  had  finally  rejected  his  sister 
without  cause,  like  the  daughter  of  a  common  person.  He  gave  utter¬ 
ance  to  deep  groans  and  sighs  as  he  anxiously  pondered  over  means 
of  requiting  the  emperor  in  like  fashion  and  returning  measure  for 
measure.  Although  in  the  midst  of  his  reflections  he  realized  that 
the  emperor  was  the  most  powerful  monarch  on  earth  and  that  his 
own  strength  was  entirely  inadequate  to  do  him  any  injury,  yet  re- 

Her  death  is  dated  September  11,  1161,  by  Rohricht  (see  R.  Rohricht,  Geschichte 
des  Konigreichs  Jerusalenty  iioo—i2gij  p.  307).  Baldwin  must  have  spent  the  winter 
at  Antioch. 


292  JERUSALEM  UNDER  BALDWIN  III 

sentment  drove  him  to  action.  Lest  he  seem  indifferent  or  oblivious 
to  the  insult  which  had  been  offered  him,  he  ordered  the  galleys  which 
he  had  prepared  for  another  purpose  to  be  armed.  Then  he  summoned 
pirates  and  desperados,  men  who  had  committed  the  most  shocking 
crimes,  and  delivered  the  ships  into  their  charge  with  orders  to  devastate 
the  lands  of  the  emperor  without  mercy.  Neither  age,  sex,  nor  condi¬ 
tion  was  to  be  spared  j  everything  was  to  be  given  to  the  flames  without 
distinction,  including  churches  and  monasteries,  and  the  work  of  pil¬ 
lage  and  rapine  carried  on  far  and  wide.  Let  them  ever  keep  in  mind 
that  they  were  employing  arms  and  force  in  a  just  cause. 

Obedient  to  his  command,  they  set  sail  upon  the  sea  and  roved  over 
the  domains  of  the  emperor.  Both  in  the  islands  and  on  the  lands 
bordering  on  the  sea,  they  interpreted  the  count’s  orders  in  the  widest 
sense.  On  all  sides  they  plundered,  burned,  and  massacred.  They  vio¬ 
lated  churches  and  broke  into  monasteries  without  respect  for  the  vener¬ 
able  places.  They  laid  hands  on  the  travelling  money  of  pilgrims  as 
they  journeyed  to  and  from  the  holy  places  and  thus  forced  them  to 
die,  or,  needy  and  naked,  to  prolong  their  lives  by  begging.  They 
seized  the  goods  of  travelling  merchants  who  earned  a  livelihood 
for  their  wives  and  children  in  that  way  and  forced  them  to  return 
home  empty  handed  with  the  loss  of  both  principal  and  gain.®^ 

34*  The  king  is  foisoned  at  Antioch.  Falling  thereby  into  his  last 
illnesSy  he  begs  to  be  carried  home.  His  illness  becomes  worse 
on  the  journey y  and  he  dies  at  Beirut. 

While  the  count  of  Tripoli,  in  his  desire  for  revenge,  was  thus  en¬ 
gaged,  the  king  was  at  Antioch.  Desiring  to  take  a  physic  before  the 
approach  of  winter,  as  was  his  custom,  he  obtained  certain  pills  from 
Barac,  the  physician  of  the  count,  a  part  of  which  were  to  be  taken 
at  once  and  the  rest  after  a  short  interval.  For  our  Eastern  princes, 
through  the  influence  of  their  women,  scorn  the  medicines  and  practice 
of  our  Latin  physicians  and  believe  only  in  the  Jews,  Samaritans, 
Syrians,  and  Saracens.^*^  Most  recklessly  they  put  themselves  under 

william’s  vivid  and  sympathetic  account  of  the  sufferings  of  the  house  of  Tripoli 
would  indicate  that  he  condoned,  to  some  degree,  the  terrible  vengeance  which  Ray¬ 
mond  III  exacted.  Melisend  is  said  to  have  entered  a  convent  after  this  unfortunate 
affair. 

Whether  this  preference  was  due  to  the  fact  that  so  many  of  the  women  were 
themselves  Eastern  or  because  they  recognized  a  definite  superiority  in  Eastern  medical 
knowledge  is  not  clear,  but  the  preference  is  clear  enough. 


JERUSALEM  UNDER  BALDWIN  III  293 

the  care  of  such  practitioners  and  trust  their  lives  to  people  who  are 
ignorant  of  the  science  of  medicine.  It  was  rumored  that  these  pills 
were  poisoned,  and  this  was  probably  the  fact.  At  any  rate,  when 
later  at  Tripoli  the  rest  of  the  medicine  was  put  into  bread  and  ad¬ 
ministered  as  an  experiment  to  a  dog,  the  animal  died  within  a  few 
days.  As  soon  as  the  king  had  taken  the  pills,  he  was  seized  with  a 
fever  and  dysentery  which  developed  into  consumption  from  which 
he  was  never  able  to  obtain  relief  or  help.  Perceiving  from  the  intensity 
of  his  suffering  that  the  disease  was, increasing,  he  left  Antioch  and 
went  to  Tripoli.  There  he  lay  for  several  months  hoping  from  day 
to  day  to  improve.  Finally,  realizing  that  his  malady  was  becoming 
worse  and  that  recovery  was  improbable,  he  caused  himself  to  be 
carried  to  Beirut  and  directed  that  the  prelates  of  the  church  and  the 
nobles  of  the  realm  be  summoned  in  haste.  Before  them  all,  he  acknowl¬ 
edged  his  faith  with  piety  and  devotion  and,  in  humble  and  contrite 
spirit,  confessed  all  his  sins  to  the  priests.  Then  his  spirit,  released  from 
the  prison  of  the  flesh,  departed  to  heaven,  there  to  receive,  God 
willing,  in  the  company  of  the  elect  the  crown  that  never  fades. 

King  Baldwin  died  on  February  10  in  the  year  1162  of  the  Incarna¬ 
tion  of  our  Lord,  in  the  twentieth  year  of  his  reign  and  the  thirty- 
third  year  of  his  life.®^  As  he  left  no  children,  his  brother  was  the 
heir  to  the  throne.  Amid  universal  mourning  his  body  was  borne  to 
Jerusalem  with  reverence  and  royal  ceremony.  The  funeral  proces¬ 
sion  was  met  by  the  clergy  and  all  the  people  and  conducted  to  the 
church  of  the  Sepulchre  of  the  Lord.  There  he  was  honorably  entombed 
among  his  predecessors  before  the  place  Calvary,  where  the  Lord 
was  crucified  for  our  salvation. 

The  date  here  is  definite,  yet  is  contradicted  in  the  opening  paragraph  of  the  next 
book.  The  events  after  ii6o  are  somewhat  confused.  William  fails  to  mention  an  ex¬ 
pedition  which  Baldwin  III  made  into  Egypt  during  this  time.  He  conveys  the  im¬ 
pression  of  two  expeditions  to  Antioch  in  successive  years.  William’s  absence  from 
Palestine  during  these  years  doubtless  accounts  for  some  of  this  confusion.  The  date 
of  Baldwin’s  death,  as  William  here  states  it,  has  been  accepted  by  so  many  historians, 
including  both  Rohricht  and  La  Monte,  that  it  seems  necessary  to  enumerate  a  number 
of  inconsistencies.  If  Baldwin  was  born  no  earlier  than  February,  1130  (see  Book 
XIV,  note  10 }  Book  XVI,  note  3),  he  would  be  barely  thirty-two  years  old  February 
10,  1162.  If  his  reign  began  when  his  father  died  on  November  10,  1143,  he  had  ruled 
but  eighteen  years  and  three  months.  Furthermore,  if  his  brother  was  seven  years  old 
when  Baldwin  began  to  rule  in  1143,  he  could  only  be  twenty-six  years  old  at  most 
by  February,  1162,  instead  of  the  twenty-seven  which  William  assigns  to  him  (Book 
XIX,  chap.  I )  at  this  time.  The  only  way  in  which  all  of  these  stubborn  inconsistencies 
can  be  removed  is  by  accepting  1163  instead  of  1162  as  the  year  of  Baldwin’s  death. 


294  JERUSALEM  UNDER  BALDWIN  III 

There  is  no  record  in  any  history,  nor  does  any  man  now  living 
recall,  that  such  deep  and  poignant  sorrow  was  ever  felt  over  the 
death  of  any  other  prince  of  our  own  or  other  nations.  For,  in  addition 
to  the  manifestations  of  grief  and  mourning  displayed  by  the  people 
of  the  cities  through  which  the  royal  funeral  train  passed,  there  came 
down  from  the  mountains  a  multitude  of  infidels  who  followed  the 
cortege  with  wailing. 

For  eight  successive  days,  while  the  funeral  procession  moved  from 
Beirut  to  Jerusalem,  lamentation  was  unrestrained  and  grief  was  re¬ 
newed  almost  hourly.  Even  his  enemies  are  said  to  have  grieved  over 
his  death.  When  it  was  suggested  to  Nureddin  that  while  we  were 
occupied  with  the  funeral  ceremonies  he  might  invade  and  lay  waste 
the  land  of  his  enemies,  he  is  said  to  have  responded,  “We  should 
sympathize  with  their  grief  and  in  pity  spare  them,  because  they  have 
lost  a  prince  such  as  the  rest  of  the  world  does  not  possess  today.” 

As  we  come  to  the  end  of  this  book  recording  the  works  of  this 
king,  we  too  pray  that  with  the  spirits  of  the  elect  saints  his  soul  may 
enjoy  holy  repose.  Amen. 


HERE  ENDS  THE  EIGHTEENTH  BOOK 


THE  NINETEENTH  BOOK  BEGINS 


AMAURY  I:  THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  EGYPT, 

FIRST  STAGE 


I.  Amaury  succeeds  his  brother  Baldwin  on  the  throne, 

Baldwin  III,  the  fourth  Latin  king  of  Jerusalem,  died  without  chil¬ 
dren,  as  has  been  mentioned.  He  was  succeeded  in  the  Holy  City  by 
Amaury,  his  only  brother,  count  of  Jaffa  and  Ascalon.  The  latter  be¬ 
came  the  fifth  Latin  king  in  the  year  1163  of  the  Incarnation  of  our 
Lord  and  the  sixty-second  of  the  liberation  of  that  same  city,  beloved 
of  God.^  At  this  time,  Alexander  was  head  of  the  holy  Roman  church, 
in  the  third  year  of  his  pontificate  3  the  holy  church  of  the  Resurrection 
was  ruled  by  Amalrich,  the  ninth  patriarch  of  the  Latins,  in  the  fourth 
year  of  his  patriarchate  3  over  the  holy  church  at  Antioch  presided 
Aimery,  the  third  patriarch  of  the  Latins  in  that  same  city,  in  the 
twentieth  year  of  his  office 3  and  the  church  at  Tyre  was  subject  to 
Peter,  the  third  archbishop  of  the  Latins  after  the  taking  of  the  city, 
who  was  in  the  thirteenth  year  of  his  office. 

The  succession  to  the  throne  after  the  death  of  Baldwin  was  the 
occasion  of  much  discord  among  the  barons  of  the  realm,  who  were 
variously  affected  by  the  change  of  monarchs.  In  fact,  it  came  near 
causing  a  serious  quarrel  involving  the  danger  of  schism.  But  happily 
divine  providence,  which  knows  how  to  apply  proper  remedies  in  the 
gravest  crises,  was  with  us.  The  clergy  and  the  people,  as  well  as  a 
few  of  the  great  men  of  the  kingdom,  were  strongly  in  favor  of 
Amaury,  and  the  efforts  of  the  disaffected  nobles  were  quickly  brought 
to  naught.  On  the  twelfth  day  before  the  Kalends  of  March,  which 
was  the  eighth  day  after  the  death  of  the  king,  his  brother  Amaury 
was  raised  to  the  throne  of  the  realm,  which  belonged  to  him  by 

^  This  paragraph  is  probably  a  part  of  William^s  framework  made  hastily  in  1182. 
His  resolve  to  include  Godfrey  in  the  list  of  the  kings  was  probably  made  later,  but 
he  may  have  had  it  partly  in  mind,  since  he  here  dates  from  the  liberation  of  Jerusalem, 
1099,  instead  of  the  beginning  of  the  Kingdom,  iioo.  This  necessitated  the  difference 
of  a  year  from  the  last  two  digits  of  the  Christian  era,  but  William  has  reversed  the 
figures.  It  should  read  either  1163  and  sixty-fourth  year  or  1162  and  sixty-third  year. 
It  is  difficult  to  check  the  year  by  reference  to  the  other  chronological  items  because 
the  adjectival  expression  allows  a  margin  of  nearly  a  year  in  each  case. 


KING  AMAURY  I 


296 

hereditary  right.  In  the  church  of  the  Sepulchre  of  the  Lord  he  re¬ 
ceived  the  grace  of  royal  unction  at  the  hand  of  the  patriarch,  assisted 
by  the  assembled  archbishops,  bishops,  and  all  the  prelates  of  the 
church,  and  was  given  the  insignia  of  the  crown.  At  the  time  when 
he  became  a  knight  and  assumed  arms,  he  had  been  created  count  of 
Jaffa.  Later,  his  brother  Baldwin,  of  illustrious  memory,  with  royal 
liberality  granted  him  the  city  of  Ascalon.  This  metropolis  of  the 
Philistines  was  captured  in  Baldwin’s  own  time  and  thus  restored  after 
a  long  interval  to  the  Christian  profession,  as  was  described  in  more 
detail  when  the  events  of  the  reign  of  Baldwin  were  related.  Amaury 
was  twenty-seven  years  old  when  he  came  to  the  throne,  and  he 
reigned  eleven  years  and  five  months.^ 


2.  The  characteristics  of  King  Amaury  with  some  remarks  on 
his  life  and  manners. 

Amaury  was  a  man  of  prudence  and  discretion,  well  versed  in  secular 
affairs.  He  had  a  slight  impediment  in  his  speech,  not  serious  enough 
to  be  considered  as  a  defect  but  sufficient  to  render  him  incapable  of 
ready  eloquence.  He  was  far  better  in  counsel  than  in  fluent  or  ornate 
speech.  He  was  well  skilled  in  the  customary  law  by  which  the  kingdom 
was  governed — in  fact,  he  was  second  to  no  one  in  this  respect.  In 
keenness  of  intellect  and  true  discernment  he  surpassed  all  the  nobles 
of  the  realm.  He  handled  with  strength  and  wisdom  the  frequent 
crises  which  arose  during  his  vigorous  and  unceasing  efforts  to  extend 
the  limits  of  the  kingdom  and  always  maintained  a  fearless  attitude 
combined  with  regal  firmness.  He  was  fairly  well  educated,  although 
much  less  so  than  his  brother.  Thanks  to  his  keen  intellect  and  reten¬ 
tive  memory,  however,  he  was  sufficiently  well  informed  on  the  ques¬ 
tions  which  are  usually  important  to  kings.  In  this  he  was  assisted  by 
his  habit  of  constantly  asking  questions  and  of  reading  whenever  the 
affairs  of  the  kingdom  allowed  him  leisure.  He  displayed  much  subtlety 
in  putting  his  questions  and  took  pleasure  in  seeking  solutions  for 
them.  He  listened  eagerly  to  history  and  preferred  it  to  all  other  kinds 
of  reading.^  He  never  forgot  what  he  heard  and  recited  it  afterwards 

“  These  two  statements  of  date  are  definite  and  consistent,  and  both  indicate  that 
Amaury  became  king  in  1163. 

®  The  implications  of  this  statement  are  too  often  overlooked.  It  is  the  clearest  evi¬ 
dence  that  William  himself  read  history  to  Amaury  and  that  William  wrote  originally 
to  read  his  history  to  him. 


KING  AMAURY  I 


297 

with  ease  and  accuracy.  Serious  matters  absorbed  his  attention  entirely, 
and  he  had  no  interest  in  theatricals  or  games  of  chance.  He  took 
great  delight  in  watching  the  flight  of  falcons  and  herons  in  pursuit 
of  prey.  He  endured  hardships  with  patience  5  but  as  he  was  inclined 
to  corpulency  and  was  altogether  too  fat,  he  suffered  little  inconveni¬ 
ence  from  heat  and  cold. 

He  was  pious  in  that  he  commanded  tithes  to  be  given  to  the 
church  in  their  entirety  and  without  dispute.  He  religiously  heard 
mass  every  day  unless  prevented  by  sickness  or  some  other  emergency. 
He  bore  with  equanimity  the  curses  and  reproaches  which  were  often 
hurled  against  him  both  in  public  and  private,  even  by  low  and  con¬ 
temptible  persons,  and  concealed  his  feelings  so  well  that  it  appeared 
as  if  he  had  not  heard  the  things  said.^  In  both  eating  and  drinking, 
he  practiced  moderation,  for  he  despised  excess  in  both.  He  is  said  to 
have  placed  so  much  confidence  in  his  agents  that  he  required  no  ac¬ 
counting  from  them  after  they  had  been  put  in  charge  of  his  affairs 
and  refused  to  listen  to  insinuations  against  their  good  faith.  By  some 
people  this  was  regarded  as  a  fault,  while  others  considered  it  a 
virtue  and  said  that  it  was  a  proof  of  genuine  trust. 

From  these  excellent  gifts  of  mind  and  character  certain  conspicuous 
faults  detracted  and  in  some  measure  dimmed  the  good  traits  just 
described.  He  lacked  a  genial  temperament  and  was  far  too  taciturn. 
He  was  entirely  without  that  gracious  affability  which  princes  need 
more  than  other  people  in  order  to  win  the  hearts  of  their  subjects. 
Rarely  did  he  speak  to  anyone  unless  compelled  by  necessity  or  unless, 
perchance,  annoyed  by  being  addressed  first.  This  defect  was  the  more 
noticeable  because  his  brother  Baldwin  had  always  been  ready  with 
pleasant  words  and  was  most  affable  to  all.® 

Amaury  is  said  to  have  abandoned  himself  without  restraint  to  the 
sins  of  the  flesh  and  to  have  seduced  married  women  j  for  which  may 
the  Lord  in  His  mercy  forgive  him !  He  was,  moreover,  a  violent  op¬ 
ponent  of  the  liberty  of  the  churches.  During  his  reign  he  reduced 
them  to  the  point  of  exhaustion  by  frequent  demands  on  their  patrl- 

^This  affords  excellent  evidence  of  the  spirit  of  freedom  which  prevailed  in  the 
feudal  kingdom  of  Jerusalem.  Though  some  of  the  refinements  of  life  in  the  East 
had  been  introduced,  the  ceremonial  suppression  of  free  speech  which  prevailed  in 
Eastern  courts  had  evidently  not  yet  been  adopted. 

®  This  frequent  comparison  of  the  two  brothers  suggests  that  William  must  have 
known  Baldwin  also  and  therefore  have  been  at  court  even  before  the  days  of  Amaury, 
with  whom,  of  course,  he  was  very  intimately  acquainted. 


KING  AMAURY  I 


298 

mony,  so  that  the  holy  places  were  burdened  with  debt  far  beyond 
the  extent  of  their  revenues.® 

His  greed  for  money  was  greater  than  was  seemly  or  honorable  in 
a  king.  By  the  free  use  of  gifts,  he  often  acquired  it  and  still  more 
often  retained  it  quite  contrary  to  the  demands  of  strict  justice  and 
right.  In  talking  familiarly  with  me,  he  tried  to  excuse  this  avaricious 
conduct  by  giving  the  following  reasons:  ^‘Every  prince,  and  above 
all  a  king,  should  ever  see  to  it  that  he  is  never  in  straitened  circum¬ 
stances,  and  that  for  two  reasons:  first,  because  the  wealth  of  the 
subject  is  always  safe  when  the  ruler  is  not  in  needj  secondly,  that 
he  may  have  resources  at  his  disposal  from  which  to  provide  for  the 
necessities  of  his  realm  whenever  an  unexpected  emergency  arises.  In 
such  a  case,  the  provident  king  should  be  most  munificent  and  should 
spare  no  expense.  Thus  it  will  be  plain  that  whatever  he  has  he  pos¬ 
sesses  not  for  his  own  benefit  but  for  the  good  of  the  realm.” 

Even  those  who  disliked  the  king  could  not  deny  that  these  reasons 
were  applicable  in  his  case.  For  when  the  kingdom  was  in  critical  straits 
he  spared  no  expense,  nor  was  he  restrained  by  mere  physical  fatigue. 
But  the  wealth  of  his  subjects  was  far  from  safe,  for  again  and  again 
he  took  advantage  of  the  most  trivial  pretexts  to  make  serious  inroads 
upon  their  patrimony. 


3.  Of  his  fhy steal  traits  and  of  a  certain  question  which  he  fro- 
founded  to  one  of  his  friends  for  solution. 

He  was  of  goodly  height,  taller  than  many  although  shorter  than 
those  of  maximum  stature.  His  features  were  comely,  and  his  bear¬ 
ing  plainly  proclaimed  even  to  strangers  the  dignity  of  a  prince  to 
whom  reverence  was  due.  He  had  sparkling  eyes  of  medium  sizej  his 
nose,  like  that  of  his  brother,  was  becomingly  aquiline;  his  hair  was 
blond  and  grew  back  somewhat  from  his  forehead.  A  comely  and  very 
full  beard  covered  his  cheeks  and  chin.  He  had  a  way  of  laughing 
immoderately  so  that  his  entire  body  shook.  He  loved  to  talk  with 
wise  and  discreet  men  as  well  as  with  those  who  were  familiar  with 
far  countries  and  foreign  customs.*^ 

®  This  has  reference,  doubtless,  to  special  levies  for  campaigns,  though  William  evi¬ 
dently  disapproved  of  such  practice  except  for  emergency  when  the  kingdom  was  actu¬ 
ally  endangered. 

^  This  suggests  a  definite  intellectual  interest  at  the  court  of  Jerusalem. 


KING  AMAURY  I 


299 

I  recall  that  he  once  summoned  me  In  a  friendly  way  to  the  citadel 
of  Tyre,  while  he  was  suffering  from  a  low  fever  there,  which  was, 
however,  unattended  by  danger.  During  the  hours  of  rest  and  in  the 
intervals  which  occur  in  intermittent  fevers,  I  talked  with  him  inti¬ 
mately  on  many  subjects  and  answered  some  of  his  questions  as  well 
as  the  time  permitted.  In  fact  he  was  much  edified  by  our  conversation. 

Among  other  questions  which  he  put  to  me  at  that  time,  there  was 
one  which  moved  me  greatly  5  first,  because  the  query  was  unusual 
and  the  subject  one  that  hardly  admitted  of  discussion,  for  our  uni¬ 
versal  faith  taught  it  and  had  handed  it  down  as  entitled  to  sincere 
belief,  and  secondly,  because  my  heart  was  deeply  wounded  that  an 
orthodox  prince,  the  scion  of  orthodox  ancestors,  should  entertain  a 
doubt  in  regard  to  a  fixed  doctrine  and  should  question  it  in  the  depths 
of  his  heart. 

He  asljzed  me,  in  short,  whether  outside  of  the  teaching  of  the  Saviour 
and  the  holy  men  who  followed  Christ,  doctrines  which  he  did  not 
doubt,  there  was  any  way  of  proving  by  reliable  and  authoritative 
evidence  that  there  was  a  future  resurrection?  Much  agitated  by  the 
novelty  of  his  query  I  answered,  “The  teaching  of  our  Lord  and 
Redeemer  is  sufficient,  for,  in  many  passages  of  the  Gospel  He  plainly 
teaches  the  future  resurrection  of  the  body.  He  promises  that  He 
will  come  as  judge  to  judge  the  quick  and  the  dead  and  the  world 
with  fire.  To  the  elect  He  says  that  He  will  give  a  kingdom  prepared 
from  the  foundation  of  the  world  j  but  the  wicked  shall  be  consigned 
to  the  eternal  fire  which  is  prepared  for  the  devil  and  his  angels.  The 
pious  declaration  of  the  holy  apostles  and  the  patriarchs  of  the  Old 
Testament  suffices.” 

To  this  he  responded,  “I  firmly  believe  all  thisj  but  I  seek  a  reason 
whereby  this  can  be  proved  to  one  who  doubts  these  things  and  does 
not  accept  the  doctrine  of  Christ  and  believe  in  a  future  resurrec¬ 
tion  and  that  there  is  another  life  after  this  death.”  I  answered,  “Put 
yourself  then  in  the  place  of  a  man  so  afflicted  and  let  us  try  to  ascertain 
something  about  this  matter.”  “It  is  well,”  he  said.  I  then  asked, 
“You  acknowledge  that  God  is  just?”  He  answered,  “I  acknowledge 
that  nothing  is  more  true.”  Then  I  continued,  “It  is  also  just  that  good 
be  repaid  for  good  and  evil  for  evil?”  He  replied,  “That  is  true.”  “In 
this  life,”  I  went  on,  “that  does  not  often  happen.  For  some  good 
people  suffer  nothing  but  troubles  and  adversity  in  this  world,  while 


KING  AMAURY  I 


300 

many  evil  persons  rejoice  in  continual  happiness,  as  the  evidence  of 
daily  life  teaches  us.”  Again  he  answered,  “It  is  so.”  “Then,”  I  re¬ 
sumed,  “that  will  take  place  in  another  life,  for  it  is  impossible  that 
God  should  not  act  justly.  Therefore  there  will  be  another  life  and 
a  resurrection  of  this  flesh,  when  all  who  have  merited  either  good  or 
evil  in  this  life  must  receive  their  reward.”  To  this  he  said,  “This  seems 
to  me  good  beyond  measure  j  you  have  wrested  all  doubt  from  my 
heart.”  ®  By  these  and  similar  conversations  his  spirit  was  greatly  re¬ 
freshed.  But  let  us  return  to  our  subject. 

Amaury  was  excessively  fat,  with  breasts  like  those  of  a  woman 
hanging  down  to  his  waist.  Nature  had  framed  his  other  members 
with  a  kinder  hand,  however,  for  these  displayed  not  merely  ordinary 
comeliness,  but,  in  fact,  a  rather  unusual  beauty.  Not  even  his  enemies 
could  deny  that  in  the  use  of  bodily  nourishment  he  was  moderate 
and  in  regard  to  wine  most  abstemious. 

4.  Relates  howy  before  his  coronatioriy  he  was  jorced  to  fut 
atvay  the  wife  whom  he  had  married  contrary  to  the  sacred 
canons. 

While  his  brother  Baldwin  was  still  actively  concerned  in  human  affairs 
and  was  ruling  the  kingdom  with  success,  Amaury  had  married  Agnes, 
daughter  of  the  younger  Joscelin,  count  of  Edessa.®  During  the  life¬ 
time  of  his  brother,  he  had  by  her  two  children :  a  son,  Baldwin,  whom 
his  uncle  received  at  the  sacred  font,  and  an  older  daughter,  Sibylla, 
a  namesake  of  the  countess  of  Flanders,  the  sister  of  Baldwin  and 
Amaury, 

After  the  death  of  his  brother,  however,  when  Amaury  claimed 
the  kingdom  devolving  upon  him  by  hereditary  right,  he  was  forced 
to  put  away  his  wife.  It  was  in  opposition  to  the  expressed  will  of  the 
Patriarch  Fulcher,  of  revered  memory,  that  he  had  espoused  her  in 
the  beginning,  for  it  was  claimed  that  they  were  within  the  fourth 
degree  of  blood  relationship,  a  fact  which  was  later  solemnly  attested 
in  the  face  of  the  church  by  relatives  common  to  both.^®  An  annulment 

®  The  dialogue  between  the  king  and  his  chronicler  recalls  the  conversations  between 
Charlemagne  and  Alcuin,  though  the  subject  of  the  dialogue  reveals  the  existence  of 
some  scepticism  in  secular  circles  of  the  twelfth  century. 

®  Robert  of  Torigni  mentions  this  marriage  as  occurring  in  1157. 

Agnes  must  have  been  a  woman  of  unusual  attractiveness.  She  was  already  be¬ 
trothed  to  one  of  the  nobles  of  the  kingdom,  Hugh  dnbelin,  when  Amaury  became 
infatuated  with  her. 


KING  AMAURY  I 


301 

according  to  the  forms  of  ecclesiastical  law  was  pronounced,  therefore, 
and  the  marriage  dissolved  in  the  presence  of  the  Patriarch  Amalrich, 
of  good  memory,  and  John,  cardinal-priest  of  Saints  John  and  Paul, 
the  papal  legate.  The  kinsmen  of  both  parties  attested  the  relation¬ 
ship  by  solemn  oaths  and  swore  that  the  facts  were  as  had  been  stated. 
Provision  was  made,  however,  that  the  offspring  of  the  two  should 
be  considered  legitimate  and  should  have  full  right  of  succession  to 
the  inheritance  of  their  father. 

Being  curious  about  such  matters,  I  later  made  a  careful  investiga¬ 
tion  as  to  the  degree  of  relationship  between  the  two.  For  at  the  time 
that  this  event  took  place  at  Jerusalem,  I  had  not  returned  from  the 
schools  but  was  still  sojourning  beyond  the  sea,  engaged  in  the  study 
of  the  liberal  arts.  I  finally  learned  the  facts  through  the  Lady  Stepha- 
nia,  abbess  of  the  convent  of  the  Holy  Mary  the  Elder  (which  was 
situated  opposite  the  Sepulchre  of  the  Lord  at  Jerusalem).  This  pious 
woman,  noble  both  according  to  the  flesh  and  by  reason  of  her  holy 
life,  was  the  daughter  of  the  elder  Joscelin,  count  of  Edessa,  and  the 
sister  of  Roger,  prince  of  Antioch  and  son  of  Richard. Although  she 
was  now  far  advanced  in  years  she  remembered  the  details  of  the  matter 
well  and  gave  the  genealogy  of  the  two  as  follows. 

Baldwin  du  Bourg,  the  second  king  of  Jerusalem,  a  splendid  man 
in  every  respect  (of  whose  life  and  manners,  as  well  as  of  his  deeds 
both  good  and  evil,  we  wrote  at  length  when  we  were  treating  of  his 
reign),  and  the  elder  Joscelin  were  sons  of  two  sisters.  Of  Baldwin 
was  born  Queen  Melisendj  of  Melisend  were  born  the  two  kings 
Baldwin  III  and  Amaury.  Likewise  of  the  elder  Joscelin  were  born 
Joscelin  the  Younger,  father  of  the  Countess  Agnes,  wife  in  fact, 
though  not  in  law,  of  Amaury,  and  her  brother  Joscelin  III,  now 
seneschal  of  the  king  and  uncle  of  King  Baldwin  IV  who  is  now  reign¬ 
ing,  Amaury  remained  unmarried  for  a  time,  but  Agnes  at  once 
united  herself  in  the  bonds  of  matrimony  with  the  noble  and  illustrious 
man,  Hugh  dTbelin,  son  of  the  older  Balian.  Hugh  was  the  brother 
of  Baldwin  of  Ramlah,  who  now  rules  that  city,  his  brother  having 

Joscelin  I  had  married  the  sister  of  Roger,  after  whose  death  he  married  the 
Armenian  princess. 

Joscelin  III  was  made  seneschal  of  the  kingdom  shortly  after  his  release  from 
captivity  in  1176,  a  position  which  he  held  until  1190.  His  sister  Agnes  was  doubtless 
responsible  for  his  new  start  in  life  (see  J.  L.  La  Monte,  ‘‘The  Rise  and  Decline  of  a 
Frankish  Seigneury  in  Syria  in  the  Time  of  the  Crusades,’^  Remie  historique  du  Sud-Est 
eurofeen^  XV  [1938],  301—20). 


KING  AMAURY  I 


302 

died  without  children,  and  of  Balian  the  Younger,  who  married  the 
widow  of  King  Amaury.  After  Hugh’s  death  and  while  Amaury  was 
still  living,  Agnes  entered  into  the  same  bonds  of  affection  with  Renaud 
of  Sidon,  son  of  Gerard.  This  alliance  is  said  to  have  been  not  less  illegal 
than  her  former  relation  to  King  Amaury.  For  Gerard,  the  father  of 
Renaud,  a  blood  relation  of  both  as  he  certainly  was,  established  by 
his  sworn  statement  the  consanguinity  of  these  two,  as  he  had  heard 
it  from  his  ancestors.  A  second  annulment  consequently  followed  in 
the  manner  already  described. 

5.  The  king  goes  down  into  Egypt,  A  battle  is  fought  with 
Dirgham  the  sultan,  Shawar  introduces  Shirkuh  into  Egypt, 
Dirgham  sends  envoys  to  the  king  to  sue  for  peace. 

After  Amaury  had  been  established  on  the  throne  and  during  the 
first  year  of  his  reign,  the  Egyptians  refused  to  pay  the  annual  tribute 
according  to  the  agreement  which  they  had  made  with  his  brother.^^ 
The  king  thereupon  assembled  a  strong  force  of  knights  and  a  large 
army  and,  about  the  first  of  September,  descended  upon  Egypt  with 
a  great  host.  Dargan  [Dirgham],  the  governor  of  that  kingdom,  who 
in  that  tongue  is  called  the  sultan,  marched  out  against  him  at  the 
head  of  a  countless  multitude  and  did  not  hesitate  to  risk  an  encounter 
in  the  desert  on  this  side  of  Egypt.  He  was  unable  to  sustain  the  at¬ 
tack  of  the  Christians,  however,  and,  after  losing  the  greater  part  of 
his  men  either  by  capture  or  death,  he  was  forced  to  retreat  with  the 
remnant  of  his  army  to  the  nearest  city,  which  in  the  Egyptian  tongue 
is  called  Belbeis  [Balbis].  The  Egyptians  now  feared  that  the  king, 
after  accomplishing  this  feat,  might  decide  to  lead  his  armies  against 
the  more  remote  parts  of  the  realm.  In  despair,  therefore,  of  finding 
any  other  remedy  against  our  inroads,  they  broke  down  the  retaining 
dykes  which  held  back  the  overflow  of  the  Nile  until  the  proper  sea¬ 
son,  and  let  in  the  waters  of  the  river  now  swollen  by  its  usual  increase. 
By  these  barriers,  at  least,  they  might  hope  to  prevent  the  further 
advance  of  their  foes  and,  by  the  help  of  the  all-pervading  waters, 
secure  their  safety. 

According  to  Wiet,  this  promise  to  pay  tribute  was  a  result  of  Baldwin’s  cam¬ 
paign  to  al-Arish  in  the  early  part  of  1161.  William  failed  to  mention  the  expedition 
(see  G.  Wietj  UEgyfte  arabe  de  la  conquete  Arahe  d  la  conquete  ottomane^  6^  ^  ly 

de  Vere  chretienney  p.  291). 


KING  AMAURY  I 


3^3 

Thereupon  the  king  returned  victorious  and  covered  with  glory 
to  his  realm.  He  had  triumphed  over  his  enemies  and  had  completed 
a  successful  campaign. 

Shortly  before  this,  Dirgham,  now  governor  and  sultan  of  all  Egypt, 
as  has  been  said,  had  driven  out  from  that  same  office  another  powerful 
lord  called  Shawar.^^  This  change  was  effected  partly  by  force  and 
partly  by  strategy.  Shawar  succeeded  in  making  good  his  escape,  and 
with  his  friends  and  retainers  and  all  the  treasures  which  he  could 
carry  away,  he  betook  himself  to  his  fellow  tribesmen,  the  Arabs,  to 
seek  their,  aid.  There  he  lay  in  hiding  among  his  own  people,  as  has 
been  said,  to  await  the  outcome  of  the  matter  and  the  result  of  the 
war.  He  hoped  that  a  favorable  opportunity  would  soon  present  itself 
when  he  might  turn  the  tables  against  his  rival.  Information  of  the 
king’s  return  to  his  own  land  reached  him,  together  with  the  news 
that  his  adversary  continued  to  be  strong  and  powerful  as  ruler.  Dirg¬ 
ham  had  indeed  become  more  arrogant  than  ever.  He  boasted  vain- 
gloriously  of  the  fact  that  he  had  conquered  in  battle  a  mighty  chief 
and  had  forced  him  to  retreat  without  causing  great  injury  to  the 
land.  Thereupon  Shawar  hastened  to  the  powerful  prince  Nureddin, 
the  king  of  Damascus,  and  begged  his  aid.  He  desired  to  return  to 
Egypt,  drive  out  his  rival  Dirgham,  and  again  obtain  control  of  the 
kingdom.  Induced  by  gifts  and  promises,  Nureddin  readily  agreed 
to  this  proposition,  for  he  hoped  that  if  once  his  army  were  introduced 
into  Egypt,  he  might  seize  the  kingdom  himself.  He  assigned  to 
Shawar  the  chief  of  his  knights,  Shirkuh,  an  able  and  energetic  warrior, 
eager  for  glory  and  of  wide  experience  in  military  affairs.  Generous 
far  beyond  the  resources  of  his  patrimony,  Shirkuh  was  beloved  by 
his  followers  because  of  this  munificence.  He  was  small  of  stature, 
very  stout  and  fat  and  already  advanced  in  years.  Though  of  lowly 
origin,  he  had  become  rich  and  had  risen  by  merit  from  his  humble 
estate  to  the  rank  of  a  prince.  He  was  afflicted  with  cataract  in  one 
eye.  He  was  a  man  of  great  endurance  under  hardships,  one  who  bore 
hunger  and  thirst  with  an  equanimity  quite  unusual  for  that  time  of 

There  is  some  controversy  about  the  date  of  this  expedition.  Rohricht  and  Schlum- 
berger  place  it  in  the  fall  of  1163.  Derenbourg*  and  Wiet  insist  upon  1162  as  the  date. 
Wiet  regards  the  matter  as  settled  by  a  poem  of  congratulation  addressed  to  Ruzzik, 
who  ceased  to  be  vizier  December  28,  1162  (see  Wiet,  UEgyfte  arabe,  p.  291). 

Shawar  succeeded  Ruzzik  as  vizier,  obtaining  the  office  by  force  early  in  1163. 
He  himself  was  driven  out  by  Dirgham  in  August,  1163  (see  Wiet,  UEgypte  arahe^ 
p.  292). 


304  KING  AMAURY  I 

life.  Such  was  the  man  whom  Nureddin  sent  to  Egypt  with  a  great 
army.^® 

Messengers  were  constantly  going  to  and  fro.  From  them  and  from 
common  report  as  well,  Sultan  Dirgham  learned  that  the  enemy  whom 
he  had  once  driven  out  was  returning  with  a  Turkish  army  of  many 
thousands.  As  he  had  little  confidence  in  his  own  strength,  the  sultan 
was  forced  to  beg  for  assistance.  He  dispatched  envoys  to  the  king  with 
messages  of  peace,  wherein  he  earnestly  pleaded  for  aid  against  the 
enemy  who  was  now  threatening  to  attack  him.  He  promised  to  pay 
not  only  the  tribute  originally  agreed  upon  with  King  Baldwin,  but 
a  larger  amount  to  be  fixed  as  the  king  determined.  He  also  declared 
that  he  was  prepared  to  give  hostages  in  token  of  perpetual  subjection 
and  an  alliance  for  all  time, 

6.  Peter y  archbishof  of  Tyre^  dies.  He  is  succeeded  by  Fred- 
encky  bishof  of  Acre. 

About  the  same  time,  on  March  i  in  the  second  year  of  King  Amaury^s 

reign,  Peter,  the  venerable  archbishop  of  Tyre  of  pious  memory  in 

the  Lord,  went  the  way  of  all  flesh. Within  a  few  days — in  fact, 

■ 

before  the  month  passed — Frederick,  bishop  of  Acre  and  suffragan 
of  the  same  church,  was  appointed  in  his  stead  at  the  express  desire 
of  the  king. 

Frederick,  a  Lotharingian  by  birth,  was  noble  according  to  the  flesh. 
He  was  an  extremely  tall  man.  He  possessed  little  education  but  was 
inordinately  devoted  to  the  art  of  war. 

7.  Dirghaniy  the  sultan  of  Egyfty  is  slain  by  the  machinations 
of  his  ozvn  feofle.  Shawar  becomes  sultan.  He  invites  the 
king  to  come  to  his  aid.  The  king  goes  dozvn  into  Egyft. 

Shirkuh  is  driven  out  by  force. 

Meanwhile  the  Egyptian  envoys  were  negotiating  with  the  king  and, 
in  fact,  had  practically  arrived  at  a  satisfactory  agreement.  Before  they 
could  return  to  their  own  country,  however,  the  aforesaid  Shawar  and 

Shirkuh  had  figured  prominently  in  the  capture  of  Damascus.  Despite  his  own 
great  achievements  as  a  warrior,  he  is  remembered  chiefly  as  the  uncle  of  Saladin, 
under  whom  the  latter  received  his  training  in  military  affairs. 

There  is  some  uncertainty  about  this  year.  The  evidence  of  the  charters  would 
indicate  March,  1164,  as  the  probable  date  (see  R.  Rohricht,  Regesta  regni  Hiero- 
solymitanij  nos.  385  and  397). 


KING  AMAURY  I 


305 

Shirkuh  had  entered  Egypt  with  all  their  forces  and  had  met  the 
sultan  Dirgham  in  battle.  In  the  first  engagement  they  were  vanquished 
and  suffered  a  severe  defeat.  However,  before  they  could  try  their 
fortune  in  a  second  battle  under  the  same  conditions,  Dirgham  was 
struck  by  an  arrow  sent  by  the  hand  of  one  of  his  own  men  and  perished, 
greatly  lamented  by  his  followers.^®  Upon  his  death,  Shawar  entered 
Cairo  as  victor,  just  as  he  had  desired.  He  put  to  the  sword  all  the 
friends,  relations,  and  retainers  of  Dirgham  who  could  be  found  and 
again  assumed  his  former  official  position.  For  it  is  a  matter  of  indif¬ 
ference  to  a  supreme  ruler  whether  one  rival  claimant  or  the  other 
wins,  as  long  as  there  is  someone  who  will  devote  himself  slavishly 
to  the  care  of  his  lord’s  personal  affairs  and  to  those  of  the  realm. 

Shirkuh  at  once  attacked  the  neighboring  city  of  Balbis  and  began 
to  claim  that  city  as  his  own.  By  his  deeds  and  possibly  by  his  words, 
he  showed  that  he  intended,  if  fortune  favored  him,  to  bring  the  other 
parts  of  that  kingdom  under  his  own  power,  in  spite  of  the  sultan  and 
the  caliph.  Before  long,  Shawar  began  to  fear  that  by  introducing  such 
a  guest  he  had  injured  his  own  cause  as  well  as  that  of  his  master  and 
had  received  one  who,  “like  a  mouse  in  the  wardrobe  and  a  serpent 
in  the  bosom,”  would  poorly  requite  his  hosts.  As  speedily  as  possible, 
therefore,  he  dispatched  envoys  to  the  king  in  Syria,  charged  with 
messages  of  peace.  They  were  empowered  to  carry  out  at  once,  not 
merely  by  word  but  by  action,  the  terms  of  the  agreement  formerly 
concluded  between  the  lord  king  and  the  Sultan  Dirgham  and,  if 
necessary,  to  offer  even  greater  inducements. 

As  soon  as  the  pact  had  been  confirmed  by  both  parties,  the  king,  in 
the  second  year  of  his  reign,  marched  forth  at  the  head  of  his  entire 
army  and  went  down  to  Egypt  a  second  time.^^  There  he  was  joined 
by  Shawar  with  the  Egyptian  forces,  and  together  they  besieged  Shirkuh 
in  the  city  of  Balbis,  whither  he  had  retired  as  into  his  own  citadel. 
After  a  long  siege,  Shirkuh  was  finally  forced  through  exhaustion  and 
lack  of  provisions  to  surrender  the  place.  The  terms  demanded  were 
that  he  be  permitted  to  depart  to  his  own  land  with  all  his  forces  freely 
and  without  hindrance.  This  was  granted  j  thereupon  he  abandoned 
the  city  and  returned  by  way  of  the  desert  to  Damascus. 

The  death  of  Dirgham  occurred  in  a  battle  under  the  walls  of  Cairo,  August, 
H64  (Wiet,  JJEgy'pte  arahe^  p.  294), 

This  campaign  of  Amaury’s  was  carried  on  during  the  fall  of  1164  (Wiet,  UEgyfte 
arabe^  pp.  294—95). 


3o6 


KING  AMAURY  I 


8.  Nureddtn  is  defeated  in  the  country  around  Tripoli  and 
barely  escapes  from  the  hands  of  the  Christians  by  flight. 

Nureddin  was  at  this  time  sojourning  in  the  environs  of  Tripoli,  at 
a  place  commonly  known  as  La  Boquea.  The  great  elation  which  he 
felt  over  his  victories  had  had  the  effect  of  rendering  him  somewhat 
careless,  and  as  a  result  he  suffered  a  disaster  which  was  almost  ir¬ 
reparable.  Just  at  this  time,  certain  nobles  had  come  from  the  land 
of  Aquitaine  on  a  pilgrimage  for  the  sake  of  prayer.  Among  them 
were  Godfrey,  surnamed  Martel,  a  brother  of  the  count  of  Angouleme, 
and  Hugh  de  Lusignan  the  Elder,  who  was  surnamed  the  Brown. 
After  their  devotions  were  accomplished  according  to  custom,  they 
proceeded  to  the  land  of  Antioch.  Here  they  learned  that  Nureddin 
was  still  with  his  army  in  the  vicinity  of  Tripoli  at  the^  place  named 
above.  In  too  great  fancied  security,  he  was  enjoying  at  his  leisure  a 
period  of  rest  and  relaxation.  The  Christians  accordingly  gathered 
their  forces  and  made  a  sudden  attack  upon  his  army.  Nureddin  was 
taken  by  surprise  5  many  of  his  men  were  made  prisoners,  and  still 
more  perished  by  the  sword  5  in  fact,  his  army  was  almost  annihilated. 
The  prince  himself,  in  despair  of  his  very  life,  fled  in  utter  confusion. 
All  the  baggage  and  even  his  sword  were  abandoned.  Barefooted  and 
mounted  on  a  beast  of  burden,  he  barely  escaped  capture  at  the  hands 
of  our  forces.  But  the  Christians,  laden  with  spoils  and  manifold  riches, 
returned  victorious  to  their  own  land. 

Gilbert  de  Lacy,  a  nobleman  of  high  rank,  an  experienced  warrior 
and  commander  of  the  Knights  Templars  in  those  parts,  led  this  ex¬ 
pedition.  He  was  assisted  by  the  two  great  men  named  above,  by 
Robert  Mansel  who  commanded  the  Galensians  on  that  expedition, 
and  by  some  other  knights.^® 

9.  Nureddin  lays  siege  to  the  fortress  of  Harim  in  the  land  of 
Antioch.  The  prince  of  Antioch^  the  count  of  Tripoliy  and 
ColmaUy  the  governor  of  Ciliciay  are  taken  prisoners, 

Nureddin,  extremely  angry  and  filled  with  confusion  and  fear,  was 
overwhelmed  with  dismay  at  this  unlucky  disaster.  Anxious  to  wipe 
out  the  disgrace  and  to  avenge  his  own  injuries  as  well  as  those  of 

This  defeat  of  Nureddin  must  have  taken  place  late  in  1163  at  the  very  latest 
(see  F.  Lundgreen,  Wilhelm  von  Tyrus  und  der  T emplerordeny  pp.  99—100). 


KING  AMAURY  I 


307 

his  people,  he  besought  aid  from  relatives  and  friends.  There  was 
scarcely  a  prince  in  the  East  on  whom  he  did  not  call  as  a  suppliant, 
now  entreating  assistance  by  prayers  and  again  by  promise  of  reward. 
Meanwhile,  he  recruited  his  own  strength  and  collected  military  re¬ 
inforcements  from  all  sides.  With  a  great  host  and  thousands  of  knights 
assembled  in  this  way,  he  laid  siege  to  Harim,  one  of  the  Christian 
strongholds  in  the  land  of  Antioch.  He  stationed  his  engines  around 
it  in  the  customary  manner  and  began  to  assault  the  place  with  a  fury 
which  permitted  the  inhabitants  no  rest. 

The  leaders  of  the  Christians  were  soon  informed  of  his  activities. 
At  once  all  the  forces,  both  infantry  and  cavalry,  that  could  be  gathered 
anywhere,  hastened  to  Harim.  These  included  Bohemond  III,  prince 
of  Antioch,  the  son  of  Raymond  j  the  younger  Raymond,  count  of 
Tripoli,  son  oi  Count  Raymond  j  Calamanus  [Colman],  the  governor 
of  Cilicia,  a  kinsman  of  the  emperor,  in  charge  of  the  imperial  affairs 
in  that  province  5  and  Thoros,  a  very  powerful  Armenian  prince.  They 
marched  with  forces  drawn  up  in  battle  formation,  determined  to 
relieve  the  siege  in  spite  of  Nureddin’s  efforts. 

But  that  prince  and  the  Parthian  leaders  associated  with  him,  after 
consultation,  decided  that  it  would  be  safer  to  raise  the  siege  and  de¬ 
part  of  their  own  accord,  rather  than  to  risk  encountering  the  enemy 
who  were  now  almost  upon  them.  They  therefore  arranged  the  bag¬ 
gage  and  endeavored  to  make  good  their  retreat.  But  the  Christians, 
emboldened  by  the  success  that  had  attended  their  efforts,  started  in 
pursuit.  They  could  not  rest  content  with  having  relieved  the  citizens 
from  the  siege  at  the  hand  of  these  great  princes.  So,  regardless  of  the 
rules  of  military  discipline,  they  recklessly  dispersed  and  roved  hither 
and  yon  in  pursuit  of  the  foe.  Suddenly  the  Turks  rallied,  regained 
their  courage  and  strength,  and  turned  upon  them.  Trapped  in  a  con¬ 
fined  and  swampy  place,  the  Christians  broke  ranks  at  the  first  charge, 
and  those  who  shortly  before  had  caused  the  utmost  terror  in  the  ranks 
of  the  Turks  became  the  pitiful  sport  of  that  same  enemy.  Over¬ 
whelmed  and  shattered  by  the  swords  of  the  enemy,  they  were 
shamefully  slain  like  victims  before  the  altar.  No  one  called  to  mind 
his  former  valor  ^  no  one,  remembering  his  own  prestige  and  that 
of  his  fathers,  strove  to  avert  disaster  or  to  fight  for  the  defense  of 
liberty  and  the  glory  of  his  ancestors.  Regardless  of  honor  all  threw 
down  their  arms  precipitately  and  ignominiously  begged  for  life,  which 


KING  AMAURY  I 


308 

would  have  been  better  expended  In  fighting  manfully  for  the  father- 
land  as  an  example  for  posterity. 

At  this  crisis,  Thoros  the  Armenian,  perceiving  that  the  Turks  were 
gaining  the  upper  hand  and  that  the  Christians,  on  the  contrary,  had 
succumbed,  decided  to  save  himself  by  flight  and  withdrew  from  the 
tumult  of  battle.  From  the  first  he  had  opposed  the  pursuit  of  the 
Turks  and  had  endeavored  to  dissuade  the  Christians  from  attempting 
it,  but  the  foolish  advice  of  others  prevailed. 

To  save  their  lives  even  at  the  cost  of  shame  and  reproach,  Bohe- 
mond,  prince  of  Antioch,  and  Raymond,  count  of  Tripoli,  surrendered 
to  the  enemy.  Colman,  the  governor  of  Cilicia,  Hugh  de  Lusignan, 
who  was  mentioned  above,  Joscelin  III,  son  of  Joscelin  II,  count  of 
Edessa,  and  many  other  nobles  followed  the  same  course.  Chained 
liked  the  lowest  slaves,  they  were  led  ignominiously  to  Aleppo,  where 
they  were  cast  into  prison  and  became  the  sport  of  the  infidels. 

Encouraged  by  this  success  and  great  good  fortune,  Nureddin  and 
his  allies  again  attacked  the  stronghold  which  they  had  been  besieging 
before  and  this  time  with  more  confidence.  Siege  operations  were  once 
more  resumed,  and  within  a  few  days  the  place  was  captured  by  force. 

This  event  happened  on  the  fourth  day  before  the  Ides  of  August, 
in  the  year  1 1 65  of  the  Incarnation  of  our  Lord  and  the  second  year 
of  King  Amaury’s  reign.  The  king  himself  was  still  in  Egypt  at  this 
time,  detained  there  by  his  own  affairs.^ ^ 


10.  Count  'Thierry  of  Flanders  arrives  in  ^yria,  Nureddin  be¬ 
sieges  B  any  as  and  takes  the  city. 

w 

These  great  changes  and  dire  disasters  so  seriously  affected  the  condi¬ 
tion  of  the  Christians  that  they  were  reduced  almost  to  the  last  ex¬ 
tremity.  No  ray  of  hope  now  remained.  All  with  despairing  hearts 
were  daily  dreading  worse  misfortunes,  when  Thierry,  count  of  Flan¬ 
ders,  arrived.  He  was  accompanied  by  his  wife,  the  king’s  sister,  a 
religious  and  God-fearing  woman,  and  followed  by  a  goodly  company 
of  knights.^^  The  people  universally  welcomed  him  with  rejoicing. 

The  year  1165  is  obviously  wrong*,  perhaps  a  copyist’s  error.  William  clearly 
intends  to  correlate  these  events  with  Amaury’s  expedition  into  Egypt  in  1 164.. 

“2  This  was  the  fourth  journey  of  Thierry  of  Flanders  to  the  Holy  Land.  He  had 
entrusted  the  county  of  Flanders  to  his  son,  Philip.  According  to  Robert  of  Torigni, 
who  notes  Thierry’s  departure  under  the  year  1164,  Sibylla  had  remained  in  Jerusalem 
with  Iveta,  abbess  of  St.  Lazarus  in  Bethany,  when  Thierry  went  home  in  1158  (see 


KING  AMAURY  I 


309 

for  he  seemed  a  very  present  help,  like  unto  a  pleasant  breeze  after 
the  intense  heat  of  the  sun,  and  by  his  support  they  hoped  that  they 
might  be  able  to  hold  out  until  the  king  and  the  Christian  army  should 
return.  But,  alas,  this  state  of  serenity,  bright  as  it  was,  was  soon  dis¬ 
pelled  by  a  dense  cloud  which  suddenly  arose  and  turned  all  into 
darkness.^^  For  Nureddin  had  become  so  arrogant  through  his  success 
that  he  determined  to  seize  the  opportunity  to  besiege  the  city  of 
Banyas.  Well  he  knew  that  the  kingdom  was  stripped  of  its  customary 
defenders,  for  the  king  was  absent  with  the  entire  military  strength 
of  the  realm  and  the  principal  leaders  were  his  own  prisoners. 

Banyas  is  a  very  ancient  city  situated  at  the  base  of  the  famous  Mt. 
Lebanon.  During  very  early  times,  in  the  days  of  the  people  of  Israel, 
it  was  called  Dan.  It  was  the  northern  boundary  of  the  Israelitish 
possessions,  just  as  Beersheba  was  the  southern,  and,  accordingly,  when 
the  length  of  the  Land  of  Promise  is  described  it  is  spoken  of  as  ^^from 
Dan  to  Beersheba.”  Philip,  son  of  the  elder  Herod,  tetrarch  of  Iturea 
and  the  region  of  the  Traconites,  as  one  reads  in  Luke,^^  enlarged 
it  during  his  time  in  honor  of  Tiberius  Caesar  and  in  order  to  preserve 
his  own  name  forever  called  it  Caesarea  Philippi.  It  is  also  known 
as  Paneas,  but  our  Latins  corrupted  the  name,  as  is  generally  their 
custom  with  names  of  cities,  and  called  it  Belinas.  On  the  east  it  borders 
upon  the  land  of  Damascus,  near  the  place  where  the  two  streams  of 
the  Jordan  have  their  origin.  This  is  the  city  which  is  spoken  of  in 
the  Gospel  where  it  is  written  that  “When  Jesus  came  into  the  coasts 
of  Caesarea  Philippi,  he  asked  his  disciples,”  and  so  on.  Here  also 
it  was  that  Peter,  the  prince  of  the  disciples,  received  the  keys  of 
the  kingdom  of  Heaven  from  the  Lord  as  the  reward  of  his  excellent 
confession. 

To  this  place  Nureddin  laid  siege.  He  found  it  undefended,  for 
Humphrey,  the  royal  constable  to  whom  it  belonged  by  hereditary 
right,  was  absent  with  the  king  in  Egypt.  The  bishop  of  the  place  was 
also  away  and  the  population  had  been  greatly  diminished  by  slaughter. 
Machines  and  engines  of  war  were  at  once  set  up  in  position  round 
about,  the  wall  was  undermined  and  the  towers  weakened  for  the 
most  part  by  constant  volleys  of  stones.  Within  a  few  days,  therefore, 


L.  Delisle,  ed,,  Chronique  de  Robert  de  Torigniy  abbe  du  Mont-Saint-Michely  I,  325, 
23  Joel  2:  31  5  Ac.  2:  20.  26 


KING  AMAURY  I 


310 

it  was  taken.  The  people  within  were  forced  to  surrender,  on  condi¬ 
tion,  however,  that  they  should  be  permitted  to  leave  the  city  un¬ 
molested  with  all  their  goods.  Thus,  in  the  year  1167  of  the  Incarna¬ 
tion  of  our  Lord,  Nureddin  took  over  the  city.  This  event  occurred 
in  the  second  year  of  King  Amaury’s  reign,  on  the  fifteenth  day  before 
the  Kalends  of  November.-^ 

On  departing  for  Egypt,  the  lord  constable  had  put  Banyas  in  charge 
of  one  of  his  own  loyal  knights,  Walter  de  Quesnoy.  It  is  affirmed  by 
some  that  this  man  was  negligent  in  defending  the  place.  It  is  rumored 
further  that  in  collusion  with  a  priest  named  Roger,  a  canon  of  that 
church,  he  treacherously  accepted  a  bribe  in  return  for  effecting  the 
surrender.  Consequently,  the  two  traitors  were  greatly  terrified  when 
the  king  returned  from  Egypt,  lest  they  be  put  to  death.  We  have 
no  trustworthy  information  on  these  points,  however,  except  that  the 
city  was  surrendered  to  the  enemy. 

1 1.  On  his  return  from  Egyfty  the  kmg  refmrs  to  Antioch*  The 
frince  is  restored  to  liberty  on  fayment  of  a  ransom*  The 
cavern  at  Sidon  is  surrendered  to  the  Turks.  They  also  gmn 
'possession  of  another  cave  beyond  Jordan* 

This,  then,  was  the  situation  in  Syria.  Meanwhile,  the  king  had  driven 
Shirkuh  from  the  land  of  Egypt  and  established  Shawar  in  the  govern¬ 
ment  as  sultan.  He  now  returned,  a  glorious  conqueror,  to  his  own 
land.  There  he  learned  of  the  sad  events  which  had  taken  place  in 
the  kingdom.  Although  some  information  of  all  this  had  reached  him 
before,  he  now  listened  to  a  detailed  account  of  the  disasters  and  heard 
that  the  people  of  Antioch,  in  an  almost  desperate  situation,  had  ap¬ 
pealed  to  him  for  aid.^'^  Accordingly,  in  brotherly  pity  and  compas¬ 
sion,  he  took  with  him  the  count  of  Flanders  and  hurried  by  forced 
marches  to  Antioch  to  render  the  assistance  so  greatly  needed  by  that 
afflicted  land.  On  his  arrival  he  at  once  assumed  charge  of  the  prince’s 
affairs.  These  he  managed  faithfully  and  well  with  even  more  care 

Elsewhere  William  has  indicated  1164  as  the  second  year  of  Amaury’s  reign. 
The  use  of  1167  must  therefore  be  regarded  either  as  a  copyist’s  error  or  a  slip  of 
William’s  pen  due  to  haste,  for  he  obviously  relates  this  to  Amaury’s  absence  in  Egypt 
in  1164.  W.  B.  Stevenson  (^The  Crusaders  in  the  East^  p.  189)  dates  the  capture  of 
Banyas  October  18,  1164. 

The  news  of  Nureddin’s  activities  behind  him  may  have  prevented  Amaury  from 
following  up  his  success  by  further  penetration  of  Egypt. 


KING  AMAURY  I 


311 

than  he  ordinarily  gave  to  his  own  concerns.  He  governed  both  nobles 
and  people  with  great  kindness  and  wise  foresight.  In  each  city  he 
placed  a  capable  man  to  take  faithful  and  sensible  charge  of  all  matters 
pertaining  to  the  prince’s  domain,  after  which  he  returned  to  his  own 
kingdom.  With  the  assistance  of  loyal  followers  and  friends  of  the 
prince,  however,  he  continued  to  interest  himself  in  the  matter  of 
that  lord’s  ransom.  As  the  result  of  his  active  efforts,  the  prince,  on 
payment  of  a  large  sum  of  money,  was  restored  that  same  summer  to 
his  former  state  of  honor  and  liberty.  His  captivity  among  the  enemy 
had  lasted  for  nearly  a  year.^®  Bohemond  did  not  rest  in  idleness  after 
his  return  to  Antioch  but  displayed  great  energy  in  raising  the  ransom 
for  the  hostages  he  had  given  so  that  their  return  also  might  not  be 
delayed.  A  short  time  before  this  the  emperor  of  Constantinople  had 
married  the  prince’s  youngest  sister,  Maria.  Thither  [Bohemond] 
hastened.  He  was  received  by  the  emperor  with  honorable  and  kindly 
treatment  and,  after  a  short  visit,  returned  to  Antioch,  laden  with 
munificent  gifts  from  his  imperial  majesty. 

It  seems  strange  that  Nureddin,  wise  and  far-seeing  prince  that  he 
was,  should  have  consented  to  release  the  prince  of  Antioch  so  soon. 
He  was  always  loath  to  free  Christian  captives  and  gloried  above  all  in 
the  fact  that  he  held  many  of  our  people,  especially  those  of  high 
rank,  as  his  prisoners.  Two  possible  solutions  of  this  problem  occur  to 
me.  He  may  have  feared  that  the  emperor  would  intervene;  that  the 
mighty  potentate,  whose  request  he  would  not  dare  refuse,  might 
demand  that  he  restore  the  prince  without  ransom.  He  may  also  have 
considered  the  possibility  that  the  people  of  Antioch,  if  their  prince 
were  detained  too  long,  might  provide  for  their  interests  by  choosing 
a  stronger  ruler  in  the  place  of  Bohemond,  for  the  prince  was  a  youth 
who  gave  little  promise  of  future  good.  Thus  a  more  formidable 
adversary  might  be  raised  up  against  himself.  Hence,  Nureddin,  shrewd 
and  provident,  deemed  it  better  for  his  own  interests  that  Bohemond 
should  continue  to  rule  at  Antioch,  for  he  too  looked  for  little  good 
from  him,  A  wiser  and  more  powerful  prince  placed  in  that  position 
might  be  more  difficult  to  deal  with.  This  latter  theory,  in  my  opinion, 
explains  the  real  motives  which  governed  this  most  sagacious  prince.^® 

Bohemond  III  was  released  in  the  summer  of  1165,  as  much  the  result  of  the 
military  success  of  Thoros  of  Armenia  as  of  Amaury’s  powers  of  persuasion. 

Nureddin  still  held  a  number  of  important  Latin  princes,  including  Renaud  de 
Chatillon  and  Raymond  III  of  Tripoli.  He  had  held  Joscelin  II  captive  for  nine  years. 


KING  AMAURY  I 


312 

About  the  same  time  Shirkuh,  so  often  mentioned,  a  man  bent  on 
destroying  the  Christians,  seized  a  fortress  belonging  to  the  Christians 
near  Sidon  suddenly  and  without  warning.  The  place  was  known  as 
the  cave  of  Tyre  and  was  considered  impregnable.  It  is  said  that  the 
capture  was  accomplished  by  bribing  the  custodians.  That  the  fortress 
had  fallen  into  the  enemy’s  hands  through  collusion  with  its  guardians 
was  quite  apparent,  for  as  soon  as  it  was  surrendered  all  those  within 
escaped  to  the  enemy’s  country,  with  the  exception  of  their  chief.  By 
a  lucky  chance  he  was  caught  and  came  to  a  miserable  end  at  Sidon, 
where  he  was  hanged. 

During  this  same  year,  William,  king  of  Sicily,  of  illustrious  re¬ 
nown,  the  son  of  King  Roger,  was  overtaken  by  death. About  this 
same  time,  also,  a  fortress  of  similar  nature,  that  is,  an  impregnable 
cave,  lying  beyond  Jordan  on  the  borders  of  Arabia,  was  likewise  sur¬ 
rendered  to  Shirkuh  by  the  brothers  of  the  Knights  Templars,  to  whose 
care  it  had  been  confided.  The  king  hurried  to  its  rescue  with  a  goodly 
company  of  knights,  but  while  he  was  encamped  on  the  banks  of  the 
Jordan,  news  came  that  the  stronghold  had  already  fallen  into  the 
hands  of  the  enemy.  Disconcerted  and  infuriated  at  this  news,  the 
king  caused  about  twelve  of  the  Templars  responsible  for  the  surrender 
to  be  hanged  from  a  gallows.^^ 

Thus,  during  that  year  which  was  the  third  of  King  Amaury’s  reign, 
the  Christians  suffered  many  reverses,  and,  because  of  our  sins,  the 
entire  kingdom  was  in  a  very  parlous  state. 


It  was  only  under  pressure  that  he  released  such  prisoners,  the  threat  of  Manuel’s 
invasion  being  the  most  striking  instance.  This  was  another.  Ordinary  offers  of  ransom 
did  not  tempt  him.  Perhaps  William  is  justified  in  his  speculation  as  to  Nureddin’s 
reason  for  releasing  Bohemond.  Rohricht  suggests  a  more  probable  reason  in  the 
threat  of  another  attack  by  Manuel  (R.  Rohricht,  Geschichte  des  Konigretchs  Jerusalem^ 
1 100-12^1 y  p.  319). 

William  I  of  Sicily  died  May  7,  1166,  and  was  succeeded  by  his  son  William  II, 
who  was  only  thirteen  years  old  (see  F.  Chalandon,  Histoire  de  la  domination  nor- 
mande  en  Italie  et  en  Sidle y  II,  303—305). 

William’s  date  for  this  tragedy  is  in  Amaury’s  third  year,  or  1165.  Lundgreen, 
who  places  it  in  1166,  is  unable  to  find  any  other  authority  for  the  hanging  of  the 
Templars  and  questions  William’s  statement  without  being  able  to  refute  it  {Wilhelm 
von  Tyrtis  und  der  Temflerordeny  p.  101). 


KING  AMAURY  I 


3'3 


12.  The  return  of  the  writer  of  this  history  to  his  own  land  is 
described  and  something  of  his  progress  is  related. 

I 

[The  text  of  this  chapter  does  not  appear  in  any  of  the  extant  rnanu- 
scripts.] 

13.  Shtrkuh  goes  down  Into  Egyft  at  the  head  of  a  large  body 
of  soldiery. 

This,  then,  was  the  situation  among  our  people  at  that  time.  Mean¬ 
while  a  persistent  story  emanating  from  various  sources  was  widely 
circulated.  It  was  said  that  Shirkuh  at  the  head  of  a  mighty  force  of 
knights  gathered  from  the  lands  of  the  East  and  the  North  was  pre¬ 
paring  to  descend  again  in  martial  splendor  upon  the  land  of  Egypt. 
Nor  was  this  report  without  foundation.  For  Shirkuh  had  visited  the 
caliph  of  Bagdad,  that  greatest  of  all  Saracen  rulers,  he  who  far  excels 
all  others  and  is  recognized  as  the  supreme  monarch  over  all.  On  his 
arrival  there,  Shirkuh  offered  the  customary  salutation  and  then  began 
to  describe  in  great  detail  the  immense  wealth  of  Egypt,  He  told  of 
the  marvellous  abundance  of  all  good  things  there  and  of  each  in¬ 
dividual  commodity  j  the  inestimable  treasures  belonging  to  the  prince 
himself  j  the  imposts  and  taxes  from  the  cities  both  on  the  coast  and 
farther  inland  j  and  the  vast  amount  of  annual  revenue.  He  added 
that  the  people,  devoted  to  luxurious  living  and  ignorant  of  the  science 
of  war,  had  become  enervated  through  a  period  of  long-continued 
peace.  Again  and  again  he  endeavored  to  impress  upon  the  caliph’s 
mind  the  fact  that  the  prince  now  ruling  Egypt,  and  his  ancestors  as 
well,  had  raised  up  a  rival  caliph  in  opposition  to  himself  [the  caliph 
of  Bagdad]  and  his ,  predecessors.  This  caliph,  they  had  insolently 

32  Prutz  has  various  conjectures  reg’arding  this  missing  material  (H.  Prutz,  “Studien 
iiber  Wilhelm  von  Tyrus”  Neues  Archiv,  VIII,  98—99).  If  the  assumption  that  William 
had  not  been  able  to  finish  this  work  is  correct  and  that  the  unfinished  portion  was 
that  of  the  years  1160— 1166  inclusive,  the  most  reasonable  explanation  is  that  William 
did  not  write  it.  He  had  planned  the  chapters  for  the  whole  work,  which  accounts  for 
the  captions,  but  in  his  haste  had  been  unable  to  fill  it  out.  The  very  sketchy  nature 
of  the  chapters  preceding  this  lends  further  support  to  the  explanation.  His  absence 
from  Palestine  during  a  part  of  this  period  may,  as  noted  above,  account  for  the 
vagueness  of  the  material  for  the  years  from  1160  to  1163  inclusive,  while  the  relative 
fullness  and  accuracy  of  rel9,ted  events  in  1164  would  indicate  that  he  was  then  back 
in  the  Holy  Land.  If  so,  only  the  haste  of  closing  his  work  would  explain  the  few 
entries  for  1165  and  almost  none  for  1166.  The  contrasting  fullness  of  the  next  year, 
with  which  he  probably  began  his  work  as  historian,  emphasizes  this  possibility. 


KING  AMAURY  I 


314 

dared  to  clainij  was  on  an  equality  with  his  own  unparalleled  excellency. 
Moreoverj  they  had  assumed  to  teach  another  law  and  traditions 
directly  opposed  to  those  of  the  caliph.  By  reiterating  such  suggestions 
Shirkuh  so  wrought  upon  the  caliph^s'mind  that  he  was  induced  to 
carry  out  the  sultan’s  will.  He  wrote  to  all  the  princes  who  accepted 
his  false  doctrines  and  commanded  them  strictly  to  muster  their  forces 
and  follow  Shirkuh  to  lend  him  aid.^^ 

When  Amaury  heard  this  news,  he  called  a  general  assembly  at 
Nablus  to  devise  means  of  anticipating  and  forestalling  the  caliph’s 
designs.  There,  in  the  presence  of  the  patriarch,  the  archbishops,  bish¬ 
ops,  and  other  dignitaries  of  the  church  as  well  as  the  barons  and  all 
the  people,  he  explained  with  great  care  the  danger  which  threatened 
the  kingdom  and  earnestly  besought  their  aid.  In  view  of  the  circum¬ 
stances,  it  was  thereupon  unanimously  decided  that  everyone  without 
exception  should  give  one-tenth  of  all  movable  property  toward  the 
relief  of  the  kingdom.  This  decree  was  put  into  effect. 

The  report  continued  to  circulate  that  Shirkuh,  well  supplied  with 
the  requisite  food  for  many  days  and  an  abundant  provision  of  water 
carried  in  skins,  had  already  started  on  his  march  through  the  desert, 
over  the  route  by  which  the  children  of  Israel  had  entered  the  Land 
of  Promise.  The  king  thereupon  mustered  all  his  available  cavalry 
and  set  out  in  haste  to  meet  him  and  oppose  his  progress.  He  advanced 
as  far  as  Kades-Barnea  in  the  desert,  but  not  finding  Shirkuh  there, 
he  at  once  retraced  his  course. 

14.  The  klngy  following  Shirkuh^  likewise  goes  down  to  Egyft 
to  assist  the  Egyftians. 

The  heralds  were  now  ordered  to  summon  from  every  city  the  entire 
military  strength  of  the  kingdom,  both  infantry  and  cavalry.  The 
forces  were  directed  to  concentrate  at  Ascalon.^^  On  January  30,  the 
army  set  forth,  carrying  with  them  the  necessary  supply  of  food  for 
the  journey,  and  by  forced  marches  crossed  the  vast  wilderness  with 
lies  between  Gaza,  the  last  city  of  our  kingdom,  and  the  land  of  Egypt. 

This  account  of  the  situation  in  Egypt  is  quite  evidently  made  without  regard 
to  the  previous  chapters,  another  reason  for  concluding  that  William  began  his  history 
at  this  point. 

The  preliminaries  of  this  campaign,  including  the  council  of  Nablus,  must  have 
reached  back  into  the  fall  of  ii66.  The  march  began  from  Ascalon  on  January  30, 
1167. 


KING  AMAURY  I 


315 

At  al-Arish,  an  ancient  fortress  in  the  desert,  they  held  a  census  of 
their  forces  and  awaited  the  rest  of  the  army.  The  army  as  a  whole 
finally  reached  the  city  now  known  as  Balbis,  although  in  ancient  times 
it  was  called  Pelusium  and  as  such  is  often  mentioned  in  the  Prophets. 

When  the  Sultan  Shawar  learned  that  the  king  had  come,  he  was 
seized  with  terror.  Dismayed  at  the  sudden  appearance  of  the  Chris¬ 
tians,  he  doubted  the  good  faith  of  the  oncoming  host  and  feared  that 
the  martial  array  might  be  directed  against  himself.  He  was,  in  gen¬ 
eral,  a  wise  and  able  ruler  and  was  considered  particularly  farsighted, 
but  on  this  occasion  he  displayed  cowardice  and  gross  ignorance.  Al¬ 
though  informed  of  the  reason  for  our  coming,  he  could  scarcely  be¬ 
lieve  it  true.  Finally,  almost  too  late  and  reluctantly,  he  dispatched 
scouts  to  the  desert  to  obtain  definite  information  about  the  enemy’s 
movements.  On  their  return,  the  messengers  reported  that  the  Turkish 
army  had  reached  Attasi.  Then,  indeed,  the  sultan  marvelled  at  the 
sincere  loyalty  of  the  Christians  and  praised  them  highly.  In  recogni¬ 
tion  of  the  solicitude  which  the  Christian  army  had  shown  for  their 
Egyptian  allies,  he  placed  at  the  disposal  of  the  king  all  the  riches, 
both  of  the  kingdom  and  of  the  caliph.  Moreover,  from  that  day  forth, 
he  showed  great  zeal  in  carrying  out  all  the  king’s  wishes.  Accordingly, 
Amaury  freely  availed  himself  of  this  help  whenever  he  had  need. 

15.  A  descriftion  of  Cairo  and  some  remarks  07i  the  founder 
of  the  city. 

The  Christians  proceeded  on  their  way  past  the  cities  of  Balbis 
and  Cairo,  of  which  the  latter,  with  its  magnificent  buildings,  was  dis¬ 
played  as  the  seat  of  royal  power  and  the  supreme  glory  of  Egypt. 
With  the  noble  and  famous  city  commonly  called  Babylon  [Babi- 
lyun],®^  but  known  in  the  Arabic  tongue  as  Macer,^’^  on  the  left,  they 
established  the  camp  on  the  bank  of  the  Nile.  We  have  been  unable 
to  discover  what  name  this  city  bore  in  ancient  times.  Babylon  or 

This  place  was  later  called  Farama,  or  al-Farama. 

Babilyun  was  a  strong  fortress  at  the  time  of  the  Arab  conquest.  It  was  the  scene 
of  a  pitched  battle  and  a  long  siege.  The  fortress  was  captured  April  6,  641.  The  city 
of  Cairo  was  built  later  just  north  of  Babilyun.  It  was  probably  from  Babilyun  that 
the  Westerners  derived  their  name  for  Egypt,  which  they  commonly  called  “Babylon.’^ 
William  is  right  in  refusing  to  identify  it  with  ancient  Memphis,  which  he  correctly 
located  some  ten  miles  farther  up  the  Nile. 

37  ‘‘Macer”  is  of  Egyptian  origin  and  is  more  correctly  spelled  Misr,  which  is  today 
the  official  name  for  Egypt. 


KING  AMAURY  I 


316 

Babylonia  was  a  very  ancient  city  in  the  Orient,  but  histories  relating 
to  very  early  times  do  not  refer  to  any  city  of  this  name  as  ever  exist¬ 
ing  in  Egypt.  It  is  probable,  therefore,  that  this  place  was  founded 
not  only  after  the  time  of  the  Pharaohs,  who  were  the  first  to  reign 
in  Egypt,  and  after  that  of  the  Ptolemies,  who  ruled  later,  but  even 
subsequent  to  the  period  of  the  Romans,  who  reduced  Egypt  to  a 
province.  As  to  Cairo,  this  city  is  known  to  have  been  founded  by 
Johar  [Jawhar],  commander  in  chief  of  the  forces  of  Mehezedin- 
alla  [Muizz].  This  ruler  was  at  that  time  reigning  in  Africa  after 
Jawhar  had  won  for  him  all  the  land  of  Egypt.  How  this  happened 
will  be  related  farther  on. 

Yet  some  writers  confidently  assert  that  this  Babilyun  is  the  ancient 
Memphis,  that  noble  and  far-famed  city,  so  often  mentioned  in  ancient 
histories  and  in  the  Prophets,  and  which  is  said  to  have  been  the 
capital  and  queen  of  that  whole  kingdom  and  of  many  neighboring 
provinces.  But  ten  miles  beyond  the  Nile  which  flows  by  this  Babilyun 
of  which  we  are  speaking  there  still  exists  a  venerable  city  of  vast 
extent  where  there  are  still  evidences  of  bygone  grandeur,  and  this 
the  dwellers  in  those  parts  positively  assert  is  the  Memphis  of  antiquity. 

It  is  quite  probable,  therefore,  that  the  people  of  Memphis,  either 
through  necessity  or  because  this  site  offered  greater  advantages, 
transferred  their  homes  to  the  other  side  of  the  river  and  at  that  time, 
or  possibly  later,  changed  the  original  name. 

We  consider  it  definitely  established  also  that  it  was  Jawhar  who 
built  Cairo.  As  has  been  said  above,  he  had  been  sent  from  Africa  with 
the  armies  of  the  great  prince  Muizz  to  conquer  Egypt.  In  the  year 
358  of  the  Muslim  era,  after  he  had  won  the  entire  land  and  made  the 
people  tributary,  Jawhar  established  this  city  near  Babilyun,  and  it 
became  the  principal  and  favorite  residence  of  his  master.^^  Three 
years  later,  Muizz  left  Kairawan,  which  had  been  the  seat  of  his  king¬ 
dom  for  some  years,  and,  according  to  the  intentions  of  the  prince, 
made  this  place  glorious  as  the  capital  of  his  kingdom  and  his  own 

This  is  a  clear  indication  that  William  used  more  than  one  Arabic  source  for  his 
history  of  Egypt.  His  conclusion  regarding  the  Fatimid  conquest  of  Egypt  and  the 
founding  of  Cairo  is  in  accord  with  the  best  modern  research.  The  year  358  a.h. 
extended  from  November  24,  968,  to  November  13,  969  A.D.  The  construction  of 
Cairo  was  completed  June  22,  972,  and  the  caliph  established  himself  there  June  ii, 
973  (see  Wiet,  UEgypte  arabCy  pp.  179-88).  This  passage  is  almost  the  only  one  in 
which  William  specifically  cites  the  Muslim  era,  though  he  frequently  uses  the  reckon- 


KING  AMAURY  I  317 

residence.^®  This  occurred  in  the  year  361  of  the  Muslim  calendar 
and  the  twentieth  of  Muizz’s  own  rule,  as  has  been  thoroughly  nar¬ 
rated  elsewhere  in  our  history  of  the  princes  of  the  Orient. 

16.  The  king  marches  jorth  to  meet  Shirknhy  but  the  lottery 
anticipating  such  actioriy  crosses  the  river. 

When  the  Christians  had  established  their  camp  on  the  banks  of  the 
river  less  than  two  stadia  from  the  city  just  mentioned,  they  held  a 
council.  After  long  deliberation  and  the  careful  consideration  of  diverse 
opinions,  they  judged  it  best  to  march  out  to  encounter  Shirkuh  and 
his  forces  before  they  should  cross  the  river.  To  prevent  him  from 
entering  the  kingdom  would  be  far  wiser  than  to  join  battle  after  his 
hosts  had  made  the  passage,  when  the  difficulty  of  recrossing  would 
cause  them  to  fight  more  desperately. 

They  broke  camp,  therefore,  and  marched  rapidly  toward  the  spot 
where  the  enemy  was  supposed  to  be.  This  was  reported  as  about  ten 
miles  from  the  place  where  our  forces  had  earlier  encamped.  On 
reaching  the  spot,  however,  they  found  that  Shirkuh,  a  very  sagacious 
leader,  had  already  made  the  crossing  with  nearly  all  his  troops.  Only 
a  few  remained,  and  these  our  men  at  once  seized  and  bound.  When 
questioned,  they  gave  the  Christians  a  great  deal  of  useful  informa¬ 
tion,  especially  in  relation  to  Shirkuh’s  passage  of  the  river  and  the 
number  of  his  troops. 

A  fact  that  was  unknown  to  our  people  was  disclosed  by  their  story, 
namely,  that  after  their  forces  had  passed  Syria  Sobal  in  the  desert 
a  terrible  whirlwind  suddenly  sprang  up.  Particles  of  sand  raised 
aloft  swirled  through  the  air  like  clouds  or  dense  fog.  The  men  dared 
not  open  their  mouths  to  speak  to  one  another,  nor  could  they  keep 
their  eyes  open.  Dismounting  from  their  horses,  they  lay  prostrate 
clinging  to  the  ground,  their  hands  pressed  into  the  sand  as  far  as 
possible,  lest  they  be  swept  aloft  by  the  violence  of  the  whirlwind 
and  again  dashed  to  the  ground.  For  in  that  desert  waves  of  sand 
like  those  of  the  sea  are  wont  to  rise  and  fall  as  in  a  tempest,  a  fact 
that  renders  the  crossing  of  these  perilous  reaches  not  less  dangerous 
than  sailing  over  the  sea.  At  last,  pleasant  weather  returned,  and 
after  several  days  spent  in  wandering  aimlessly  here  and  there,  un- 

Kairawan,  which  is  so  easily  confused  with  Cairo,  is  located  a  short  distance  south¬ 
east  of  Tunis.  It  had  been  the  earlier  Fatimid  capital. 


KING  AMAURY  I 


318 

certain  of  the  route  and  hoping  only  for  life,  they  reached  Egypt,  as 
has  been  related.  Their  camels  and  the  greater  part  of  their  supplies 
were  lost  j  many  of  their  people  were  dead,  and  still  more  were  scattered 
over  the  vast  wastes  of  the  far-reaching  sands. 

When  it  became  evident  that  Shirkuh  and  his  host  had  already 
crossed  the  river,  ouf  army  retraced  their  steps  along  the  route  by 
which  they  had  come  and  again  encamped  on  the  riverbank  near  the 
city  which  they  had  left  earlier. 

ly.  ShawaTy  the  mltariy  renews  the  treaty  in  order  to  keef  the 
king  with  him. 

Shawar  now  realized  that  it  was  impossible  for  him  to  resist  the  foes 
who  had  penetrated  to  the  very  heart  of  his  kingdom,  or  to  drive 
them  from  the  land  except  by  the  assistance  of  the  king.  He  anxiously 
sought  the  most  effective  means,  therefore,  by  which  he  might  keep 
the  king  in  Egypt,  for  he  feared  that  Amaury,  weary  of  the  great 
hardships,  might  resolve  to  return  to  his  own  land.  In  fact,  the  only 
means  of  keeping  the  king  in  the  land  seemed  to  be  by  offering  him  a 
larger  amount  of  tribute  and  promising  an  adequate  sum  for  the  ex¬ 
penses  of  himself  and  his  barons. 

He  resolved  therefore — and  the  proposition  seemed  good  to  the 
Christians  also — to  renew  the  old  agreements  and  to  establish  a  treaty 
of  perpetual  peace  between  the  king  and  the  caliph  on  an  inviolable 
and  stable  basis.  The  annual  tribute  was  to  be  increased  and  a  fixed 
payment  guaranteed  to  the  king  from  the  treasury  of  the  caliph,  for 
the  matter  was  apparently  one  that  could  not  easily  be  accomplished 
without  the  expenditure  of  much  labor  and  time.  After  examining 
the  demands  and  wishes  of  both  parties,  those  in  charge  of  arranging 
the  treaty  and  the  stipulations  thereof  decided  that  four  hundred 
thousand  pieces  of  gold  should  be  allowed  the  king.  Of  this  amount 
two  hundred  thousand  was  to  be  paid  at  once  and  the  remaining  two 
hundred  thousand  was  to  be  sent  without  any  trouble  at  certain  specified 
times.  The  terms  were  as  follows:  “that  the  king  should  guarantee 
with  his  own  hand,  in  good  faith,  without  fraud  or  evil  intent,  that  he 
would  not  depart  from  the  land  of  Egypt  until  Shirkuh  and  his  entire 
army  should  be  utterly  destroyed  or  entirely  driven  from  the  terri¬ 
tories  thereof.”  These  terms  met  with  the  approval  of  both  parties, 
and  in  token  of  his  agreement  to  the  treaty  the  king  extended  his 


KING  AMAURY  I 


319 

right  hand  to  the  caliph’s  representatives.  At  the  same  time,  however, 
he  sent  Hugh  of  Caesarea,  a  young  man  of  admirable  wisdom  and 
discretion  far  beyond  his  years,  with  several  others  to  obtain  the  caliph’s 
ratification  of  the  covenant  by  the  hand  of  Hugh,  according  to  the 
stipulations  agreed  upon;  for  the  sultan’s  guarantee  alone  in  this 
matter  seemed  insuificient. 

18.  Envoys  are  sejit  to  obtain  the  renewal  <?/  the  treats'  from  the 
caliph.  The  magnificence  of  the  royal  palace  is  described. 

Since  the  palace  of  that  monarch  is  unique  and  after  a  fashion  quite 
unfamiliar  to  our  world,  I  have  deemed  it  well  to  set  down  in  detail 
what  I  have  learned  from  the  trustworthy  accounts  of  those  who  visited 
that  great  prince,  to  describe  his  state  and  grandeur,  his  vast  riches, 
and  exceedins:  mapiiificence.  To  have  an  accurate  understanding:  of  all 

00  O 

this  vail  surelv  be  of  no  slig:ht  advantag:e  to  my  readers. 

^  O  O  / 

Hugh  of  Caesarea,  accompanied  by  Geoffrey  Fulcher,  a  knight  of 
the  Temple,  entered  Cairo  under  the  escort  of  the  sultan,  as  chief  of 
the  embassy  which  was  sent  thither.  On  arriving  at  the  palace,  which 
in  the  Egyptian  language  is  called  Cascarey^^  they  were  led  through 
narrow  passages  entirely  vathout  light,  preceded  by  a  numerous  and 
noisy  throng  of  attendants  armed  with  swords.  At  each  entrance  they 
found  bands  of  armed  Ethiopians  who  zealously  showed  their  reverence 
for  the  sultan  by  repeated  salutations. 

After  passing  the  first  and  second  guards,  they  were  conducted  into 
a  large  and  spacious  court  open  to  the  sky  which  freely  admitted  the 
sun’s  rays.  There,  supported  by  columns  of  marble  covered  with  de¬ 
signs  in  relief  were  promenades  with  fretted  and  gilded  ceilings  and 
pavements  of  various  colored  stones.  Throughout  the  entire  circuit 
royal  magnificence  prevailed.  So  elegant  was  both  material  and  work¬ 
manship  that  involuntarily  the  eyes  of  all  who  saw  it  were  ravished  by 
the  rare  beauty  and  never  wearied  of  the  sight.  There  were  marble 
fishpools  filled  with  limpid  waters;  there  were  birds  of  many  kinds, 
unknown  to  our  part  of  the  world.  These  were  larger  than  those  fa¬ 
miliar  to  us,  their  forms  were  unusual,  their  colors  strange,  and  their 
songs  different.  The  food  of  each  varied  according  to  its  species  and  was 
suited  to  its  own  kind. 

This  term  is  an  Arabic  loan-word  from  the  Latin  name  for  fortress,  castnun.  It 
acquired  a  new  dignity  in  becoming  identified  witli  a  “palace.” 


KING  AMAURY  I 


320 

From  this  court  the  chief  eunuch  led  them  still  further  on,  where 
they  saw  buildings  which  surpassed  in  elegance  those  recently  seen,  just 
as  the  latter  had  seemed  more  splendid  than  common  and  ordinary 
structures.  Here  was  an  amazing  variety  of  animals  such  as  the  playful 
hand  of  the  painter  or  the  imagination  of  the  poet  loves  to  picture,  or 
such  as  the  mind  sees  in  the  visions  of  the  night — creatures  such  as  are 
often  found  in  the  countries  of  the  East  and  the  South  but  which  are 
never  seen  and  rarely  heard  of  in  the  West.  Undoubtedly  it  was  from 
these  places  that  our  Solinus  derived  the  account  contained  in  his  Poly- 
hist  or 

19-  The  treaty  is  concludedy  and  in  confirmation  thereojy  the 
caliph  gives  his  right  hand  to  Hugh  of  Caesarea, 

After  passing  through  many  winding  passages  and  devious  ways, 
whose  wonders  might  well  detain  even  the  busiest  of  men  in  contem¬ 
plation,  they  reached  the  palace  itself.  Here  still  larger  groups  of  armed 
men  and  throngs  of  attending  satellites  testified  by  their  appearance 
and  numbers  to  the  incomparable  glory  of  their  lord.  The  very  aspect 
of  the  place  gave  indisputable  proof  of  the  opulence  and  extraordinary 
riches  of  the  monarch. 

They  approached  and  were  admitted  to  the  inner  part  of  the  palace. 
Here  the  sultan  showed  the  usual  reverence  to  his  lord,  according  to 
custom  3  twice  he  prostrated  himself  on  the  ground  and  humbly  of¬ 
fered  as  to  a  divinity  due  worship  and  a  kind  of  abject  adoration.  Then 
for  a  third  time  bowing  to  the  ground,  he  laid  down  the  sword  which 
he  wore  suspended  from  his  neck.  Thereupon  the  curtains  embroidered 
with  pearls  and  gold,  which  hung  down  and  hid  the  throne,  were 
drawn  aside  with  marvellous  rapidity,  and  the  caliph  was  revealed 
with  face  unveiled.  Seated  on  a  throne  of  gold,  surrounded  by  some 
of  his  privy  counsellors  and  eunuchs,  he  presented  an  appearance 
more  than  regal. 

With  all  reverence,  the  sultan  approached  him  and,  humbly  imprint- 

Solinus  does  not  make  special  mention  of  many  birds  in  his  discussion  of  Egypt, 
though  he  does  mention  animals.  William’s  statement  indicates  a  general  familiarity 
with  the  whole  work. 

This  was  Caliph  Adid,  who  reigned  1160—1171.  He  was  a  cousin,  not  a  son,  of 
the  previous  caliph,  Faiz,  and  was  about  sixteen  or  seventeen  years  old  at  this  time. 
William  derived  this  account  of  the  palace  and  its  ceremonial  directly  from  Hugh  of 
Caesarea.  The  contrast  in  manners  described  in  this  chapter  suggests  that  the  Latins  in 
the  East  had  not  yet  lost  all  their  Western  ways. 


KING  AMAURY  I 


321 

ing  a  kiss  upon  the  foot  of  the  seated  monarch,  stated  the  reason  for 
the  envoys’  visit,  the  provisions  of  the  treaty,  and  the  urgent  needs  of 
the  kingdom.  He  explained  that  an  enormous  hostile  force  was  stand¬ 
ing  in  the  very  heart  of  the  empire  and  in  a  few  words  stated  what  was 
asked  of  the  caliph  and  what  would  be  rendered  by  the  king  in  return. 
To  this  the  caliph,  with  cheerful  and  undisturbed  countenance,  very  af¬ 
fably  responded  that  he  was  ready  to  fulfil  all  the  stipulations  of  the 
treaty  that  had  been  arranged  and  accepted  by  both  parties,  and  that 
with  a  most  liberal  interpretation,  because  of  his  own  regard  for  the 
king. 

The  Christians  then  requested  that  he  confirm  this  statement  with 
his  own  hand  as  the  king  had  done.  At  first,  the  courtiers  who  sur¬ 
rounded  him,  as  well  as  his  counsellors  and  gentlemen  of  the  chamber, 
on  whom  rested  the  responsibility  of  the  royal  plans,  were  shocked  at 
the  suggestion,  as  a  thing  utterly  beyond  comprehension.  Finally,  how¬ 
ever,  after  long  deliberation,  at  the  persistent  urging  of  the  sultan,  he 
very  reluctantly  extended  his  hand  covered.  Then,  to  the  consternation 
of  the  Egyptians,  who  were  amazed  that  anyone  should  talk  so  freely 
to  their  supreme  lord,  Hugh  of  Caesarea  said  to  him :  ^^Sire,  good  faith 
has  nothing  to  conceal,  but  when  princes  bind  themselves  together  in 
true  loyalty  everything  ought  to  be  openj  and  everything  which  is  in¬ 
serted  in  good  faith  in  any  pact  should  be  confirmed  or  refused  with 
frank  sincerity.  Therefore,  unless  you  offer  your  hand  bared  we  shall 
be  obliged  to  think  that,  on  your  part,  there  is  some  reservation  or 
some  lack  of  sincerity.” 

Finally,  with  extreme  unwillingness,  as  if  it  detracted  from  his 
majesty,  yet  with  a  slight  smile  which  greatly  aggrieved  the  Egyptians, 
he  put  his  uncovered  hand  into  that  of  Hugh.  He  repeated,  almost 
syllable  by  syllable,  the  words  of  Hugh  as  he  dictated  the  formula  of 
the  treaty  and  swore  that  he  would  keep  the  stipulations  thereof,  ^fin 
good  faith,  without  fraud  or  evil  intent.”  The  caliph  was,  as  Hugh 
reported  to  us,  a  young  man  of  an  extremely  generous  disposition 
whose  first  beard  was  just  appearing;  he  was  tall,  of  swarthy  com¬ 
plexion  and  good  frame.  He  had  a  large  number  of  wives. 

After  dismissing  the  envoys,  he  sent  them  gifts  in  token  of  his  royal 
liberality.  These  both  in  quantity  and  kind  recommended  the  royal 
donor  greatly  to  the  ambassadors,  who  left  the  princely  presence  in 
high  delight  and  returned  with  joy  to  their  own  land. 


322 


KING  AMAURY  I 


20.  Exflains  why  the  frince  of  Egypt  is  called  mulene. 

Having  described  the  magnificence  of  the  caliph,  according  to  the  re¬ 
ports  of  those  who  witnessed  it  with  their  own  eyes,  we  shall  now 
proceed  to  tell  about  the  title  of  his  high  estate,  his  origin,  and  his 
progress,  as  far  as  is  known  to  us.  This  information  is  derived  from 
studying  histories  of  olden  times  and  also  from  the  trustworthy  ac¬ 
counts  of  many  persons.  For  without  the  aid  of  history  it  would  be 
impossible  to  inform  the  reader  in  regard  to  these  details. 

The  prince  of  Egypt  is  known  by  his  people  under  two  names.  He  is 
called  the  caliph,  which,  being  interpreted,  is  the  successor  or  heir,  be¬ 
cause  he  occupies  the  place  of  their  supreme  prophet  and  holds  the 
succession  by  hereditary  right.  He  is  also  called  mulene  \m(iwlana\ 
which  means,  our  lord.^^  The  origin  of  this  second  name  seems  to  date 
from  the  days  of  the  pharaoh,  when  the  famous  Joseph  bought  the 
entire  country  of  Egypt  and  that  people  were  forced  by  dire  famine 
to  sell  their  possessions.  Joseph  made  these  lands  and  all  the  inhabi¬ 
tants  thereof  subject  to  the  pharaoh,  from  the  uttermost  boundaries  of 
Egypt  even  to  its  remotest  frontiers.  He  said  to  those  who  tilled  the 
fields,  ^^You  shall  give  a  fifth  part  to  the  king,  but  the  remaining  four 
parts  I  permit  you  to  keep  for  planting,  that  you  may  provide  for 
your  households,  your  homes,  and  your  children.”  First,  he  bought 
their  possessions  and  then  their  persons.  Hence  it  is  that  the  Egyptians 
are  held  to  their  lord  by  a  stricter  bond  than  is  the  case  with  inhabitants 
of  other  lands,  since  he  bought  them  and  their  possessions  with  a  price. 
This  also  explains  why  they  are  bound  to  him  in  a  servile  capacity  of 
the  humblest  order. 

Thus  through  the  extreme  solicitude  of  this  best  of  governors  the 
Egyptians  became  serfs  and  ever  after  called  their  prince  by  that  re¬ 
vered  name  mawlana.  This  condition  originated  in  the  days  of  the 
pharaohs.  It  prevailed  through  the  epoch  of  the  Ptolemies  and  con¬ 
tinued  through  the  rule  of  the  Romans,  who  reduced  the  land,  as  was 
their  custom  with  other  conquests,  to  the  status  of  a  province.  A  trace 

This  title  occurs  in  an  inscription  recently  discovered  under  a  coat  of  plaster  in 
the  Aqsa  mosque  in  Jerusalem.  It  is  there  applied  to  Mustansir,  caliph  1035—1094. 
William  may  well  have  read  that  inscription  (see  S.  A.  S.  Husseini,  ‘‘Inscription  of  the 
Khalif  El-Mustansir  Billah  458  A.H.  [=  A.D.  1065],’^  Palestine,  Department  of  Antiq¬ 
uities,  Quarterly^  IX  [1942],  77—80). 


KING  AMAURY  I 


323 

of  that  old  status  still  lingers  in  the  fact  that  the  prince  of  Egypt  is 
absolutely  free  from  responsibility  and  knows  nothing  of  tumults  and 
seditions.  He  devotes  himself  entirely  to  the  enjoyment  of  leisure  and 
luxury,  while  a  governor,  like  Joseph  of  old,  administers  all  the  affairs 
of  the  realm,  wielding  the  power  of  the  sword  and  executing  justice  in 
the  place  of  his  lord.  This  governor  is  called  the  sultan,  and  this  was 
the  office  held  by  that  Shawar  of  whom  we  have  so  often  spoken. 

21.  Relates  why  he  is  called  calif  h  and  why  he  is  the  adversary 
of  the  caliph  of  Bagdad. 

The  reason  for  the  title  caliph  is  as  follows:  Muhammad,  their 
prophet,  or  rather  their  destroyer,  who  was  the  first  to  draw  the  peoples 
of  the  East  to  this  kind  of  superstition,  had  as  his  immediate  successor 
one  of  his  disciples  named  Abu-Bakr.  The  latter  was  succeeded  in  the 
kingdom  by  Omar,  son  of  Khattab,  who  was  likewise  followed  by 
Uthman,  and  he  by  Ali,  son  of  Abu-Talib.  All  these  prophets  were 
called  caliphs,  as  were  also  all  who  followed  them  later,  because  they 
succeeded  their  famous  master  and  were  his  heirs.  But  the  fifth  in  the 
succession  from  Muhammad,  namely  Ali,  was  more  warlike  than  his 
predecessors  and  had  far  greater  experience  in  military  matters  than 
his  contemporaries.  He  was,  moreover,  a  cousin  of  Muhammad  him¬ 
self.^  ^  He  considered  it  unfitting  that  he  should  be  called  the  successor 
of  his  cousin  and  not  rather  a  great  prophet  himself,  much  greater,  in 
fact,  than  Muhammad.  The  fact  that  in  his  own  estimation  and  that 
of  many  others  he  was  greater  did  not  satisfy  him  j  he  desired  that  this 
be  generally  acknowledged.  Accordingly,  he  reviled  Muhammad  and 
spread  among  the  people  a  story  to  the  effect  that  the  Angel  Gabriel, 
the  propounder  of  the  law,  had  actually  been  sent  to  him  from  on  high 
but  by  mistake  had  conferred  the  supreme  honor  on  Muhammad.  For 
this  fault,  he  said,  the  angel  had  been  severely  blamed  by  the  Lord. 
Although  these  claims  seemed  false  to  many  from  whose  traditions 
they  differed  greatly,  yet  others  believed  them,  and  so  a  schism  devel¬ 
oped  among  that  people  which  has  lasted  even  to  the  present.  Some 
maintain  that  Muhammad  is  the  greater  and,  in  fact,  the  greatest  of  all 
prophets,  and  these  are  called  in  their  own  tongue,  Sunnites  j  others 
declare  that  Ali  alone  is  the  prophet  of  God,  and  they  are  called  Shiites. 

Ali  was  cousin  and  son-in-law  of  Muhammad. 


KING  AMAURY  I 


324 

The  above-named  Ali  was  slain,  however,  and  the  rival  faction 
gained  the  supremacy.  The  kingdom  of  the  Orient,  therefore,  was 
under  the  sway  of  the  successors  of  Muhammad,  and  they,  holding  the 
power,  oppressed  all  who  held  the  opposite  opinion.  In  the  two  hun¬ 
dred  and  eighty-sixth  year  after  the  rule  of  the  aforesaid  seducer,"^ 
there  arose  a  certain  nobleman,  by  name  Abdallah  [Ubaydullah]  son 
of  Muhammad,  son  of  Japhar  [Jafar],  son  of  Muhammad,  son  of  Ali, 
son  of  Hussen  [Husayn],  son  of  the  greater  Ali,  of  whom  we  have 
been  speaking.  He  went  out  from  the  city  of  Salamia  in  the  Orient  and 
crossed  over  to  Africa.  After  conquering  all  the  lands  of  that  region, 
he  called  himself  Almahadi  [al-Mahdi] ,  which  means  the  Leveller,^® 
that  is,  one  who  has  reduced  all  things  to  peace  and  made  the  ways 
smooth  and  without  obstacle  for  the  people.  He  built  the  great  city 
Mahadia  [Mahadiyah],  so  called  from  his  own  namej  this  he  in¬ 
tended  should  become  the  capital  of  his  dominions,  a  metropolis  sur¬ 
passing  all  others.  He  built  a  fleet,  seized  Sicily,  and  laid  waste  certain 
parts  of  Italy.  He  was  the  first  of  all  his  line  after  Ali,  his  ancestor, 
who  ventured  to  call  himself  caliph  j  not  that  he  considered  himself  the 
successor  of  Muhammad,  whom  he  execrated,  but  rather  of  Ali,  that 
greatest  and  most  famous  prophet  from  whose  stock  he  was  descended, 
as  has  been  said.  Indeed,  he  even  dared  to  hurl  curses  openly  against 
Muhammad  and  his  successors  and  to  establish  another  ritual  and 
another  form  of  prayer. 

One  of  his  descendants,  Abu-Tamin,  surnamed  Muizz,  subjugated 
Egypt  through  Jawhar,  the  commander  in  chief  of  his  army.  The  latter 
also  built  Cairo  which,  being  interpreted,  is  the  Conqueror,^'^  because 
it  was  destined  to  be  the  residence  of  his  great  and  supreme  master,  the 
conqueror  of  all  things. 

This  caliph  left  Caroca  [Kairawan]  In  the  province  of  Africa,  where 
four  of  his  predecessors  had  lived,  went  to  Egypt,  and  made  the  city 
just  mentioned  the  seat  of  his  kingdom.  From  that  time  until  now 


The  year  286  A.H.  extended  from  January  16,  899,  to  January  6,  900  a.d.  There 
is  considerable  variation  among  Arabic  scholars  as  to  the  correct  genealogy  of  All’s 
descendants,  there  being  at  least  eight  different  lists  (see  P,  K.  Hitti,  History  of  the 
Arabsy  p.  618). 

The  translation  should  be  “the  Guided  One.”  Professor  Hitti  believes  that  Wil¬ 
liam  here  mistook  the  Arabic  word  for  another  which  is  almost  identical  and  has  the 
meaning  assigned  by  him.  Evidently  William  knew  his  Arabic  almost  too  well. 

Hitti  prefers  “Triumphant”  as  the  translation  of  the  word  (see  Hitti,  Arabs, 
p.  619,  note  2). 


KING  AMAURY  I 


325 

there  has  never  ceased  to  be,  ruling  in  Egypt,  a  rival  to  the  caliph  of 
the  East,  who  had  been  supreme  for  so  many  years,  a  rival  ever  striving 
to  be  on  a  par  with  him — nay,  even  claiming  to  be  his  superior.^® 

If  anyone  wishes  to  know  more  of  these  matters,  he  may  read  the 
history  which  we  have  written  with  great  care  from  the  Arabic  sources 
at  the  instance  and  command  of  King  Amaury.  It  deals  with  the  princes 
of  the  East  and  their  acts  from  the  time  of  the  seducer  Muhammad  j 
that  is,  it  covers  a  period  of  five  hundred  and  seventy-seven  years  to  the 
present,  which  is  the  year  1182  of  the  Incarnation  of  our  Lord.^^ 


22.  The  king  builds  a  bridge  over  the  Nile,  Shirkuh  descends 
ufon  the  island -y  the  king  attacks  him. 

When  the  treaty  had  been  renewed  and  reduced  to  terms  satisfac¬ 
tory  to  both  parties,  as  has  been  related,  all  girded  themselves  as  with 
one  accord  for  the  work  planned,  prepared  to  attack  the  enemy  and 
drive  him  out  of  the  entire  realm.  Meanwhile,  the  approach  of  night 
afforded  an  excuse  for  resting.  In  the  morning  they  found  the  situation 
somewhat  changed.  During  the  night  Shirkuh  had  arrived  and  en¬ 
camped  on  the  other  bank  of  the  same  river  opposite  our  army.  The 
king,  thereupon,  caused  boats  to  be  brought  and  trunks  of  the  palm 
tree,  which  is  native  there,  and  had  a  bridge  constructed.  The  vessels 
were  joined  together  two  by  two  and  made  stable  by  anchors  j  then 
the  beams  were  laid  upon  them  and  covered  with  earth.  Finally  the 
bridge  was  fortified  with  wooden  towers,  equipped  with  engines.  The 
work  was  continued  for  several  days  until  the  middle  of  the  river  was 
reached,  when  fear  of  the  enemy  prevented  the  extension  of  the  work 
to  the  opposite  bank.  Here,  then,  for  a  month  or  longer,  all  actual  en¬ 
counter  was  suspended,  since  the  Christians  were  unable  to  cross  the 

The  Fatimid  caliphate  was  brought  to  an  end  by  Saladin  in  1171,  as  William 
himself  relates  later.  William^s  definite  statement  that  there  was  still  a  caliph  at  Cairo 
when  he  was  writing  would  indicate  that  this  passage  was  written  before  William  had 
learned  of  the  change,  perhaps  before  1175,  and  is  here  incorporated  from  the  Gesta 
orientalium  frincifum. 

This  statement  of  time  is  of  exceptional  interest.  The  material  of  the  two  pre¬ 
ceding  chapters  was  obviously  drawn  from  his  History  of  the  Princes  of  the  Orient. 
Whether  he  took  it  as  he  had  originally  written  it  or  summarized  a  portion  of  it  is  not 
clear.  The  statement  referring  the  reader  to  that  other  work  is  an  indication  that  he 
had  excerpted  the  material  immediately  preceding.  The  year  577  A.H.  extended  from 
May  16,  II 81,  to  May  6,  1182,  and  its  identification  with  the  Christian  year  1182  is 
therefore  limited  to  the  first  four  months  of  that  year.  He  was  thus  engaged  in  the 
revision  of  this  book  during  those  months. 


KING  AMAURY  I 


326 

river  and  the  enemy^  on  their  part,  did  not  dare  to  venture  far,  lest  we 
fall  on  their  rear.  This  was  the  situation  in  the  vicinity  of  Cairo.  In 
the  interim,  Shirkuh  had  sent  a  party  of  men  to  seize,  if  possible,  a 
neighboring  island  which  abounded  in  all  kinds  of  supplies,  for  he 
wished  to  prevent  the  Christians  from  raiding  it  at  some  future  time. 
This  undertaking  was  successfully  accomplished. 

As  soon  as  the  king  learned  that  the  enemy  had  seized  the  island, 
he  sent  thither  Milon  de  Plancy  and  Chemel  [Kamil],  a  son  of  the 
sultan,  with  a  force  of  knights.  They  found  that  the  Turks  were  already 
in  possession  and  were  treating  the  inhabitants  most  shamefully.  An  at¬ 
tack  was  immediately  made,  and  a  battle  ensued  which  was  waged 
very  fiercely  on  both  sides.  Finally,  by  the  help  of  God,  the  Christians 
prevailed  j  they  forced  the  enemy  headlong  into  the  river  near  by, 
where  those  who  escaped  the  sword  were  drowned  in  the  raging  waters. 
Five  hundred  of  the  enemy  perished  that  day  from  various  mishaps. 
When  the  report  of  this  battle  reached  Shirkuh,  he  was  overwhelmed 
with  dismay  and  began  to  entertain  grave  doubts  about  the  ultimate 
success  of  his  undertaking. 

This  was  the  state  of  affairs  when  certain  leading  men  of  the  king¬ 
dom  arrived  at  the  camp,  namely  Humphrey  of  Toron,  the  royal  con¬ 
stable,  and  Philip  of  Nablus.  They  had  not  marched  out  with  the  king 
but  had  remained  behind  for  private  reasons.  As  swiftly  as  possible, 
however,  they  followed  the  army  and  joined  our  camp.  The  cohorts 
greeted  them  with  demonstrations  of  great  joy,  for  they  were  brave 
men,  valiant  in  arms  and  trained  from  their  earliest  years  in  the  art  of 
war. 

A  council  was  at  once  held  to  determine  what  plan  of  procedure 
should  be  adopted.  It  was  finally  decided  by  unanimous  consent  that, 
in  the  silence  of  night,  without  the  knowledge  of  the  enemy,  the  entire 
fleet  should  be  conducted  to  an  island  about  eight  miles  below  the  camp. 
About  the  first  watch,  the  whole  army  was  to  be  ferried  across  the 
river  3  then,  during  the  night,  they  were  to  fall  stealthily  upon  the  foe 
while  off  guard  and  do  all  the  damage  possible.  It  was  ordered  that 
this  plan  be  carried  into  execution.  The  fleet  immediately  descended  to 
the  place  decided  upon,  without  discovery  by  the  enemy.  The  army  in 
utter  silence  followed.  They  were  quickly  ferried  across  and  seized 
the  island. 


KING  AMAURY  I 


327 

While  they  were  trying  to  cross  the  farther  channel  of  the  river, 
however,  in  the  same  way,  according  to  their  orders,  a  whirlwind  sud¬ 
denly  arose  which  prevented  them  from  carrying  out  their  purpose. 
They  were  obliged  to  make  camp,  therefore,  on  that  part  of  the  island 
which  faced  the  farther  shore.  A  part  of  the  force  was  left  behind,  how¬ 
ever,  to  finish  the  bridge  and  guard  it  after  its  completion.  In  command 
of  this  detachment  was  Hugh  dTbelin,  a  valiant  and  powerful  knight, 
who,  as  has  been  said,  had  married  the  divorced  wife  of  King  Amaury. 

23.  The  island  is  described;  the  names  and  number  of  the  mouths 
by  which  the  Nile  enters  the  sea  are  given.  The  Christians 
drive  out  the  foe  and  take  f  os  session  of  the  island,  Shirkuh 
flees  into  the  desei't. 

The  island  now  under  discussion  is  called  by  the  natives  Mahalla.  It 
has  a  very  productive  soil  and  abounds  in  all  good  things.  The  waters 
of  the  Nile  separate  at  this  point  and  form  this  island,  and  the  branches 
which  part  here  do  not  again  join  the  main  stream  until  they  reach  the 
sea.  Even  then  the  waters  do  not  unite  but  mingle  with  the  sea  through 
four  separate  mouths.  The  first  branch,  which  faces  our  Syria,  flows 
into  the  sea  between  two  ancient  maritime  cities,  Tanis  and  Farama.  It. 
flows  very  close  to  one  of  these  cities  in  its  passage,  even  laving  its 
buildings,  but  is  about  three  or  four  miles  distant  from  the  other.  The 
second  arm  joins  the  sea  at  Damietta,  an  old  and  noble  cityj  the  third, 
at  Sturio.  The  fourth  flows  into  the  sea  at  Rosetta,  which  is  about  four 
or  five  miles  from  Alexandria.  We  have  discovered  no  other  mouths  of 
this  river,  although  careful  search  and  inquiry  have  been  made.  This 
we  regard  as  singular,  for  the  ancients  call  the  Nile  the  sevenfold 
flowing,^®  because  it  entered  the  sea  by  seven  mouths.  The  only  expla¬ 
nation  which  occurs  to  us  is  that,  through  successive  ages,  the  face  of  the 
country  has  altered  and  the  river  has  changed  its  channel,  as  has  hap¬ 
pened  in  the  case  of  so  many  other  rivers.  Possibly,  however,  the  peo¬ 
ple  of  that  earlier  epoch  did  not  understand  the  truth  of  the  mattery 
or  perchance  the  river,  swollen  by  more  than  its  usual  complement, 
overflowed  and,  at  the  time  of  its  annual  increase,  formed  other  chan¬ 
nels  besides  these  four,  which  the  sea  abandoned  when  the  water  again 
subsided  within  its  bed.  If  any  still  exist,  we  have  not  counted  them 

Ovid  Meta.  i.  422. 


KING  AMAURY  I 


328 

as  branches  because  they  are  not  always  filled  but,  like  torrents,  are 
full  only  at  certain  seasons.®^ 

Although  the  island  had  been  taken,  the  lesser  channel  still  re¬ 
mained.  As  the  day  grew  bright,  the  enemy,  roused  from  sleep,  dis¬ 
covered  that  the  foe  had  departed  and  the  fleet  had  sailed  away.  They 
flew  to  arms,  fearing  a  sudden  attack  by  the  Christians.  As  they  hur¬ 
riedly  advanced,  extending  their  lines  along  the  river,  they  saw  that 
our  forces  had  seized  the  island  and,  by  introducing  the  fleet,  were 
asserting  their  right  to  the  channel  yet  to  be  crossed.  Accordingly  they 
placed  their  camp  opposite,  somewhat  back  from  the  shore,  although 
in  this  position  they  had  no  free  access  to  the  river  but  were  obliged  to 
go  farther  downstream  even  to  water  their  horses. 

The  Christians  had  determined  to  try  their  fortune  to  the  utmost 
on  the  following  day  and  to  open  a  path  by  the  sword,  if  necessary. 
But  during  the  night,  unknown  to  them,  the  infidels  departed.  When 
morning  came  and  our  army  saw  that  the  enemy  had  left,  they  quickly 
crossed  the  river  and  hastened  in  pursuit.  That  the  cavalry  might  ad¬ 
vance  more  rapidly,  the  foot  soldiers  were  left  behind,  and  the  king- 
set  out  accompanied  only  by  a  few  knights.  He  dispatched  Hugh 
dTbelin,  however,  and  Kamil,  the  sultanas  son,  with  a  large  force  of 
cavalry,  both  Christian  and  Egyptian,  to  protect  Cairo  and  the  bridge 
which  the  soldiers  had  built  from  sudden  hostile  attack.  The  towers 
and  all  the  fortifications  of  that  noble  city  were  put  in  charge  of  our 
people,  and  the  palace  of  the  caliph,  heretofore  unknown  to  the  Chris¬ 
tians,  became  very  familiar  to  them,  for  the  lord  himself  and  his 
entire  household  relied  for  safety  entirely  on  the  king’s  forces.  Then 
there  was  revealed  to  the  Christians  that  holy  of  holies  which  had  been 
hidden  from  the  world,  and  the  inmost  precincts  whose  wonders  were 
once  familiar  to  only  the  few  were  disclosed. 

The  king  also  sent  Gerard  de  Pougy  and  another  son  of  the  sultan, 
called  Mahadan,  to  the  farther  bank  of  the  river,  again  with  a  force 
made  up  of  both  nationalities.  They  were  ordered  to  check  the  foe,  if 
perchance  he  should  attempt  to  cross  the  river.  The  king  himself,  leav¬ 
ing  behind  most  of  the  impedimenta,  as  we  have  said,  then  set  out  in 
pursuit  of  the  foe,  against  the  current  of  the  stream  j  for  the  formation 

William  here,  as  in  a  number  of  other  places,  refuses  to  accept  the  testimony  of 
books,  however  ancient,  if  they  are  at  variance  with  observed  fact. 


KING  AMAURY  I 


329 

of  the  country  was  such  that  the  enemy’s  route  could  be  traced  without 
difficulty. 

24*  The  land  of  Egypt  and  its  characteristic  features. 

The  entire  land  of  Egypt  from  the  most  remote  frontiers,  where 
it  is  said  to  border  on  the  country  of  the  Ethiopians,  lies  between  two 
sandy  deserts,  doomed  to  be  infertile  forever.  The  land  itself  neither 
knows  nor  produces  fruitful  crops  of  any  kind  except  as  it  is  rendered 
fertile  at  fixed  seasons  by  the  inundation  of  the  Nile  when  in  flood. 
It  is  only  where  the  nature  of  the  adjacent  land  permits  that  the  river 
makes  the  soil  fit  to  bring  forth  crops.  For  wherever  it  finds  a  level 
surface  in  the  vicinity,  the  river  spreads  freely  over  a  wide  area  and 
renders  it  productive.  The  wider  the  distribution  of  the  waters,  the 
more  extensive  is  the  country  which  thus  becomes  arable. 

Beyond  Cairo  toward  the  sea,  where  the  country  is  very  flat,  the 
waters  have  a  wider  range.  Hence  this  district  is  extremely  productive 
throughout  the  wide  extent  irrigated  by  the  Nile.  The  river  thus  in¬ 
sures  very  abundant  crops  and  also  extends  the  limits  of  the  kingdom. 
From  the  fortress  called  Phacusa,  which  faces  Syria,  even  to  Alexan¬ 
dria,  which  borders  on  the  Libyan  desert  and  is  the  last  city  of  Egypt, 
the  Nile  carries  the  blessings  of  fertility  and  cultivation  for  a  hundred 
miles  and  more.  Above  Cairo,  however,  until  Chus,  the  southernmost 
city  of  Egypt,  is  reached — 2.  place  which  is  said  to  abut  on  the  kingdom 
of  the  Ethiopians — ^the  country  is  shut  in  by  the  encroaching  sand  hills. 
Consequently,  only  here  and  there  does  the  river  stretch  out  to  the 
width  of  seven  or  eight  miles  and  generally  only  to  four  or  five,  some¬ 
times  on  both  sides  and  again  only  on  one,  according  to  the  extent  of 
the  flood.  In  this  way  it  contracts  or  expands  the  lateral  extent  of  the 
kingdom,  for  the  places  not  irrigated  by  the  river  are  doomed,  as  has 
been  said,  to  perpetual  sterility,  because  of  the  intense  heat  of  the  sun’s 
rays.  This  upper  region  is  called  in  the  Egyptian  tongue  Seith.  As  yet 
we  have  been  unable  to  find  the  origin  of  this  name.  Legend  says, 
however,  that  in  very  early  times  there  was  an  ancient  city  in  this 
upper  part  of  Egypt  called  Sais.  Our  Plato,  in  the  T imaeusy  mentions 
the  city  through  his  disciple,  Critias,  who  introduces  Solon,  a  man  of 
great  authority.  As  better  evidence  of  this,  it  seems  well  to  give  his 
very  words  that  nothing  authoritative  may  be  lacking.  ^^There  is,”  he 


KING  AMAURY  I 


330 

saySj  part  of  Egypt  called  the  Delta,  at  the  extremity  of  which  the 
waters  of  the  Nile  divide.  Near  this  place,  there  was  once  a  great  city, 
Sais  by  name,  which  was  governed  according  to  an  ancient  custom, 
called  the  Satyran  law.^-  The  Emperor  Amasis  was  originally  from 
this  city,”  etc. 

Still  another  part  of  this  country  belongs  to  Egypt  ^  it  lies  a  day^s 
journey  from  Cairo,  across  uninhabitable  land.  This  region,  thanks  to 
the  benefits  received  from  the  river  through  some  of  its  branches,  has 
excellent,  fertile  soil  and  rejoices  in  luxuriant  fields  and  vineyards. 
The  Egyptians  call  this  part  of  the  country  Phium  [Philae] . 

Traditions  of  olden  times  say  that  this  was  formerly  barren  land 
which  had  never  experienced  the  plough,  but  had  been  left  without 
cultivation  and  care  from  the  beginning  of  the  world,  just  like  the 
other  portions  of  this  same  desert.  But  Joseph,  that  wise  governor  of 
Egypt,  ever  alert  to  discern  anything  that  might  be  turned  to  advan¬ 
tage,  investigated  the  location  of  the  place  and  perceived  that  this 
region  was  lower  than  the  surrounding  land.  He  saw  that  if  certain 
low  mounds  which  lay  between  the  habitable  land  and  this  part  of  the 
desert  were  removed  this  locality  also  might  readily  receive  the  benefit 
of  the  waters.  He  built  dykes,  levelled  off  the  ground  between,  and 
let  in  the  overflow  of  the  Nile.  The  water  was  conducted  through 
ditches  already  prepared  for  it  and  produced  a  fecundity  hitherto  un¬ 
known  there. 

Although  we  do  not  know  its  ancient  name,  we  believe  that  in  early 
times  this  region  was  called  the  Thebaiad.  From  here  is  said  to  have 
come  the  legend  of  the  holy  Thebans  who  were  crowned  with  martyr¬ 
dom  at  Agaunum  under  Diocletian  and  Maximianus  Augustus,  and 
whose  first  martyr,  we  read,  was  Mauritius.  There  is  another  proof, 
alsoj  the  best  opium  found  anywhere  grows  there  and  is  called  by 
physicians  Theban.^^ 

Now  the  land  of  Goshen  which  Joseph  is  said  to  have  given  to  his 
brethren  is  in  that  part  of  Egypt  which  faces  Syria,  according  to  the 
description  given  in  the  book  of  Genesis,  as  the  diligent  reader  may 
easily  discover  for  himself.  This  region,  on  the  contrary,  which  faces 
nearer  Libya  is  situated  at  the  other  extremity  of  Egypt  and  is  on  the 

This  quotation  is  from  the  Latin  translation  of  the  Timaeus  by  Chalcidius  and 
includes  a  mistranslation  of  the  name  of  the  law. 

The  use  of  opium  by  physicians  of  the  twelfth  century  is  an  interesting”  item  in 
medical  history. 


KING  AMAURY  I  331 

farther  bank  of  the  river.  It  is  far  from  being  of  small  extent  j  indeed, 
it  is  said  to  include  within  its  boundaries  three  hundred  and  sixty-six 
cities  and  villages. 

By  reason  of  the  nature  of  the  country,  therefore,  the  kingdom  was 
so  narrow,  as  we  have  said,  that  it  was  impossible  to  turn  either  to  the 
right  or  left.  Constant  information  of  the  enemy^s  progress  was  brought 
to  the  king  and  the  sultan  by  scouts.  The  pursuit  was  continued  for 
three  days,  and  on  the  fourth,  which  was  the  Sabbath  before  the  Lord^s 
day  when  “Rejoice,  Jerusalem,”  is  sung  in  the  church,  the  foe  was 
reported  to  be  in  the  vicinity.®^ 

25*  A  battle  involving  great  feril  to  both  sides  is  fought  in  the 
desert  betzveen  the  king  and  Shirkuh, 

A  COUNCIL,  necessarily  short,  was  immediately  held,  for  it  was  evi¬ 
dent  that  there  was  need  of  wise  advice  and  a  bold  spirit  and  the  press¬ 
ing  emergency  did  not  admit  of  long  delay.  Battle  was  decided  upon 
by  unanimous  consent,  and  the  decision  that  the  matter  must  be  settled 
by  the  sword  was  greeted  with  applause.  The  number  of  mailed  war¬ 
riors  in  the  two  hosts,  however,  was  very  unequal.  Shirkuh  had  twelve 
thousand  Turks,  of  whom  nine  thousand  wore  the  breastplate  and 
helmet  and  the  other  three  thousand  used  only  bows  and  arrows.  He 
had  in  addition  ten  or  eleven  thousand  Arabs  who,  according  to  their 
custom,  fought  with  lances  only.  The  Christians,  on  the  other  hand, 
had  barely  three  hundred  and  seventy-four  knights  besides  the  worth¬ 
less  and  effeminate  Egyptians,  who  were  a  hindrance  and  a  burden 
rather  than  a  help.  They  had  also  some  light-armed  cavalry  called 
Turcopoles,  but  I  do  not  know  in  what  number.  Many  have  told  me, 
however,  that  in  the  great  conflict  of  that  day  these  forces  were,  for  the 
most  part,  useless. 

As  soon  as  the  two  hostile  armies  became  aware  of  each  other^s 
proximity,  both  drew  up  their  forces  in  battle  array,  as  the  occasion 
seemed  to  demand,  arranged  their  battalions,  and  displayed  their 
weapons.  Veterans,  with  the  wisdom  obtained  from  experience  in 
former  conflicts,  exhorted  the  rest;  they  instructed  the  recruits  and 
roused  their  courage  by  promising  victory  and  immortal  glory,  the 
fruit  of  success. 

^^Laetare  Hierusctlein**  was  sung  on  the  fourth  Sunday  of  Lent,  hence  on  March 
18,  1167. 


KING  AMAURY  I 


332 

The  field  where  the  engagement  was  to  take  place  was  on  the  bor¬ 
derland  between  the  fertile  country  and  the  desert.  The  ground  here 
was  uneven,  broken  by  hills  of  sand  and  depressions,  so  that  those 
coming  or  going  could  not  be  seen  from  a  distance.  The  place  was  called 
Beben,  which  means  the  Gates,  because  the  passage  between  the  hills 
on  either  side  is  very  narrow  at  this  point.  It  is  ten  miles  from  Lamonia, 
hence  this  engagement  is  sometimes  known  as  the  battle  of  Lamonia. 

With  energetic  foresight,  the  enemy  had  already  seized  the  hills 
on  both  right  and  left  and  had  drawn  up  their  forces  in  battle  array. 
The  rising  ground  and  the  yielding  nature  of  the  sand  made  it  diffi¬ 
cult  for  our  men  to  approach  with  a  rush  igainst  this  position.  The 
cohort  commanded  by  Shirkuh  occupied  the  center,  and  the  others 
were  drawn  up  on  either  side.  The  conflict  soon  reached  the  point 
where  fighting  at  close  quarters  became  necessary.  The  king’s  division 
advanced  valiantly  as  with  one  thought  j  they  overwhelmed  Shirkuh’s 
cohorts  and  put  them  to  the  sword.  Shirkuh  himself  fled,  with  the  foe 
in  close  pursuit. 

Hugh  of  Caesarea  attacked  the  division  commanded  by  Saladin, 
Shirkuh’s  nephew;  he  was,  however,  deserted  by  his  men  and,  conse¬ 
quently,  was  defeated  and  taken  prisoner.  A  large  number  of  his  troops 
were  taken,  and  many  more  were  slain.  Eustace  Cholet,  a  noble  and 
valiant  lord  from  the  land  of  Ponthieu,  also  fell  in  this  combat. 

Elated  by  this  success,  the  other  Turkish  divisions  united.  They 
completely  surrounded  the  Christian  forces  which  had  been  detailed 
to  guard  the  baggage  and  equipment,  and  in  a  furious  attack  promptly 
dispersed  and  routed  them.  Hugh  of  Creona  is  said  to  have  fallen  in 
this  battle.  He  was  a  nobleman  of  Sicilian  birth,  a  young  man  of  up¬ 
right  and  honorable  life. 

The  Christian  lines  were  now  broken;  many  of  our  people  were  dead, 
and  those  who  had  escaped  the  sword  took  refuge  in  flight.  The  enemy 
seized  the  baggage  and  equipment  without  a  struggle  and  carried  it  off. 

The  scattered  forces,  dispersed  here  and  there  among  the  little 
valleys,  fought  with  varying  fortune.  The  only  witnesses  were  the 
fighters  themselves,  for  no  one  else  could  see  it.  The  battle  was  inde¬ 
cisive;  sometimes  the  Turks  and  again  the  Christians  had  the  upper 
hand,  all  alike  ignorant  of  what  was  transpiring  elsewhere.  Each  side 
considered  itself  at  one  place  victorious,  at  another  defeated.  In  the 


KING  AMAURY  I 


J 

confusion,  our  venerable  brother,  Ralph,  bishop  of  Bethlehem,  the 
royal  chancellor,  whom  we  later  followed  in  that  office,  was  seriously 
wounded  and  lost  all  his  baggage/'^  For  a  long  time  the  result  of  the 
battle  was  uncertain.  The  actual  decision  of  victory  was  deferred  until 
the  close  of  day  warned  the  scattered  troops  to  retui*n  to  their  standards. 
Then,  at  length,  through  fear  of  the  oncoming  night,  those  who  were 
still  at  large  began  to  hurr)^  back  to  their  own  ranks,  eagerly  seeking 
the  king.  From  all  directions  they  rallied  and  again  joined  the  lines. 

The  king  had  come  off  conqueror  at  the  point  where  he  had  fought. 
Others,  in  one  place  or  another,  had  tried  the  fortune  of  war  with  vary¬ 
ing  results,  here  enjoying  success,  there  adA^erse  fate,  so  that  neither 
side  could  claim  a  decisi^^e  victor\'.  Finalh',  the  kinp-  withdrew  with  a 

«  m 

few  of  his  retainers  to  a  certain  hill,  somewhat  elevated  above  the 
plain,  and  there  took  his  stand.  Raising  his  standai*d  to  recall  his  scat¬ 
tered  forces,  he  awaited  his  comrades.  When  these  had  rallied  in  pai‘t, 
the  Christians  saw  that  the  Tiu*kish  di\'ision  which  had  destroyed  their 
baggage  train,  after  killing  some  and  captui'ing  others,  was  in  disarra}’ 


upon  the  two  hills  opposite  them.  No  other  way  of  retreat  was  possible 

for  our  army  except  that  which  passed  between  the  two  hills  occupied 

by  the  enemy.  Determined  to  reti-eat,  howe^'er,  the  Christians  formed 

in  order  of  battle  and  beean  to  advance  slowh^  between  the  enemy 

whom  the^*  saw  both  on  the  ripht  and  on  the  left.  With  such  steadiness 

did  they  proceed  that  the  infidels  dai*ed  not  attempt  any  hostility 

against  them.  Placing  the  strongest  and  best-armed  men  around  the 

column,  oui*  people  in  close  arrav  made  their  way  to  a  certain  part  of 

the  river  where  they  a'ossed  in  safet\'  bv  a  ford.  In  this  same  formation 

«  *  •’ 

they  continued  to  retreat  throughout  the  entire  night  along  the  same 
route  by  which  the\*  had  previously  ad\ranced. 

At  Lamonia  they  were  met  bv  Gerard  de  Pouo•^^  With  fift^*  knicrhts 
and  a  hundi'ed  Turcopoles,  assisted  by  INIahadan,  a  son  of  the  sultan,  he 
had  been  holding  the  other  bank  of  the  river  to  check  the  enemy  if 
they  should  try  to  a'oss.  The  arrival  of  Gei*ai'd  was  most  opportune,  for 
the  kins:  had  been  much  concerned  lest  the  eneim-  mi2:ht  attack  him 

w  -  O 

alone  on  one  side  of  the  river  or  the  other.  He  v^as  still  anxious  about 
the  infantiy  detachments,  however,  which  were  to  follow  under  com- 

This  passagre  must  have  been  written  after  the  death  of  Amaury  and  the  time  of 
William's  appointment  as  chancellor,  late  in  1174. 


KING  AMAURY  I 


334 

mand  of  a  wise  and  valiant  knight,  Joscelin  of  Samosata.  There  was 
indeed  great  danger  that  they  might  suddenly  encounter  the  foe  while 
off  their  guard. 

For  three  days  he  awaited  their  arrival  at  Lamonia.  By  the  fourth 
day  the  infantry  had  gradually  assembled  and  were  again  united  with 
his  forces.  They  thereupon  proceeded  to  Cairo  by  continuous  marches 
and  encamped  by  the  bridge  before  Babilyun.  There  the  king  took  a 
census  of  his  knights  and  found  that  a  hundred  were  missing.  The 
enemy  is  said  to  have  lost  fifteen  hundred  in  that  encounter. 

26.  Shirkuh  withdrazus  to  Alexandria,  The  king  goes  thither 
in  haste  and  lays  siege  to  the  city, 

Shirkuh  now  rallied  all  his  remaining  troops  and  formed  them  into 
one  body.  Then  secretly,  unknown  to  the  Christians,  he  marched 
through  the  desert  to  Alexandria,  where  the  people  at  once  surrendered 
the  city  to  him. 

Information  of  this  fact  was  soon  brought  to  the  king.  He  at  once 
summoned  his  chief  counsellors,  together  with  the  sultan  and  his  sons 
and  the  Egyptian  nobles,  and  counselled  with  them  as  to  what  meas¬ 
ures  should  be  taken.  After  long  discussion,  as  is  usually  the  case  in 
doubtful  matters,  it  was  decided  to  station  the  fleet  in  the  river  as  an 
obstacle,  for  Alexandria  has  within  its  own  borders  no  resources  of 
grain  or  other  food  supplies  and  is  entirely  dependent  upon  what  is 
brought  by  ships  from  upper  Egypt.  In  this  position  the  fleet  could 
completely  shut  off  all  commerce  with  people  outside. 

When  this  had  been  done,  the  king  led  his  entire  army  to  the  vi¬ 
cinity  and  established  his  camp  between  Toroge  and  Demenhut,  at  a 
place  about  eight  miles  from  Alexandria.  From  here  he  sent  out  scouts 
to  visit  and  break  up  all  settlements  in  the  vicinity  and  even  those  far 
remote  in  the  desert.  He  wished  to  prevent  any  assistance  being  sent 
to  the  besieged  and  also  to  intercept  all  messengers  leaving  the  city 
to  solicit  aid  from  outside.  As  a  further  check,  the  fleet  prevented  all 
passage  of  the  river  and  permitted  no  one,  however  well  known,  to 
descend  without  undergoing  a  thorough  questioning. 

A  period  of  one  month  rolled  away  under  these  conditions.  During 
that  time  the  city  had  received  no  provisions  from  outside,  and  the 
people  were  already  beginning  to  murmur.  For  bread  was  failing  in 
their  chests,  and  they  had  no  food.  When  this  came  to  the  knowledge  of 


KING  AMAURY  I 


335 

Shirkuhj  he  began  to  fear  lest  he  and  his  army  might  also  be  forced  to 
suffer  famine  with  the  rest.  Accordingly,  he  left  his  nephew  Saladin 
with  about  a  thousand  knights  in  charge  of  the  city,  and  he  himself 
withdrew  by  night  through  the  desert.  Although  he  passed  very  near 
our  forces,  he  managed  to  escape  to  the  upper  part  of  Egypt,  whence 
he  had  come  only  a  short  time  before. 

As  soon  as  Shirkuh’s  departure  became  known,  the  king  at  once 
started  in  pursuit  and  had  proceeded  as  far  as  Babilyun.  His  whole 
army  was  ready  to  advance,  and  he  had  already  ordered  the  baggage 
arranged  with  a  view  to  further  pursuit  when  Ben  Ercarselle,  a  power¬ 
ful  Egyptian  nobleman,  suddenly  approached  and  informed  him  that 
Alexandria  was  struggling  with  desperate  famine.  He  said,  further¬ 
more,  that  he  had  relatives  of  great  influence  in  the  city  itself,  the 
governors,  in  fact,  of  the  place.  They  could  easily  sway  the  people, 
now  under  the  stress  of  hunger,  in  whatever  direction  they  wished, 
even  to  the  extent  of  surrendering  the  city  into  the  hands  of  the  king 
with  all  the  Turks  who  had  been  left  there. 

Influenced  by  this  news,  the  king  thereupon  inquired  of  his  counsel¬ 
lors  what  policy  seemed  best  in  their  eyes  5  and  finally,  since  the  wishes 
of  all  were  in  accord,  and  even  the  sultan  approved,  they  returned  to 
Alexandria  and  placed  the  two  armies  as  a  blockading  force  around  it. 

27.  'Fhe  situation  of  Alexandria  Is  described, 

Alexandria  is  the  last  of  all  the  cities  of  Egypt  in  that  part  of  the 
country  which  extends  westward  toward  Libya.  It  lies  on  the  border 
between  the  cultivated  land  and  the  arid  desert.  Beyond  the  walls  of 
the  city  and  closely  adjoining  it  on  the  west  lies  a  vast  waste  which  has 
never  felt  the  blessings  of  cultivation  and  care.  According  to  ancient 
histories,  this  city  was  founded  by  Alexander  of  Macedon,  the  son  of 
Philip,  from  whom  it  takes  its  name.  Julius  Solinus  states  that  it  was 
built  in  the  hundred  and  twelfth  Olympiad,  in  the  consulship  of  Lu¬ 
cius  Papirius,  son  of  Furius,  and  of  Gaius  Petilius,  son  of  Gaius.  It  was 
laid  out  by  the  architect  Dinocrates,  who  occupies  the  second  place  after 
its  founder  in  the  grateful  remembrance  of  the  people.^® 

Alexandria  is  situated  not  far  from  that  mouth  of  the  Nile  which 
some  call  the  Heracleoticon  and  others  the  Canopic  mouth.  Now,  how- 


Solinus  Polyhistor  XXXII,  41. 


KING  AMAURY  I 


336 

ever,  the  place  from  which  the  arm  nearest  that  city  takes  its  name  has 
lost  its  ancient  appellation  and  is  called  Ressith  [Rosetta] .  The  city  is 
five  or  six  miles  distant  from  the  bed  of  the  river,  but,  during  the  season 
of  its  annual  increase,  part  of  the  water  is  carried  to  the  city  by  several 
canals*  This  influx  of  water  is  saved  with  great  care  in  vast  cisterns 
specially  designed  for  the  purpose,  for  the  use  of  the  people  during  the 
entire  year.  As  much  as  is  necessary,  however,  is  diverted  through  un¬ 
derground  conduits,  for  the  purpose  of  irrigating  the  orchards  which 
lie  outside  the  city. 

Alexandria  is  most  conveniently  situated  for  carrying  on  extensive 
commerce.  It  has  two  ports  which  are  separated  from  one  another  by 
a  very  narrow  stretch  of  land.  At  the  end  of  that  tongue  rises  a  tower 
of  marvellous  height  called  the  Pharos.  Julius  Caesar  is  said  to  have 
built  this  for  utilitarian  purposes  and  to  have  led  a  colony  hither.^**^ 

By  the  Nile,  Alexandria  receives  from  upper  Egypt  an  abundance 
of  food  supplies  of  every  kind  and,  indeed,  a  wealth  of  almost  every 
commodity.  If  there  is  anything  which  the  country  itself  lacks,  it  is 
brought  by  ships  from  the  lands  across  the  sea  in  profuse  abundance. 
As  a  result  Alexandria  has  the  reputation  of  receiving  a  larger  supply 
of  wares  of  every  description  than  any  other  maritime  city.  Whatever 
our  part  of  the  world  lacks  in  the  matter  of  spices,  pearls.  Oriental 
treasures,  and  foreign  wares  is  brought  hither  from  the  two  Indies, 
Saba,  Arabia,  and  both  the  Ethiopias,  as  well  as  from  Persia  and  other 
lands  near  by.  All  this  merchandise  is  conveyed  to  upper  Egypt  by 
way  of  the  Red  sea,  which  forms  the  route  from  those  races  to  us.  It  is 
unloaded  at  the  city  of  Aidab  on  the  shore  of  that  same  sea,  and 
thence  descends  the  Nile  to  Alexandria.  Consequently,  people  from 
the  East  and  the  West  flock  thither  in  great  numbers,  and  Alexandria 
is  a  public  mart  for  both  worlds.  It  is  famous  under  both  its  ancient 
and  modern  titles,  but  it  derives  especial  honor  because  of  the  preach¬ 
ing  and  conversation  of  the  blessed  Mark,  the  spiritual  son  of  the 
prince  of  the  apostles  who  was  sent  by  divine  will  to  that  church.  It  is 
furthermore  made  illustrious  by  the  fact  that  the  holy  fathers  Athana¬ 
sius  and  Cyril  chose  it  as  the  place  of  their  abode  and  are  there  buried. 

Solinus  XXXII,  43. 

Near  the  site  of  modern  Suez.  The  old  trade  route  ran  almost  directly  west  to 
strike  the  Nile  near  Cairo.  This  route  was  so  important  that  both  in  ancient  times  and 
ag-ain  under  the  early  Muslims  a  canal  was  built  from  the  Nile  toward  the  Red  sea. 
Such  a  fresh  water  canal  from  Cairo  to  Suez  was  finally  built  in  1869. 


KING  AMAURY  I 


337 

Alexandria  ranks  second  among  the  four  patriarchates,  and  to  it  as 
their  metropolis  look  Egypt,  Libya,  Pentapolis,  and  many  other  prov¬ 
inces. 

Thither  the  entire  fleet  was  dispatched.  Every  gate  and  all  means  of 
approach  were  blockaded  and  no  one  allowed  to  enter. 

28.  The  king  continues  to  carry  on  the  siege  and  of  presses  the 
citizens  most  grievously . 

Meanwhile,  the  Christians  who  had  remained  in  Syria  learned  that 
the  king  had  laid  siege  to  Alexandria.  They  knew  that  by  sailing  with¬ 
out  making  any  stops  they  could  reach  that  city  within  a  few  days. 
Accordingly  they  seized  arms  and  eagerly  undertook  the  journey. 
Loading  the  ships  with  all  necessary  provisions,  they  joyously  set  sail 
on  their  own  initiative.  With  them  went  Frederick,  archbishop  of  Tyre, 
our  predecessor.  Moved  by  the  enthusiasm  of  others  and  also  by  an 
ardent  affection  for  the  king,  he  went  down  to  Egypt  by  ship,  accom¬ 
panied  by  a  rather  distinguished  retinue.  But  soon  he  began  to  suffer 
from  a  dangerous  attack  of  dysentery  caused  by  drinking  the  water  of 
the  Nile,  and,  his  illness  increasing,  he  was  forced  to  return  home 
before  Alexandria  was  surrendered  to  the  king. 

The  besieging  host  assembled  before  the  city  now  collected  an  im¬ 
mense  number  of  masts,  summoned  craftsmen  and  carpenters,  and 
caused  them  to  erect  a  tower  of  great  height  from  whose  top  the  entire 
city  could  be  surveyed.  Machines  called  petraries  which  hurl  forth 
enormous  stones  of  great  weight  were  also  placed  in  strategic  positions 
around  the  walls.  From  these,  almost  incessantly,  were  hurled  im¬ 
mense  stones  of  great  weight  which  shattered  the  walls  and  terrified 
the  people  almost  beyond  endurance. 

Surrounding  the  city  like  a  leafy  forest  were  fertile  gardens  of  most 
delightful  aspect,  full  of  fruit  trees  and  medicinal  plants.  The  very  sight 
of  this  charming  retreat  invited  the  passer-by  to  enter  and,  having 
entered,  to  rest  there.  Our  soldiers  invaded  these  orchards  in  large 
numbers,  primarily  with  the  object  of  finding  material  for  building 
the  engines.  Soon,  however,  they  were  seized  with  the  sole  desire  of 
causing  injury  and  loss,  and,  with  far  more  zealous  effort  than  had 
been  expended  upon  the  original  planting,  they  cut  down  aromatic 
trees,  useful  for  many  purposes.  Before  long,  the  orchards  were 
levelled  to  the  ground,  and  no  trace  of  their  former  condition  re- 


KING  AMAURY  I 


338 

mained.  It  was  of  this  outrage  that  the  people  complained  most  bitterly 
after  the  treaty  of  peace  had  been  adopted  and  in  respect  to  which  they 
felt  that  they  had  received  the  greatest  injury. 

Our  army  continued  to  press  on  the  siege  j  every  method  of  causing 
injury  was  employed  and  new  ways  of  annoying  the  besieged  con¬ 
stantly  invented.  Incessant  assaults  permitted  the  weary  defenders  no 
rest.  The  citizens,  accustomed  only  to  trading,  untrained  in  the  art  of 
fighting  and  without  experience  in  warfare,  found  this  unusual  kind 
of  labor  extremely  hard  to  bear.  The  Turks  who  had  remained  in  the 
city  were  few  in  number  and  hesitated  to  trust  themselves  to  the  waver¬ 
ing  and  unreliable  prowess  of  the  citizens.  Hence  they  seldom  came 
forth  to  the  conflict  and  then  reluctantly — an  attitude  which  did  not 
greatly  encourage  the  rest  to  fight.  Why  should  more  be  said?  Daily 
fighting,  the  constant  slaughter  of  friends,  continual  vigils,  fear  by 
night,  and  above  all  the  lack  of  food,  wore  upon  the  people  and  caused 
them  to  despair.  So  disheartened  had  they  become  that  now  they  cast 
aside  all  desire  for  liberty  and  preferred  to  give  up  the  city  and  be  en¬ 
slaved  by  anyone  rather  than  to  die  of  cruel  hunger  on  their  own  hearth¬ 
stones,  together  with  their  wives  and  little  ones.  Murmurs  began  to 
creep  about  among  the  people  j  and  presently  it  was  openly  said  that 
the  pestilential  strangers  who  had  brought  such  affliction  upon  them 
must  be  driven  from  the  city.  An  agreement  of  some  kind  should  be 
sought  by  which  these  unseemly  woes  might  be  dispelled,  the  siege 
raised,  and  the  city  restored  to  its  former  state  of  dignity  and  freedom. 

This  general  state  of  feeling  among  the  people  was  not  lost  upon 
Saladin.  He  dispatched  swift  messengers  in  all  secrecy  to  his  uncle  with 
a  statement  of  the  situation :  the  wretched  plight  of  the  city,  the  entire 
lack  of  food  supplies,  the  inclination  of  the  people  to  desert  him.  Most 
earnestly  he  besought  him  by  every  possible  argument  to  find  some 
immediate  relief  to  succor  the  despairing  people  from  most  imminent 
danger. 

In  the  interim  he  appealed  both  to  the  city  fathers  and  the  people 
themselves  3  he  warned  them  that  they  must  fight  to  the  death  for  their 
wives  and  children  and  urged  them  to  emulate  the  customs  and  tradi¬ 
tions  of  their  ancestors.  Help  was  before  the  gates ;  even  now  Shirkuh, 
his  uncle,  was  traversing  Egypt  to  drive  away  the  enemy  and  to  relieve 
Alexandria.  Very  soon  he  would  arrive  with  a  vast  number  of  troops. 

The  king,  well  aware  of  the  dissension  among  the  citizens,  urged 


KING  AMAURY  I 


339 

that  the  siege  be  pressed  on  without  pause*  The  more  he  learned  of 
their  desperate  situation,  the  fiercer  became  his  assaults.  The  sultan, 
too,  was  constantly  on  the  alert  j  active,  diligent,  and  full  of  solicitude, 
he  went  about  among  all  the  commanders.  With  a  liberal  hand  he  dis¬ 
pensed  money  for  building  engines  as  well  as  generous  sums  for  every 
necessity  of  warfare.  He  paid  adequate  wages  to  the  workmen;  he 
gave  gifts  to  the  poor  and  needy,  and,  above  all,  to  the  wounded,  that 
they  might  have  proper  care.  He  was  liberal  also  to  the  fighters,  es¬ 
pecially  to  those  whom  he  knew  were  valiant  in  battle. 

29.  On  hearing  this  reforty  Shirkuh  confers  with  Hugh  of 
Caesarea  about  feace. 

While  these  events  were  happening  before  Alexandria,  Shirkuh  was 
marching  through  upper  Egypt.  On  arriving  at  Chus,  he  made  an  at¬ 
tempt  to  take  the  place  by  storm.  He  soon  found,  however,  that  his 
efforts  were  in  vain ;  a  longer  time  was  needed  for  such  an  undertaking, 
and  the  precarious  situation  of  his  nephew  demanded  that  he  proceed 
to  other  work.  Accordingly,  he  accepted  a  money  payment  from  these 
cities  and  hurried  on  to  lower  Egypt  with  his  forces. 

On  arriving  at  Babilyun,  he  found  that  the  king  had  sent  Hugh 
dTbelin  to  guard  Cairo  and  the  bridge  there,  that,  in  short,  existing 
conditions  were  far  otherwise  than  he  had  supposed.  He  therefore 
summoned  Hugh  of  Caesarea,  whom  he  was  holding  prisoner,  to  a 
friendly  conference  and,  being  ready  of  speech,  courteous,  and  genial, 
he  began  to  address  him  in  well-chosen  words:  ^^You  are  a  great  prince 
of  high  rank  and  much  influence  among  your  own  people,  nor  is  there 
any  one  of  your  barons  to  whom,  if  free  choice  were  offered  me,  I  would 
prefer  to  communicate  this  secret  of  mine  and  make  my  confidant.  Of 
her  own  accord  Fortune  has  granted  and  the  chance  of  war  has 
afforded  an  advantage  which  otherwise  must  have  been  sought  with 
much  effort,  namely  that  I  may  have  the  benefit  of  your  experience 
for  this  present  need.  I  frankly  acknowledge  that  I,  eager  for  glory 
like  all  mortals,  was  attracted  by  the  wealth  of  this  kingdom,  and  rely¬ 
ing  upon  the  helpless  character  of  the  native  population,  I  at  one  time 
conceived  the  hope  that  this  realm  might  sometime  fall  into  my  hands. 

^^Therefore,  at  the  cost  of  great  expense  and  infinite  hardships,  fu¬ 
tile  as  I  now  see,  I  have  come  down  into  Egypt  through  many  dangers. 
With  me  is  a  large  company  of  knights  all  of  whom  have  been  drawn 


340  KING  AMAURY  I 

hither  by  the  same  desire.  My  expectations  have  not  been  realized, 
however,  for,  as  I  now  see,  fortune  was  against  my  entering  the  coun¬ 
try.  Would  that  I  may  be  permitted  to  return  at  least  under  favorable 
auspices !  Y ou  are  a  man  of  high  rank,  as  I  have  said,  dear  to  the  king, 
and  influential  both  in  word  and  deedj  be  the  mediator  of  peace  be¬ 
tween  us.  May  the  matter  prosper  in  your  hands.  Say  to  the  king,  ^We 
are  wasting  our  time  here,  and  the  days  are  passing  without  result. 
Many  duties  await  us  at  home.’  Moreover  the  presence  of  the  king 
himself  is  most  necessary  to  his  realm.  He  is  expending  his  efforts  now 
for  others  3  for,  when  he  has  repulsed  us,  he  will  resign  the  riches  of 
this  province  to  the  miserable  inhabitants,  who  are  hardly  worthy  to 
live.  Let  him  take  his  people  who  are  now  my  prisoners  3  let  him  raise 
the  siege  and  restore  the  captives  whom  he  holds  as  well  as  those  whom 
he  is  keeping  shut  up  in  the  city  of  Alexandria.  For  my  part,  as  soon 
as  I  have  received  a  guarantee  from  him  that  we  are  to  meet  with  no 
trouble  on  the  way  from  his  soldiers,  I  am  ready  to  leave.” 

30.  Hugh  arranges  the  terms  of  the  treaty  with  the  king  and 
the  barons. 

After  listening  to  this  speech,  Hugh,  as  he  was  a  man  of  good  sense 
and  discretion,  for  a  long  time  carefully  considered  in  his  own  mind 
this  proposal.  He  did  not  doubt  that  the  terms  of  peace  under  the  con¬ 
ditions  of  the  treaty  would  be  advantageous  to  the  Christians  3  yet  he 
hesitated  to  undertake  this  mission  himself,  lest  it  might  seem  that  he 
was  more  interested  in  obtaining  his  own  liberty  than  concerned  for 
the  public  welfare.  He  felt,  therefore,  that  the  first  steps  might  be 
more  honorably  taken  by  someone  else.  His  feeling  on  the  matter  he 
later  explained  to  us  confidentially. 

Accordingly,  another  captive,  Arnulf  of  Turbessel,  an  intimate  as¬ 
sociate  of  the  king  who  had  been  taken  prisoner  in  the  same  battle  as 
the  Hugh  of  whom  we  are  speaking,  was  sent  as  the  bearer  of  the 
message.  Charged  with  this  mission,  he  hastened  to  the  king  and  ex¬ 
plained  to  him  in  detail  the  object  of  his  coming.  The  king  at  once 
called  a  council,  and  in  that  assembly  of  the  barons,  the  sultan  and  his 
sons  also  being  present,  Arnulf  submitted  the  proposal  and  explained 
the  nature  of  the  treaty.  The  overture  of  peace  met  with  the  approval 
of  all,  and  the  terms  proposed  seemed  to  suffice  both  for  glory  and  for 
the  fulfillment  in  good  faith  of  the  treaty  concluded  between  the  king 


KING  AMAURY  I 


341 

and  the  caliph.  The  city  was  to  pass  by  surrender  into  the  power  of  the 
king.  An  exchange  of  all  prisoners  on  both  sides  was  to  be  made,  and 
all  the  Turks  who  had  been  shut  in  by  the  siege  as  well  as  the  troops  of 
Shirkuh,  now  dispersed  over  the  land  of  Egypt,  were  to  leave  its 
boundaries  utterly. 

Shawar,  the  sultan,  as  well  as  all  the  satraps  of  Egypt,  approved  the 
pact  and  willingly  accepted  the  provisions  of  the  treaty.  He  declared 
himself  fully  satisfied,  since  it  excluded  his  most  dreaded  enemy,  his 
rival  for  the  supremacy  in  the  kingdom. 

Then  Hugh  presented  himself  and,  after  the  treaty  in  all  its  aspects 
had  been  fully  discussed  by  both  sides,  put  the  final  touches  to  it  and 
brought  the  matter  to  a  satisfactory  conclusion. 

31.  The  city  is  surrendered  to  the  kingy  and  feace  is  froclaimed 
to  the  feofle  of  Alexandria. 

Then  the  herald  proclaimed  to  each  cohort  and  to  the  public  in  general 
that  the  fighting  was  at  an  end  j  a  legal  edict  was  also  issued  forbidding 
further  molestation  of  the  Alexandrians.  As  soon  as  peace  was  con¬ 
cluded,  the  people,  worn  down  by  the  hardships  of  the  long-continued 
siege,  issued  forth  rejoicing.  They  made  light  of  the  straits  which  they 
had  endured  and  took  pleasure  in  walking  about  unhindered,  to  relieve 
their  weariness.  There  was  now  abundant  food,  and  the  resumption  of 
commerce  was  granted.  Accordingly,  the  people,  relieved  from  the 
long-continued  famine,  devoted  themselves  to  the  restoration  of  their 
health  and  spirits.  They  delighted  to  watch  the  now  friendly  troops 
whom  but  a  short  time  before  they  had  regarded  with  loathing  and 
hatred,  to  talk  with  the  very  men  whom  recently  they  had  feared  as  the 
ministers  of  danger  and  death. 

The  Christians,  for  their  part,  were  no  less  eager  to  enter  the  city 
so  long  the  object  of  their  desires.  Wandering  freely  about  the  streets, 
they  gazed  at  the  ports  and  the  ramparts  3  and  by  diligent  observation 
they  collected  material  from  which,  on  their  return  home,  they  might 
ofttimes  weave  stories  for  their  friends  and  refresh  the  minds  of  their 
listeners  with  agreeable  converse. 

Above  this  splendid  city  rises  a  tower  of  remarkable  height  called 
the  Pharos.^®  Toward  this,  as  toward  a  star,  guided  by  the  brilliant  light 

The  repetition  of  this  statement  about  Pharos  (see  chap.  27)  so  soon  suggests  that 
these  two  chapters  were  written  at  different  times.  This  mention  was  probably  the 


KING  AMAURY  I 


342 

of  its  many  flashing  torches,  ships  unfamiliar  with  the  locality  direct 
their  course  at  night.  For  the  approach  to  Alexandria  is  very  dangerous, 
and  the  gloomy  sea  is  full  of  treacherous  shoals.  But  sailors,  warned  in 
advance  by  the  lights  which  are  kept  burning  always  at  public  expense 
upon  the  tower,  escape  the  threatened  danger  of  shipwreck  and  proceed 
in  safety  on  their  way. 

Above  this  tower,  in  token  of  victory,  the  standard  of  the  king  was 
unfurled,  and  at  the  sight  of  the  flag,  the  fact  of  the  surrender,  which 
until  now  had  been  known  to  a  few  only,  became  manifest  to  all. 
Thereupon,  many  who  at  the  first  talk  of  the  treaty  had  cautiously  held 
back  and  feared  to  trust  themselves  to  the  Christians,  now  that  peace 
was  assured,  did  not  hesitate  to  join  us  and  to  rely  on  the  sincerity  of 
our  good  faith.  One  thing  appeared  marvellous  beyond  all  others: 
namely,  that  so  small  an  army  had  been  able  to  shut  up  within  Alex¬ 
andria  such  a  host  of  citizens,  besides  numerous  foreigners  who  all 
faithfully  cooperated  for  the  defense  of  the  place,  and  had  forced  them 
to  an  ignominious  surrender.  For  the  Christians  had  barely  five  hun¬ 
dred  knights  and  only  four  or  five  thousand  foot  soldiers,  while  the 
besieged  had  more  than  fifty  thousand  men  who  were  able  to  bear  arms. 

32.  The  king  returns  to  his  own  landy  victonouSy  with  all  his 
forces  restored, 

Saladin  now  issued  forth  from  the  city  and  repaired  to  the  king.  There 
he  remained  in  the  Christian  camp  until  ready  to  set  forth  on  his  re¬ 
turn.  He  was  treated  with  all  respect  and  furnished  with  a  guard  to 
protect  him  from  insults  that  might  be  offered  him  by  audacious  spirits. 
But  the  sultan  at  the  head  of  his  troops  marshalled  in  serried  ranks 
entered  the  gates  of  Alexandria  in  triumph  as  a  victor.  Heralded  by  the 
blare  of  trumpets,  the  sound  of  drums,  and  of  every  other  kind  of 
musical  instrument,  he  advanced  attended  by  bands  of  singing  men 
and  preceded  by  numerous  servitors  and  crowds  of  shouting  men  at 
arms.  The  citizens  trembled  with  terror  5  some  he  condemned,  others 
he  released  3  for,  although  he  punished  the  guilty  with  a  strong  hand, 
he  distributed  rewards  to  all  who  deserved  them. 

earlier  and  written  on  the  basis  of  his  first  investigation  of  the  Egyptian  campaign  of 
1167.  The  previous  mention  is  part  of  the  antiquarian  information  which  William  was 
adding  for  the  benefit  of  the  more  remote  reading  audience  which  he  was  addressing 
after  1180. 


KING  AMAURY  I 


343 

The  citizens  of  Alexandria  were  finally  sentenced  to  pay  a  great 
sum  of  money,  not  definitely  fixed  3  administrators  of  the  tribute  and 
officers  to  have  charge  of  the  taxes  and  revenues  of  the  city  were  ap¬ 
pointed.  After  thus  exacting  a  vast  sum  of  money,  the  sultan  entrusted 
the  care  of  the  city  to  loyal  servants  of  his  own  and  retired  full  of 
glory  to  his  camp. 

The  Christian  army  now  yearned  to  return  home.  Accordingly, 
those  who  had  come  by  sea  made  the  necessary  provision  for  the  trip 
and  embarked  on  board  ship.  Committing  themselves  to  the  breezes, 
they  returned  with  joy  to  their  own  land.  The  king  ordered  the  ma¬ 
chines  to  be  burned  and  the  baggage  made  ready.  He  then  took  the 
route  to  Babilyun,  where  those  whom  he  had  sent  on  before  were  again 
united  with  his  forces.  Thus  having  confirmed  the  sultan  in  the  govern¬ 
ment  of  the  kingdom,  expelled  the  enemy,  and  recovered  his  men  who 
had  been  taken  prisoners,  he  entered  Ascalon  on  the  twelfth  day  be¬ 
fore  the  Kalends  of  September  [August  21]  in  the  fourth  year  of  his 
reign  and  the  year  1 167  of  the  Incarnation  of  our  Lord.®® 

Amaury’s  fifth  regnal  year  had  begun  in  February,  1167. 

HERE  ENDS  THE  NINETEENTH  BOOK 


THE  TWENTIETH  BOOK  BEGINS 


THE  STRUGGLE  FOR  EGYPT:  ALLIANCE 

WITH  EMPEROR  MANUEL 

I.  HernesiuSy  archbishop  of  Caesar  cay  and  Eudes  de  Saint-- 
Amandy  the  royal  butler y  return  from  C onstantinopley  bring¬ 
ing  with  them  the  future  wife  of  the  king.  A^naury  is 
crowned  in  the  church  at  Ty?'e  and  marries  a  zvife. 

During  this  timCj  Hernesius,  archbishop  of  Caesarea,  of  precious 
memory,  and  Eudes  de  Saint-Amand,  at  that  time  the  royal  butler, 
returned  by  sea  from  Constantinople  and  landed  at  Tyre.  They  had 
pursued  the  task  on  which  they  had  been  sent  to  Emperor  Manuel 
with  wisdom  and  loyalty,  and  at  the  end  of  two  years  their  mission 
had  been  successful,  for  they  brought  with  them  the  daughter  of  John 
the  protosebastos  as  the  future  wife  of  the  king.^ 

As  soon  as  the  king  learned  of  their  arrival,  he  hastened  to  Tyre. 
There,  after  summoning  the  prelates  of  the  church  and  the  nobles 
of  the  realm,  he  espoused  the  Princess  Maria,  who  had  previously  re¬ 
ceived  the  gift  of  royal  unction  and  consecration.  The  marriage  was 
solemnized  with  due  pomp  and  ceremony  on  August  29  in  the  church 
at  Tyre  by  the  Patriarch  Amalrich  of  good  memory.  The  king  was 
magnificently  attired  in  the  royal  robes  and  wore  the  crown  of  his 
ancestors. 

This  John  the  frotosebastosy  whose  daughter,  as  I  have  said,  the 
king  took  as  his  consort,  was  the  emperor’s  nephew,  the  son  of  his 
elder  brother.  As  escort  for  his  niece,  Manuel  sent  a  number  of  il¬ 
lustrious  and  magnificent  nobles  closely  attached  to  himself,  among 
whom  were  the  Lord  Palaeologus  and  Manuel  Sebastos,  a  kinsman 
of  his  own,  and  numerous  others.-  On  them  devolved  the  duty  of 

^  This  embassy  must  have  been  sent  to  Constantinople  in  1165,  one  of  the  events 
of  that  year  which  William  failed  to  mention  at  the  time.  Presumably  it  left  in  the 
fall  of  1165,  for  Hernesius  is  recorded  as  still  present  in  Palestine  in  a  document  of 
the  late  summer  or  early  fall  of  that  year. 

Protosebastos  (like  sebastos  and  sehastocrator')  was  one  of  the  honorific  titles  de¬ 
vised  by  the  Comneni,  usually  applied  to  relatives  of  the  emperor.  There  is  no  exact 
Western  equivalent. 

"  Maria  was  the  daughter  of  John  Comnenus,  and  her  escort  was  headed  by  George 
Palaeologus  and  Manuel  Comnenus,  all  members  of  the  imperial  family  (see  F. 
Chalandon,  Les  Commeney  II,  536). 


STRUGGLE  FOR  EGYPT 


345 

conducting  the  future  queen  with  much  pomp  to  the  lord  king  and 
of  seeing  to  it  that  none  of  the  prescribed  solemnities  was  omitted. 

The  head  of  the  church  at  Tyre,  where  these  ceremonies  were  held, 
was  at  that  time  Lord  Frederick,  who  had  been  transferred  from  the 
church  at  Acre.  Three  days  after  the  coronation  and  the  nuptials  of 
the  king  had  been  celebrated  in  that  city,  Frederick  generously  be¬ 
stowed  upon  me  the  office  of  archdeacon  of  the  church  at  Tyre,  which 
William  had  resigned  when  he  was  called  to  the  church  at  Acre.  This 
he  did  at  the  request  and  in  the  presence  of  the  king  and  many  other 
honorable  men.® 

2.  Andromcm y  a  relative  of  the  emperor y  carries  away  'Theo¬ 
dor  ay  the  %vidow  of  King  BaldiviUy  into  the  land  of  the 
enemy. 

At  this  time,  while  the  king  was  still  in  Egypt,  one  Andronicus,  a 
Greek  nobleman  of  great  influence  and  a  relative  of  the  emperor  of 
Constantinople,  arrived  from  Cilicia,  attended  by  a  large  retinue 
of  knights.*^  He  remained  with  us  until  the  king  returned  and  was 
a  source  of  much  comfort  to  us.  But  like  a  snake  in  the  bosom  or  a 
mouse  in  the  wardrobe,  he  made  a  poor  return  to  his  hosts  and  proved 
the  truth  of  that  saying  of  Maro,  fear  the  Greeks  even  when  bear¬ 
ing  gifts.”  ® 

Immediately  after  his  return  the  king  bestowed  upon  him  the  city 
of  Beirut.  The  Greek  then  invited  Theodora,  the  widow  of  King 
Baldwin,  who  was  also  the  daughter  of  his  own  nephew,  to  go  with 
him  to  visit  Beirut.  Theodora  possessed  the  city  of  Acre,  which  had 
been  given  to  her  as  dowry  at  the  time  of  her  marriage,  and  had  en¬ 
tertained  Andronicus  a  long  time  in  her  own  house.  While  on  this 
journey  Andronicus,  acting  in  collusion  with  Nureddin,  treacherously 

®  It  is  of  interest  to  note  William’s  mention  of  the  king’s  influence  in  his  promotion 
to  the  ofiice  of  archdeacon,  September  i,  1167.  It  probably  marked  the  agreement  of 
William  to  write  a  history  of  the  deeds  of  Amaury. 

^  He  had  been  dismissed  as  governor  of  Cilicia  bj''  the  emperor,  both  because  he  was 
inefiicient  and  because  he  had  conducted  a  violent  flirtation  with  Philippa,  the  sister 
of  Manuel’s  wdfe,  at  Antioch,  It  practically  reached  the  stage  of  marriage  but  was 
broken  up  by  the  emperor.  He  was  therefore  free  to  indulge  in  further  adventures  in 
Jerusalem.  His  wildly  adventurous  career  awaits  a  biographer.  Even  the  summary 
sketches  of  it  read  stranger  than  fiction  (see  C.  Diehl,  Figures  byzantmes^  2d  Series, 
pp.  S6-134). 

®  Virgil  Aen,  ii.  49. 


A 


STRUGGLE  FOR  EGYPT 


346 

abducted  the  queen  and  carried  her  off  into  the  enemy  country,  first 
to  Damascus  and  later  to  Persia.® 

3.  Churches  arc  established  at  Petra  and  Hebron  and  bishofs 
apfointed  over  them.  Stephen,  chancellor  of  the  king  of 
Sicily  and  bishop- elect  of  the  church  at  Palermo,  goes  down 
into  Syria.  Count  William  of  Nevers  dies  while  with  us. 

Scarcely  anything  worthy  of  note  occurred  in  the  kingdom  during 
this  year,  except  the  establishment  of  two  churches  about  Easter  time 
and  the  appointment  of  bishops  over  them.  Petra,  one  of  these  two, 
lies  beyond  the  Jordan  in  the  land  of  Moab  and  is  the  capital  of 
Arabia  Secunda.  This  church  had  had  no  Latin  bishop  since  the  Chris¬ 
tians  came  into  the  Land  of  Promise.  The  other,  namely  Hebron, 
never  had  received  that  honor,  it  is  said.  In  the  time  of  the  Greeks  it 
had  been  only  a  parish,  which  was  the  status  of  the  church  at  Bethle¬ 
hem  also,  as  is  well  known.  But  Bethlehem,  because  of  the  reverence 
with  which  it  was  held  as  the  birthplace  of  our  Lord,  deservedly  was 
raised  to  that  honor  first,  and  in  the  time  of  King  Baldwin  I,  im¬ 
mediately  after  the  liberation  of  the  Holy  City  beloved  of  God,  it 
was  given  the  rights  and  privileges  of  a  cathedral.'^ 

In  this  same  year  of  which  we  are  speaking,  Hebron  also  was  for 
the  first  time  distinguished  by  that  honor,  as  was  fitting  in  view  of  her 
connection  with  those  servants  of  God,  whose  memory  is  ever  blessed, 
Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob.  As  bishop  over  the  church  at  Petra  was 
chosen  Guerricus,  a  regular  canon  of  the  Temple  of  the  Lord,  who 
was  also  made  the  metropolitan  of  Arabia  j  while  Hebron  received  as 
head  Raynald,  the  nephew  of  the  Patriarch  Fulcher  of  revered  mem¬ 
ory. 

In  the  following  summer,  Stephen,  a  nobleman  of  high  rank,  chan¬ 
cellor  of  the  king  of  Sicily  and  bishop-elect  of  the  church  at  Palermo, 
arrived  in  the  kingdom  attended  by  a  small  retinue.  Stephen  was  a 
brother  of  Count  Rotrou  du  Perche  and  a  young  man  of  fine  appear¬ 
ance  and  excellent  natural  ability.  He  had  been  made  the  victim  of  a 
conspiracy  on  the  part  of  the  combined  nobles  of  Sicily,  who  by  their 
intrigues  had  succeeded  in  driving  him  from  that  land.  This  was  done 

®  His  affection  for  Theodora  seems  to  have  been  genuine.  When  she  and  the  two 
sons  she  bore  him  were  captured  by  Emperor  Manuel,  Andronicus  surrendered  him¬ 
self. 

See  Book  XI,  chap.  12. 


STRUGGLE  FOR  EGYPT 


347 

contrary  to  the  wishes  of  the  young  king,  a  minor,  and  his  mother, 
but  they  were  powerless  to  prevent  it.  With  the  utmost  difficulty, 
Stephen  managed  to  evade  the  plots  of  the  nobles  and  came  to  us  by 
sea.  Not  very  long  after  his  arrival,  however,  he  was  overtaken  by  a 
serious  illness  from  which  he  died.  He  was  buried  at  Jerusalem  with 
fitting  honor,  in  a  chapel  of  the  Temple  of  the  Lord.® 

About  the  same  time,  also,  William,  count  of  Nevers,  a  powerful 
lord  of  noble  family  and  great  influence,  came  to  Jerusalem  from  the 
kingdom  of  France,  attended  by  a  noble  band  of  knights.  He  had 
come  with  the  intention  of  fighting  in  the  service  of  Christianity  at 
his  own  expense  against  the  enemies  of  our  faith.  But  premature 
death,  envious  of  his  successful  prowess,  most  unfortunately  pre¬ 
vented  this  pious  and  noble  purpose.  For  William  was  stricken  with 
a  lingering  malady  and,  after  long  suffering,  died  at  the  very  begin¬ 
ning  of  a  most  promising  life.  His  death  was  mourned  and  regretted 
by  all.® 

4.  Envoys  from  the  emferor  arrive  and  demand  certain  agree¬ 
ments  from  the  king,  The  archdeacon  of  Tyre  is  sent  as 
envoy  to  C onstantinofle ,  He  concludes  the  frofosed  treaty 
with  the  emferor. 

In  the  course  of  that  same  summer.  Count  Alexander  of  Gravina 
and  a  certain  Michael  Hydruntinus  [of  Otranto],  both  members  of 
the  court  of  the  emperor  of  Constantinople,  arrived  at  Tyre  on  an 
imperial  mission.^®  They  were  granted  a  private  audience,  to  which 

®  Stephen  du  Perche  had  been  chancellor  of  Sicily  and  archbishop-elect  of  Palermo. 
The  pathetic  career  of  this  noble  and  high-minded  young  Norman  amidst  the  com¬ 
plicated  political  tangles  of  Sicilian  affairs  is  described  by  J.  C.  Hildt  (“The  Ministry 
of  Stephen  of  Perche  during  the  Minority  of  William  II  of  Sicily’’  Smith  College 
Studies y  III  [1918],  139—86).  The  palace  revolution  to  which  William  refers  occurred 
in  1168.  Stephen’s  arrival  in  the  Holy  Land  must  therefore  be  dated  toward  the  latter 
part  of  the  summer  (see  F.  Chalandon,  Histoire  de  la  domination  normande  en  Italie 
et  en  Sidle y  II,  345). 

®  William  IV,  count  of  Nevers,  died  at  Acre  in  1168.  Robert  of  Torigni  erro¬ 
neously  enters  the  event  under  the  year  1170  (see  L.  Delisle,  ed.,  Chronique  de 
Robert  de  Torigniy  abbe  du  Mont-Saint-Michely  II,  20). 

It  is  interesting  to  note  that  the  emissaries  of  Manuel  were  both  of  southern 
Italian  origin.  There  were  many  Westerners  at  the  court  of  Constantinople  at  this 
time,  and  Manuel  seems  to  have  relied  upon  them  in  matters  of  great  importance. 
Chalandon  is  wrong  in  assuming  that  they  demanded  a  part  of  the  kingdom  of 
Jerusalem.  William  is  using  the  term  regnum  for  Egypt  (see  F.  Chalandon,  Les  Comneney 

n,  536)* 


STRUGGLE  FOR  EGYPT 


348 

the  king  had  summoned  those  whom  he  wished  to  have  present  at  the 
conference.  The  envoys  explained  the  reasons  for  their  coming  and 
presented  to  the  king  a  letter  from  his  imperial  majesty  dealing  with 
the  same  subject. 

The  substance  of  the  message  was  as  follows:  ^^The  emperor  has 
perceived  that  the  kingdom  of  Egypt,  which  up  to  the  present  time 
has  been  powerful  and  exceedingly  rich,  has  fallen  into  the  hands  of 
a  weak  and  eifeminate  race.  The  neighboring  peoples  also  have  be¬ 
come  aware  of  the  impotency  and  inefficiency  of  both  ruler  and 
princes.  Since  it  seems  impossible  that  the  kingdom  can  continue  long 
in  its  present  state  and  the  government  and  dominion  over  it  must  of 
necessity  pass  to  other  nations,  the  emperor  believes  that  with  the  aid 
of  the  king  he  can  easily  bring  it  under  his  own  power.”  It  was  upon 
this  matter  that  he  had  dispatched  the  envoys  to  the  king. 

Some  say — and  with  much  plausibility — that  it  was  the  king  who 
first  suggested  this  matter  to  the  emperor  through  messengers  and 
frequent  letters,  that  he  had  urged  the  latter  to  aid  him  with  troops, 
with  a  fleet,  and  with  the  necessary  money.  In  return,  the  emperor 
was  to  receive  a  certain  share  of  that  kingdom  and  of  any  spoils  that 
might  be  taken. 

This,  then,  was  the  nature  of  the  business  on  which  the  envoys  had 
come  to  the  king.  When  the  stipulations  of  the  treaty  had  finally  been 
agreed  upon  by  both  parties,  I  was  added  to  the  legation  as  one  of 
their  number  by  command  of  the  king.  As  the  bearer  of  letters,  I  was 
to  visit  the  emperor  and  convey  to  him  the  decision  of  the  king  and 
the  entire  realm.  Furthermore,  I  was  empowered  to  ratify  the  agree¬ 
ment  between  them  as  might  be  required  of  me,  but  under  the  form 
already  decided  upon. 

Accordingly,  I  joined  the  imperial  envoys,  who  were  awaiting  my 
coming  at  Tripoli,  as  directed  by  dispatches  from  the  king,  and  we 
set  out  together  for  Constantinople.  The  emperor  himself  was  de¬ 
tained  for  the  moment  in  Serbia,  where  the  people  had  rebelled 
against  his  authority, 

Serbia  is  a  mountainous  country  lying  between  Dalmatia,  Hungary, 
and  Illyria.  It  is  thickly  wooded  and  very  difficult  of  access.  Relying 
upon  this  general  inaccessibility  of  their  country  and  the  narrow  passes 
leading  into  it,  the  Serbians  had  revolted. 

Old  traditions  say  that  this  entire  people  derive  their  origin  from 
exiles  who  were  banished  to  this  land  and  condemned  to  work  in  the 


STRUGGLE  FOR  EGYPT 


349 


marble  quarries  and  mines.  From  this  condition  of  servitude  they  are 
said  to  take  their  name.  They  are  a  rude  and  undisciplined  people, 
dwelling  in  the  forests  and  mountains.  They  have  no  knowledge  of 
agriculture  but  possess  large  flocks  and  herds  which  supply  them 
abundantly  with  milk  and  cheese,  butter  and  meat.  In  addition  they 
have  plenty  of  honey  and  wax.  They  have  magistrates  who  are  called 
suffanL 

At  times  they  obey  the  emperor.  At  other  times,  since  they  are  a 
bold  and  warlike  race,  they  sally  forth  from  their  mountain  fastnesses 
and  lay  waste  all  the  surrounding  country.  Because  of  the  intolerable 
outrages  committed  against  their  neighbors,  the  emperor  had  valiantly 
marched  against  them  with  a  large  army.  He  was  finally  successful 
in  subduing  them  and  captured  their  principal  chief.  It  was-  on  his 
return  from  this  campaign  that  we,  after  overcoming  the  many  dif¬ 
ficulties  of  the  road,  met  him  at  the  city  called  Butella,  in  the  province 
of  Pelagonia.  This  place  is  near  the  ancient  city,  formerly  known  as 
Justiniana  Prima,  which  was  the  native  place  of  the  most  wise,  most 
fortunate,  and  invincible  Emperor  Justinian.  It  is  now  commonly 
called  Acre  da  [Ochrida]. 

Here  we  were  accorded  an  honorable  reception  by  the  emperor, 
who  treated  us  with  imperial  kindness.  To  him  we  announced  the  mo¬ 
tive  for  our  journey  and  mission  and  explained  with  great  care  the 
tenor  of  the  treaty.  He  listened  to  the  entire  report  with  much  pleas¬ 
ure,  graciously  accepted  it,  and  gave  his  approval  to  all  that  had  been 
agreed  upon.  After  both  parties  had  taken  a  solemn  oath,  the  em¬ 
peror  by  his  authority  ratified  the  details  as  already  arranged  by  the 
envoys  and  confirmed  the  treaty. 

Imperial  letters  containing  the  text  of  the  treaty  in  its  entirety 
were  given  us,  and  we  were  then  dismissed  with  munificent  gifts,  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  usual  custom.  Our  mission  was  now  successfully  ac¬ 
complished,  and  accordingly,  on  the  first  day  of  October,  we  started 
on  the  return  journey. 

5.  The  king  leads  an  army  down  into  Egyft  and^  contrary  to 
the  terms  of  the  treaty  which  he  had  concluded  with  the 
Egyptians y  makes  war  against  them, 

m 

Meanwhile,  immediately  after  our  departure  and  before  our  em¬ 
bassy  could  return  to  inform  the  king  of  the  promised  assistance  of 


I 


350  STRUGGLE  FOR  EGYPT 

the  emperor,  it  began  to  be  rumored  quite  generally  throughout  the 
land  that  Shawar,  the  sultan  of  Egypt,  was  constantly  sending  messen¬ 
gers  to  Nureddin  and  secretly  imploring  his  aid.  He  claimed  that  it 
was  entirely  against  his  own  wishes  that  he  had  joined  in  any  treaty  of 
peace  with  an  enemy,  and  he  desired  to  withdraw  from  the  agreement 
which  he  had  made  with  the  king.  If  he  could  be  assured  of  Nured- 
din’s  assistance,  he  would  break  the  treaty  and  desert  the  king  com¬ 
pletely. 

Moved  with  righteous  indignation  at  this  news,  it  is  said,  the  king 
mustered  infantry  and  cavalry  forces  from  all  over  the  realm  and 
hastily  departed  for  Egypt.  There  are  those  who  claim  that  all  these 
charges  were  false,  that  the  Sultan  Shawar  was  quite  innocent  and, 
far  from  deserving  such  treatment,  had  in  good  faith  kept  the  treaty 
and  all  its  stipulations.  They  assert  that  the  war  made  against  him 
was  unjust  and  contrary  to  divine  law;  that  it  was  merely  a  pretext 
invented  to  defend  an  outrageous  enterprise.  Hence  it  was,  they  main¬ 
tain,  that  the  Lord,  who  strictly  judges  the  secrets  of  the  heart  and 
conscience,  wholly  withdrew  His  favor  from  us  and  refused  to  grant 
success  to  our  iniquitous  undertaking. 

It  is  said  that  Gerbert,  surnamed  Assallit  [Gilbert  d’Assaily],  the 
master  of  the  house  of  the  Hospital  at  Jerusalem,  was  the  prime 
mover,  if  not  the  originator,  of  this  ill-fated  campaign.  He  was  a 
man  of  high  spirit,  extremely  generous,  but  unstable  and  vacillating 
in  character.  After  exhausting  all  the  treasures  of  the  Hospital,  he 
borrowed  a  large  sum  of  money  in  addition  and  expended  it  all  on 
knights  whom  he  drew  to  him  from  every  source.  In  this  way  he 
brought  such  a  weight  of  debt  upon  his  establishment  that  there  was 
no  possibility  of  its  being  lifted.  He  finally  resigned  his  office  in 
despair,  gave  up  the  administration  of  the  Hospital,  and  left  the 
house  burdened  with  obligations  amounting  to  a  hundred  thousand 
pieces  of  gold.  He  is  said  to  have  spent  these  immense  sums  on  the 
basis  of  an  understanding  made  with  the  king  that  if  Egypt  should  be 
taken  and  subjugated,  Balbis,  formerly  called  Pelusium,  with  all  its 
territory,  was  to  become  the  possession  of  this  house  in  perpetuity. 

The  brethren  of  the  Temple,  on  the  contrary,  declined  to  take  part 
in  this  campaign.  Either  because  it  seemed  to  them  contrary  to  the 
dictates  of  conscience  or  because  the  master  of  a  rival  house  was 
apparently  the  originator  and  leader  of  the  enterprise,  they  refused 


STRUGGLE  FOR  EGYPT 


351 

to  follow  the  king  or  furnish  troops.  To  declare  war  against  a  friendly 
power  which  was  relying  on  our  good  faith  seemed  to  them  wrong, 
contrary  to  the  tenor  of  the  treaty  and  in  defiance  of  right  and  justice, 
for  Egypt  had  kept  good  faith  and  did  not  deserve  such  treatment.^  ^ 


The  city  of  Balbis  is  besieged  and  taken.  The  sultafi  beguiles 
the  king  by  fi'onnsing  a  large  sum  of  money. 


Accordingly  the  king  made  all  his  preparations  and  assembled  all 
the  paraphernalia  of  war.  Then,  in  the  month  of  October,  in  the  fifth 
year  of  his  reign,  he  mustered  the  forces  of  the  realm  and  went  down 
into  Egypt.^“  After  a  march  of  about  ten  days  across  the  intervening 
desert,  he  arrived  at  Balbis,  where  he  at  once  began  siege  operations. 
Within  three  days  he  had  opened  a  way  with  the  sword  and  taken  the 
place  by  force.  Without  delay,  on  November  3  he  placed  his  forces 
in  full  possession  of  the  city. 

As  soon  as  the  place  was  taken,  most  of  the  citizens  were  put  to  the 
sword  without  regard  to  age  or  sex.  If  by  any  chance  some  escaped 
death,  they  suffered  loss  of  liberty  and  fell  under  the  miserable  yoke 
of  bondage,  a  fate  which  to  men  of  honor  is  far  worse  than  any  form 
of  death.  Among  the  prisoners  of  high  rank  taken  at  Balbis  was 
Mahaza,  a  son  of  the  sultan,  and  also  one  of  the  latter’s  nephews.  The 
two  had  been  in  charge  of  the  city,  in  command  of  the  troops  assem¬ 
bled  there. 

As  soon  as  an  entrance  was  opened,  the  troops  rushed  in  pell-mell 
and,  without  regard  for  distinctions  of  any  kind,  penetrated  to  the 
most  secluded  retreats.  They  unbarred  private  apartments  and 
dragged  in  chains  to  ignominious  death  those  who  had  vainly  thought 
to  escape  by  hiding.  All  men  in  the  prime  of  life  capable  of  bearing 
arms  were  immediately  put  to  the  sword.  Scarcely  were  old  men  and 
children  spared,  while  to  the  common  people  slight  consideration  was 
shown.  Whatever  seemed  at  all  desirable  became  the  booty  of  the 
enemy,  and  the  most  valuable  articles  were  divided  by  lot  as  spoils. 

LuiiLlgreen,  following'  Abu-Sama,  believes  that  the  Templars  did  finally  take 
part  after  voicing'  their  objections  to  the  venture.  The  Templars  were  especiall}'' 
concerned  because  their  grand  master,  Geoffrey  Fulcher,  had  made  the  treaty  with 
the  caliph  at  Cairo  in  1167.  William  had  given  chief  credit  to  Hugh  of  Caesarea 
(see  F.  Lundgreen,  Wilh-elm  von  Tyrus  and  der  Temflerorden^  pp.  10 1—6), 

Amaury  and  his  army  left  Ascalon  October  20,  1168  (R.  Rohricht,  Regesta 
regni  Hierosolymitani^  no.  453).  William,  who  left  Ochrida  on  October  i,  did  not 
have  time  to  reach  home  before  Amaury’s  departure. 


STRUGGLE  FOR  EGYPT 


352 

Shawar,  completely  overwhelmed  by  the  news  of  these  outrages, 
was  at  a  loss  what  course  to  adopt.  He  began  to  consider,  as  far  as  the 
time  and  circumstances  permitted,  whether  to  endeavor  to  appease 
the  king^s  wrath  by  an  offer  of  money  or  to  beg  the  neighboring  chiefs 
of  his  own  faith  to  assist  him,  either  freely  or  for  pay.  Finally,  as  a 
matter  of  immediate  precaution,  he  resolved  to  use  both  methods. 
Accordingly,  he  sent  a  deputation  to  Nureddin  to  ask  for  help.  This 
was  readily  granted.  Nureddin  called  Shirkuh,  who  was  mentioned 
above,  put  him  in  command  of  a  part  of  the  army,  and  gave  him  a 
large  number  of  his  own  nobles  to  share  the  responsibility.  He 
ordered  the  necessary  provisions  for  the  march  to  be  supplied,  ar¬ 
ranged  for  a  goodly  number  of  camels  to  carry  the  baggage,  and  sent 
the  expedition  into  Egypt. 

7.  The  king  encamfs  before  Cairo  while  tvaiting  for  the  money 
promised  by  the  sultan. 

After  the  destruction  of  Balbis,  the  king  marched  on  with  all  his 
forces  toward  Cairo.  He  made  very  slow  progress,  scarcely  advancing 
a  distance  of  one  day’s  march  in  ten  days.  He  finally  arrived  at  his 
destination,  however,  established  camp  before  the  city,  and  had  the 
machines  made  ready  for  action.  Wickerwork  screens  were  set  up  and 
whatever  else  might  be  useful  in  siege  operations  arranged.  These 
preparations  outside  the  walls  seemed  to  forecast  an  attack  very 
shortly.  The  hearts  of  the  besieged  shook  with  fear,  and  they  felt 
themselves  already  menaced  by  the  apparition  of  death. 

Those  who  know  the  secret  reasons  underlying  the  king’s  actions 
declare  that  he  purposely  delayed  making  the  attack  in  order  that  the 
terror-stricken  sultan  might  have  more  time  for  reflection  and  so  be 
led  to  offer  money  for  the  withdrawal  of  the  troops.  The  king’s  entire 
aim  was  to  extort  money  from  the  sultan  ^  he  preferred  to  take  a 
goodly  bribe  and  withdraw  rather  than  to  give  those  cities  over  to 
rapine  at  the  hands  of  his  people,  as  had  been  done  at  Balbis.  This 
statement  will  be  explained  more  fully  later. 

During  this  interval,  the  sultan  tried  every  means  of  approach  to 
the  king,  through  the  members  of  his  own  house  and  those  of  the 

Virgil  Aen.  i.  95. 

William’s  choice  of  words  here  is  reminiscent  of  Terence  Phormto  iv  and 
Plautus  Bacch.  V.  i.  16. 


STRUGGLE  FOR  EGYPT 


353 

king,  and  employed  every  subtle  device.  His  offers  finally  worked  on 
the  mind  of  the  avaricious  king  5  for  the  sum  promised  was  so  vast 
that  the  entire  resources  of  the  kingdom  would  scarcely  have  sufficed 
to  pay  it  even  though  scraped  together  from  every  corner.  He 
promised,  it  is  said,  two  million  pieces  of  gold  for  the  release  of  his 
son  and  nephew  and  the  withdrawal  of  the  troops  to  their  own 
country.  He  made  this  offer,  as  was  later  disclosed,  not  with  any 
expectation  of  ever  being  able  to  redeem  his  promises,  but  to  prevent 
the  king  from  advancing  suddenly  on  Cairo.  The  city  was  wholly  un¬ 
prepared  and,  in  its  defenceless  state,  might  easily  be  taken  by  a 
surprise  attack.  Those  who  were  present  at  the  time  believe  that  this 
would  undoubtedly  have  happened,  had  our  army  advanced  on  Cairo 
by  forced  marches  immediately  after  the  capture  of  Balbis.  For  at 
that  time  the  Egyptians  were  greatly  disheartened — in  fact,  almost 
stupefied — by  the  recent  massacre  and  the  unexpected  catastrophe  to 
that  great  city.  This  does,  indeed,  seem  most  probable,  for  the  citizens 
of  Cairo  were  weak  and  effeminate  and  entirely  without  military  train¬ 
ing.  For  a  long  time  they  had  devoted  themselves  entirely  to  pleasure. 
The  neighboring  city  was  still  smoking,  and  they  themselves  were 
utterly  prostrated  over  the  loss  of  countless  friends.  At  such  a  time, 
while  fearing  for  themselves  the  fate  that  had  overtaken  others,  they 
would  have  had  neither  courage  nor  strength  to  resist. 

8.  Our  fleet  satis  uf  the  Nile  and  joins  the  land  forces.  The 
sidtan  withdraws  from  his  agreement.  He  attempts  resistance 
and  begs  aid  from  the  Turks. 

This,  then,  was  the  situation  in  the  vicinity  of  Cairo.  Meanwhile, 
the  fleet,  which  the  king  upon  his  departure  from  the  realm  had  or¬ 
dered  to  set  sail  with  all  speed,  arrived.  Borne  by  favoring  winds,  it  is 
said  to  have  entered  the  Nile  through  that  branch  commonly  known  as 
Carabes.  Tanis,  a  very  ancient  city  on  that  bank  of  the  river,  was  at 
once  captured  by  the  naval  forces  and  handed  over  to  the  troops  for 
plunder  and  pillage.  The  fleet  then  attempted  to  sail  on  to  join  the 
king,  but  the  Egyptians  blocked  the  Nile  with  their  vessels  and  pre¬ 
vented  its  passage.  Thereupon  the  king  sent  Humphrey  of  Toron, 
his  constable,  with  a  picked  body  of  cavalry  to  seize  the  opposite 
shore  if  possible,  that  a  passage  on  that  side  at  least  might  be  kept 
unobstructed.  This  might  have  been  done  without  difficulty,  had  not  a 


STRUGGLE  FOR  EGYPT 


354 

rumor  arisen  in  the  meantime  that  Shirkuh  was  approaching.  This 
compelled  a  change  of  plans.  The  fleet  was  ordered  to  sail  out  to  sea 
immediately  and  return  home,  which  was  done.  Through  lack  of 
proper  precaution,  however,  one  of  the  galleys  was  lost. 

In  the  meantime,  the  sultan  and  his  people  did  not  cease  their 
efforts  to  drive  the  king  from  their  land.  What  they  lacked  in  strength 
they  accomplished  by  strategy  and  atoned  for  the  weakness  of  their 
forces  by  using  subtle  devices.  As  soon  as  the  money  had  been 
promised,  they  demanded  an  increased  length  of  time  in  which  to  pay 
it.  The  excuse  given  was  that  such  an  immense  sum  could  not  be 
secured  from  one  source,  therefore  more  time  must  be  granted  before 
the  agreement  could  be  carried  out.  A  payment  of  a  hundred  thou¬ 
sand  gold  pieces  was  made  at  once,  however,  and  in  return  the  sultan’s 
son  and  his  nephew  were  released.  As  hostages  for  the  remainder  he 
offered  his  two  little  nephews,  lads  of  tender  years. 

The  king  then  raised  the  siege,  withdrew  with  his  forces  to  a  place 
about  a  mile  away,  and  established  his  camp  near  the  garden  of 
Balsam.  Here  the  forces  remained  for  eight  days.  During  this  time, 
the  king  received  frequent  but  unsatisfactory  messages  from  the  sultan 
and  finally  again  removed  the  camp  to  a  place  called  Syriacus. 

Meanwhile  the  sultan  was  sending  his  messengers  throughout  the 
entire  realm  to  beg  for  aid.  He  collected  all  the  available  arms  and 
summoned  assistance  from  the  surrounding  country.  He  ordered  food 
supplies  to  be  brought  into  Cairo,  made  the  rounds  of  the  city,  saw 
that  all  weak  places  in  the  fortifications  were  strengthened,  and  con¬ 
sidered  every  method  of  resistance.  With  persuasive  words  he  called 
upon  his  people  to  fight  for  their  lives,  for  liberty,  for  their  wives 
and  children.  He  drew  before  their  eyes  a  vivid  picture  of  the  dread¬ 
ful  disaster  that  had  befallen  a  neighboring  city,  described  the  bitter¬ 
ness  of  captivity,  the  unbearable  yoke  of  a  master,  and  the  desperate 
lot  of  those  under  slavery. 

9.  Milon  de  Plancy  corrufts  the  king^s  mind  by  evil  counsel. 

Shirkuh  arrives  In  response  to  the  call  of  the  Egyftlans.  The 
king  advances  Into  the  desert  against  him  but  does  not  find 
him.  He  the?'efore  returns  to  his  own  land  without  having 
obtained  results. 

There  was  a  certain  man  in  the  king’s  army,  of  noble  family  but  of 
degenerate  morals,  one  who  neither  feared  God  nor  reverenced  man. 


STRUGGLE  FOR  EGYPT 


355 

Milon  de  Plancy  was  a  man  without  shame,  a  brawler  and  a  slanderer, 
ever  active  in  stirring  up  trouble.  Well  aware  of  the  king’s  insatiable 
desire  for  wealth,  he  chose  to  foster  those  avaricious  tendencies  rather 
than  to  offer  wholesome  admonitions.  From  the  first  he  had  con¬ 
sistently  advised  the  king  to  devote  all  his  efforts  toward  a  certain 
end,  namely,  to  cheat  the  Egyptian  kingdom  of  the  sum  mentioned 
above  and  then  to  effect  an  arrangement  with  the  sultan  and  the 
caliph,  instead  of  attempting  to  take  Cairo  and  Babilyun  by  force.  He 
did  this,  it  is  said,  not  because  he  believed  it  impossible  to  take  the 
city,  but  that  he  might  outwit  the  knights  and  others  who  were 
eagerly  looking  forward  to  the  spoils  and  thus  turn  the  entire  rewards 
of  this  great  campaign  into  the  royal  treasury.  For  when  a  city  is 
taken  by  storm,  the  army  usually  reaps  a  far  richer  harvest  of  spoils 
than  is  the  case  when  the  surrender  is  made  to  a  king  or  prince 
directly,  under  the  definite  terms  of  a  treaty  which  benefits  the  lord 
only. 

In  the  former  case,  amid  the  din  and  confusion  of  looting,  the 
right  of  war  permits  each  man  to  seize  whatever  chance  throws  in  his 
way,  and  thus  the  private  means  of  the  victors  are  increased.  In  the 
latter  contingency,  however,  the  advantage  is  wholly  to  the  king,  and 
all  that  is  gained  by  this  means  accrues  to  his  coffers.  Moreover, 
although  it  may  appear  that  all  which  increases  the  fortune  of  the 
king  and  those  in  high  places  benefits  their  subjects  indirectly  and 
increases  the  wealth  of  all,  yet  the  individual  ever  seeks  more  eagerly 
those  gains  which  tend  to  swell  his  private  property  and  to  enrich  his 
own  lares  and  penates. 

And  so  this  diversity  of  feeling  led  to  serious  altercations.  The 
majority  demanded  that  the  decision  be  left  to  the  sword  and  that  all 
be  given  over  to  pillage,  while  the  king  and  his  party  held  otherwise. 
The  wishes  of  the  latter  finally  prevailed,  and  the  will  of  the  king  was 
accomplished. 

While  the  army  was  encamped  in  the  village  just  named,  five  or  six 
miles  from  Cairo,  a  steady  stream  of  messengers  kept  passing  to  and 
fro  between  the  two  sides.  The  sultan  was  continually  sending  word 
that  he  was  using  every  effort  to  collect  the  promised  sum  3  mean¬ 
while  he  begged  the  king  not  to  consider  the  delay  but  to  wait 
patiently.  He  also  advised  him  not  to  approach  nearer  to  the  city, 
lest  the  caliph  and  the  people,  who  were  relying  in  full  security  on 
the  treaty  of  peace  already  arranged,  should  become  alarmed.  The 


STRUGGLE  FOR  EGYPT 


356 

money  would  soon  be  paid,  and  the  king  would  be  able  to  return 
home  under  favorable  circumstances.  With  false  promises  of  this  kind, 
Shawar  successfully  played  on  the  credulity  of  the  Christians  and 
thereby  counteracted  the  good  advice  and  sound  warnings  of  others 
who  suggested  wiser  plans.  Then,  suddenly,  a  rumor  arose  that 
Shirkuh  was  at  hand  with  a  countless  host  of  Turks.  As  soon  as  the 
king  heard  this  news,  he  broke  camp,  ordered  the  baggage  arranged, 
and  returned  to  Balbis,  There  he  supplied  himself  with  the  necessary 
provisions  for  the  march,  left  a  force  of  infantry  and  cavalry  to  guard 
the  city,  and  on  December  25  marched  out  into  the  desert  against 
Shirkuh.  When  he  had  advanced  for  some  distance  into  the  wilder¬ 
ness,  however,  trustworthy  scouts  who  knew  the  locality  well  reported 
that  Shirkuh  had  already  crossed  the  Nile  with  his  forces.  This  news 
necessitated  a  change  of  plans.  As  the  enemy^s  strength  would  be 
doubled  by  these  reinforcements,  it  would  not  be  safe  to  tarry  longer, 
for  delay  was  fraught  with  extreme  danger.  On  the  other  hand,  to 
risk  an  engagement  with  Shirkuh  seemed  equally  hazardous.  The 
sultan  no  longer  showed  any  intention  of  standing  by  the  treaty,  and 
we  were  helpless  to  force  him  to  do  so.  By  a  shrewd  and  carefully 
considered  policy  of  delay,  he  had  prolonged  the  affair  until  the 
Turks  were  at  hand  and  we  must  depart.  Accordingly,  the  forces 
returned  to  Balbis,  where  they  were  joined  by  the  detachment  which 
had  been  left  there  to  guard  the  city.  On  January  2,  the  Christian 
army  in  marching  array  took  the  road  back  to  Syria. 

10.  Shirkuh  seizes  Egyft,  He  kills  the  sultan  andy  a  little  later y 
is  himselj  slain, 

Shirkuh  now  felt  the  time  opportune  to  accomplish  his  purpose,  for, 
since  the  king  had  departed,  there  was  nothing  to  hinder  his  wishes. 
He  therefore  ordered  the  plan  which  he  had  already  formed  to  be 
carried  out.  He  placed  his  camp  before  Cairo  as  if  his  coming  were 
with  no  hostile  intent,  and  there,  like  a  sensible  man,  he  waited 
patiently  for  several  days.  He  showed  no  sign  of  unfriendly  feeling 

The  detailed  account  of  this  campaign,  with  the  emphasis  placed  upon  the 
atrocities  committed  by  the  Christians,  the  sordid  motives  in  their  negotiations  with 
Shawar,  and  the  sympathetic  appreciation  of  Shawar’s  tactics,  reflects  not  only 
William’s  typical  regard  for  the  sanctity  of  treaties,  even  when  made  with  infidels, 
but  also  his  concern  about  the  real,  though  not  formal,  breach  of  the  treaty  which 
he  himself  had  signed  with  the  Greeks. 


STRUGGLE  FOR  EGYPT 


357 

or  sinister  design,  but  with  the  shrewdness  of  which  he  was  a  master 
he  concealed  his  actual  intention.  Each  day  Shawar  the  sultan,  ac¬ 
companied  by  a  large  retinue,  went  out  to  visit  him  at  his  camp  and, 
after  offering  the  customary  devoted  salutation  and  presenting  gifts, 
returned  to  the  city. 

The  security  attending  these  successive  visits  seemed  to  promise 
well  for  the  future  j  and  the  honorable  reception  accorded  him  for 
several  days  increased  the  sultan’s  confidence.  But,  alas,  in  this  fancied 
security  he  placed  too  much  reliance  on  the  good  faith  of  the  Turk, 
and  therefore  Shirkuh,  as  the  minister  of  murder,  took  him  unawares. 
He  gave  secret  orders  to  his  minions  that  at  dawn  the  following  day, 
when  he  himself  went  out  as  if  to  walk  down  to  the  shore,  at  the  time 
when  the  sultan  made  his  daily  visit,  they  should  fall  upon  the 
Egyptian  and  slay  him.  Accordingly  when  Shawar  went  to  the  camp 
at  the  usual  hour  to  pay  his  accustomed  visit  and  render  the  salutation 
due,  the  agents  of  death  rushed  upon  him  and  carried  out  their 
orders.^®  They  threw  him  to  the  ground,  stabbed  him  through  and 
through,  and  cut  off  his  head. 

His  sons  had  witnessed  the  murder.  They  mounted  their  horses  at 
once  and  galloped  swiftly  back  to  Cairo,  where  they  prostrated  them¬ 
selves  before  the  caliph  and  on  their  knees  begged  for  life.  He  is  said 
to  have  answered  that  they  might  hope  for  life  on  condition  that  they 
would  have  no  secret  dealing  with  the  Turks.  These  terms  they 
immediately  violated,  however,  by  secretly  sending  messengers  to 
treat  with  Shirkuh  about  peace.  When  the  caliph  was  informed  of  this, 
he  ordered  them  to  be  put  to  death  by  the  sword. 

The  king  had  now  departed,  and  Shawar  had  been  removed  from 
this  world.  Well  satisfied  with  the  accomplishment  of  his  desires, 
Shirkuh  thereupon  seized  the  kingdom  and  visited  the  caliph  to  pay 
him  the  reverence  due.  He  was  received  with  great  honor  and  granted 
the  high  dignity  of  sultan.  Thus,  strong  through  the  power  of  the 
sword,  Shirkuh  became  master  of  all  Egypt, 

O  blind  cupidity  of  men,  worse  than  all  other  crimes!  O  wicked 
madness  of  an  insatiable  and  greedy  heart!  From  a  quiet  state  of 

According  to  Beha  ed-Din,  it  was  Saladin  who  carried  out  these  orders  for  the 
assassination  of  Shawar.  The  caliph  is  said  to  have  requested  the  head  of  Shawar 
and,  upon  receiving  it,  sent  the  robes  of  the  vizirate  to  Shirkuh,  who  made  his  formal 
call  on  the  caliph  the  next  day,  January  19,  1169  (see  Beha  ed-Din,  The  Life  of 
Saladin^  p.  55). 


358  STRUGGLE  FOR  EGYPT 

peace  into  what  a  turbulent  and  anxious  condition  has  an  immoderate 
desire  for  possessions  plunged  us!  All  the  resources  of  Egypt  and  its 
immense  wealth  served  our  needs j  the  frontiers  of  our  realm  were 
safe  on  that  side^  there  was  no  enemy  to  be  feared  on  the  south.  The 
sea  aEorded  a  safe  and  peaceful  passage  to  those  wishing  to  come  to 
us.  Our  people  could  enter  the  territories  of  Egypt  without  fear  and 
carry  on  commerce  and  trade  under  advantageous  conditions.  On  their 
part,  the  Egyptians  brought  to  the  realm  foreign  riches  and  strange 
commodities  hitherto  unknown  to  us  and,  as  long  as  they  visited  us, 
were  at  once  an  advantage  and  an  honor  to  us.  Moreover,  the  large 
sums  spent  by  them  every  year  among  us  enriched  the  fiscal  treasury 
and  increased  the  private  wealth  of  individuals.  But  now,  on  the 
contrary,  all  things  have  been  changed  for  the  worse.  “How  is  the 
most  fine  gold  changed”  and  “my  harp  also  is  turned  into  mourn¬ 
ing.”  Wherever  I  turn  I  find  only  reasons  for  fear  and  uneasiness. 
The  sea  refuses  to  give  us  a  peaceful  passage,  all  the  regions  round 
about  are  subject  to  the  enemy,  and  the  neighboring  kingdoms  are  mak¬ 
ing  preparations  to  destroy  us.  The  cupidity  of  one  man  has  brought  all 
these  misfortunes  upon  us,  and  his  avarice,  the  root  of  all  evil,  has 
clouded  the  serenity  which  had  been  vouchsafed  us  from  on  high.^® 
But  let  us  resume  the  thread  of  our  story. 

After  the  death  of  the  sultan  and  his  sons,  so  undeserved,  of  which 
we,  by  our  unrighteous  conduct,  were  the  guilty  cause,  Shirkuh  held 
the  royal  power  over  Egypt  as  he  had  desired.  But  he  was  not  per¬ 
mitted  to  rejoice  long  in  his  elevation,  for  he  had  ruled  hardly  a  year 
when  he  was  removed  from  the  aEairs  of  this  world.^^ 

1 1 .  Shirkuh  is  succeeded  by  Saladhiy  his  brother^ s  soriy  who  rules 
the  kingdom  of  Egyft, 

Shirkuh  was  succeeded  by  his  nephew  Saladin,  the  son  of  his  brother 
Negem-ed-Din.“^  The  new  ruler  was  a  man  of  keen  and  vigorous 

Lam,  4 :  1  >  Job  30 :  31. 

This  appreciation  of  the  importance  of  commerce  as  above  politics  is  strangely 
modern  and  has  often  been  quoted  (see  C.  Haskins,  Renaissance  of  the  T<ioelft/i  Cen- 
tnryy  p.  270).  These  reflections  were  probably  inserted  by  William  when  he  was 
revising  his  work,  about  1182,  for  the  conditions  described  were  not  prevalent  until 
later. 

Shirkuh’s  death,  the  result  of  gluttony,  occurred  March  23,  1169,  barely  two 
months  after  he  had  become  vizier  (Beha  ed-Din,  Saladiny  p.  56). 

-°Najm  al-Din  Ayyub.  This  family  was  of  Kurdish,  not  Turkish,  descent  and 


STRUGGLE  FOR  EGYPT 


359 

mind,  valiant  in  war,  and  of  an  extremely  generous  disposition.  It  is 
said  that  at  the  very  beginning  of  his  rule,  when  he  visited  the  caliph 
to  pay  the  homage  which  he  owed,  he  struck  his  lord  to  the  ground 
with  a  club  which  he  held  in  his  hand  and  slew  him.  He  then  put  all 
the  caliph’s  children  to  the  sword  in  order  that  he  himself  might  be 
subject  to  no  higher  authority  but  might  rule  as  both  caliph  and 
sultan.  For  the  Turks  were  regarded  with  hatred  by  the  Egyptians, 
and  Saladin  feared  that  sometime  when  he  had  occasion  to  come 
before  the  caliph  his  lord  might  order  him  to  be  put  to  death.  Ac¬ 
cordingly  he  took  means  to  forestall  any  such  intention  and  brought 
upon  the  unsuspecting  caliph  the  fate  which,  if  report  be  true,  the 
latter  was  preparing  to  inflict  upon  him  as  sultan.-^ 

On  the  death  of  the  caliph,  Saladin  seized  his  wealth  and  all  the 
royal  treasures  for  himself,  together  with  everything  of  value  in  the 
palace.  He  disposed  of  all  things  according  to  his  own  pleasure.  To 
his  soldiers  in  particular  he  gave  with  such  lavish  generosity  that, 
within  a  few  days,  the  wardrobes  were  empty  and  he  was  obliged  to 
borrow  money  from  others.  Thus  he  incurred  a  heavy  burden  of  debt. 

Some  of  the  late  caliph’s  sons  are  said  to  have  been  secretly  saved 
by  loyal  adherents  of  their  father,  to  the  end  that,  if  at  some  future 
time  the  Egyptians  should  regain  control  of  the  government,  an  heir 
of  his  name,  rank,  and  blood  might  not  be  lacking. 

1 2.  Bernardy  abbot  of  the  monastery  of  Mt.  Tabor y  is  established 
over  the  church  at  Lydda.  Fredericky  archbishof  of  TyrCy 
defarts  for  the  West  to  ask  aid  from  the  frinces  there. 

After  the  king’s  return  to  the  kingdom  nothing  worthy  of  note 
happened  during  the  first  part  of  that  year  except  the  death  of 
Raynerus,  bishop  of  Lydda,  of  happy  memory,  and  the  installation  of 
Bernard,  abbot  of  the  monastery  of  Mt.  Tabor  in  his  place. 


hence  related  more  nearly  to  the  Persians.  Saladin  himself  was  called  Yusuf.  The 
family  is  commonly  referred  to  as  the  Ayyubid  dynasty. 

This  account  of  the  death  of  the  caliph  is  not  confirmed  by  other  sources.  It  is 
possible  that  William  is  confusing  Saladin’s  part  in  the  destruction  of  Shawar  and 
his  family  (note  i6  above)  with  the  death  of  the  caliph.  Caliph  Adid  seems  to  have 
died  a  natural  death,  September  13,  1171.  The  Abbasid  caliphate  had  been  pro¬ 
claimed  in  Egypt  even  before  his  death  without  causing  any  disturbance  (see  G. 
Wiet,  L^Egyfte  arahe  de  la  conquete  arahe  d  la  conquete  ottomane^  6^2—1^10  de 
Pare  chredenne,  p.  302).  The  change  occurred  so  quietly  that  it  may  have  been 
years  later  before  William  heard  of  it.  The  Fatimid  caliphate  ended  with  Caliph  Adid. 


STRUGGLE  FOR  EGYPT 


360 

The  following  springs  which  was  the  beginning  of  the  sixth  year  of 
King  Amaury’s  reign,^-  the  wise  men  of  the  kingdom  began  to  realize 
that  the  subjugation  of  Egypt  by  the  Turks  had  been  a  serious  injury 
to  us  and  that  our  situation  had  become  materially  worse.  By  sailing 
out  from  Egypt  with  his  large  fleet,  Nureddin,  our  most  powerful 
enemy,  could  effectively  shut  in  the  realm  and  blockade  all  the  coast 
cities  by  land  and  sea,  with  his  two  armies.  Still  more  to  be  dreaded 
was  the  fact  that  he  could  hinder  the  passage  of  pilgrims  on  their  way 
to  us,  or  even  refuse  them  permission  to  pass  at  all.  It  was  deemed 
imperative,  therefore,  that  an  embassy  chosen  from  distinguished 
dignitaries  of  the  church  be  sent  to  the  princes  of  the  West  to  set 
forth  with  the  utmost  care  the  intolerable  distress  under  which  the 
kingdom  was  laboring,  the  affliction  of  the  Christian  people,  and  the 
dire  calamities  which  were  threatening  the  brethren.  To  undertake 
this  mission,  the  Patriarch  Hernesius,  archbishop  of  Caesarea,  and 
William,  bishop  of  Acre,  reverend  men  endowed  with  wisdom  and 
persuasive  eloquence,  were  unanimously  selected.  Accordingly  they 
set  sail.  They  carried  with  them  letters  from  the  king  and  all  the 
bishops:  to  Frederick,  emperor  of  the  Romans j  Louis,  king  of  the 
Franks  j  Henry,  king  of  the  English  j  and  William,  king  of  Sicily  5 
also  to  the  noble  and  illustrious  counts,  Philip  of  Flanders,  Henry  of 
Troyes,  and  Theobald  II  of  Chartres — in  fact,  to  all  the  other  great 
nobles  of  the  West.  The  night  after  their  departure,  however,  a 
violent  tempest  suddenly  broke  forth  j  the  ship  was  tossed  hither  and 
yon,  the  oars  were  broken,  and  the  masts  thrown  down.  After  three 
days,  the  envoys  returned  greatly  terrified;  they  had  barely  escaped 
shipwreck.  Another  delegation  was  therefore  chosen  and  dispatched 
in  place  of  the  first.  It  consisted  of  Frederick,  archbishop  of  Tyre,  who 
had  been  finally  prevailed  upon  to  accept  the  task  by  the  urgent  en¬ 
treaties  of  the  king  and  the  nobles,  and  John,  bishop  of  Banyas, 
suffragan  of  that  same  church.  The  two  embarked  under  more  fortu¬ 
nate  auspices  and,  after  a  prosperous  voyage,  arrived  at  their  desti¬ 
nation.  They  accomplished  little,  however,  in  the  matter  which  had 
been  entrusted  to  them.  The  bishop  died  at  Paris,  soon  after  reaching 

--King-  Amaury  returned  in  January,  1169.  He  would  be  completing  six  years 
of  his  reign  in  the  following  February.  The  following  spring  would  mark  the  begin¬ 
ning  of  his  seventh  year,  therefore.  The  embassy  referred  to  in  this  chapter  reached 
Rome  in  July  and  Paris  in  September,  1169  (see  R.  Rohricht,  Geschichte  des  Konig- 
reichs  Jerusalem^  t  100—12^1^  p.  344). 


STRUGGLE  FOR  EGYPT 

Prance,  and  the  archbishop,  after  a  stay  of  two  years  abroad,  returned 
without  having  succeeded  in  his  mission. 

13*  The  emferory  anxious  to  carry  out  the  treaty y  sends  a  fleet 
to  Sy  ria  under  command  of  some  of  his  nobles. 


That  summer  passed  uneventfully  without  any  occurrence  worthy  of 
note.  At  the  beginning  of  the  following  autumn,  the  emperor,  mind¬ 
ful  of  his  agreement,  sent  the  promised  fleet  in  fulfillment  of  the 
treaty  which  he  had  made  with  the  king  at  our  suggestion  and  desire. 
In  this  matter  he  is  highly  to  be  commended,  for  with  imperial  mag¬ 
nificence  he  interpreted  the  treaty  very  liberally  and  more  than 
carried  out  his  promises.  There  were  in  this  naval  force  one  hundred 
and  fifty  ships  of  war  equipped  with  beaks  and  a  double  tier  of  oars. 
These  vessels  were  known  as  galleys  and  were  especially  designed  for 
use  in  war.  There  were  in  addition  sixty  larger  boats,  well-armored, 
which  were  built  to  carry  horses.  They  were  fitted  with  large  openings 
in  the  stern  for  greater  convenience  in  loading  and  unloading  the 
animals,  and  they  also  had  bridges  by  means  of  which  both  men  and 
horses  might  be  more  easily  embarked  and  landed.  The  fleet  included 
also  ten  or  twenty  vessels  of  huge  size  called  dromonesy  which  were 
loaded  to  capacity  with  commissary  supplies  of  all  kinds.  These  latter 
also  carried  arms  of  many  kinds  and,  in  addition,  engines  and 
machines  of  war. 

The  emperor  placed  in  command  of  the  entire  fleet  Megalducas,-^ 
one  of  his  nobles  and  a  kinsman  of  his  own.  Accompanying  him  was 
another  noble  called  Maurice,  who  stood  very  high  in  the  confidence 
of  his  imperial  master.  On  the  experience  of  this  man  the  emperor 
relied  greatly,  as  was  later  shown  when  he  put  Maurice  in  charge  of 
all  the  affairs  of  the  empire.  Associated  with  these  two  in  the  com¬ 
mand  was  Count  Alexander  of  Conversana,  a  nobleman  of  Apulia. 
The  emperor  regarded  him  with  sincere  affection  because  of  the  deep 
and  loyal  devotion  displayed  by  the  count  toward  himself. 

To  these  three  nobles  was  committed  the  command  of  the  imperial 

This  was  Alexius  Contostephanus,  whose  title,  grand  duke,  William  has  used. 
The  other  two  commanders  were  Alexander  of  Gravina,  or  Conversana,  who  had 
been  a  member  of  the  embassy  from  Manuel  in  1168,  and  Theodore  Maurozumes 
whom  William  here  calls  Maurice.  The  fleet,  after  a  review  by  Manuel,  left  the 
neighborhood  of  Constantinople  shortly  after  July  10,  1169  (see  Chalandon,  Les 

Co'tmiene^  II,  538). 


362  STRUGGLE  FOR  EGYPT 

army  when  it  was  sent  into  our  part  of  the  Orient.  About  the  end  of 
September  after  a  prosperous  voyage,  the  fleet  entered  the  harbor 
of  Tyre.  Thence  it  proceeded  to  Acre,  where  it  lay  at  anchor  in  a  quiet 
roadstead  between  the  river  and  the  port. 

14.  The  king  goes  down  into  Egyft  with  his  army.  The  Greeks 
accomfany  him  ivith  both  land  and  sea  forces. 

In  the  year  of  the  Lord  1169,  the  sixty-eighth  of  the  liberation  of 
the  city  and  the  sixth  of  King  Amaury’s  reign,^^  the  king,  having  set 
the  affairs  of  the  realm  in  order  and  left  a  force  of  knights  to  protect 
the  realm  during  his  absence  from  the  wiles  and  inroads  of  Nureddin, 
who  was  still  hovering  in  the  vicinity  of  Damascus,  ordered  the  entire 
host  both  Latin  and  Greek  to  assemble  on  October  1 5  at  Ascalon.  The 
fleet  had  sailed  from  the  port  of  Acre  several  days  before,  bound  for 
the  land  of  Egypt. 

The  army  marched  forth  from  Ascalon  on  August  16.“^  In  order 
that  the  infantry  forces  might  not  be  unduly  wearied,  they  advanced 
by  easy  stages  and  made  frequent  use  of  stopping  places  where  there 
was  no  lack  of  water.  On  the  ninth  day  the  ancient  city  of  Farama  was 
reached.  They  wished  to  follow  the  shore  road,  but  a  recent  occur¬ 
rence  made  it  necessary  to  take  the  longer  inland  route.  For  some  of 
the  dykes  between  the  plain  and  the  neighboring  sea  had  been  broken 
down  by  the  constant  lashing  of  the  waves,  and  the  waters  had  forced 
a  passage  through  the  opposing  barriers.  Now  unchecked,  they  over¬ 
flowed  the  road  into  the  plain  beyond,  where  they  formed  a  pond 
which,  although  narrow  at  first,  broadened  out  within  the  field  into  a 
.  much  wider  expanse.  This  influx  of  the  sea  brought  in  with  it  such  a 
quantity  of  fish  that  thenceforth  a  supply  of  that  kind  of  food  in 
abundance  never  dreamed  of  before  was  afforded  not  only  to  the 
cities  in  the  vicinity  but  even  to  places  more  remote.  Since  the  sea 
had  inundated  the  country  along  the  coast,  travellers  who  had  in¬ 
tended  to  go  to  Egypt  by  the  shore  route  were  obliged  to  make  a 
detour  of  ten  miles  or  even  more  around  this  pond  before,  they  could 
return  to  the  road. 

These  details  have  been  given  because  of  the  novelty  of  this  marvel- 

Here  again  William  is  confused  in  the  application  of  his  formulae  for  the  equation 
of  the  Christian  era  with  the  era  of  Latin  Jerusalem  and  the  statement  of  the  regnal 
year.  The  date  should  read  ‘*1169,  seventieth  year  of  the  liberation  of  the  city 
and  the  seventh  of  King  Amaury’s  reign. 

This  is  evidently  a  slip  of  the  pen,  for  October  16  is  clearly  intended. 


STRUGGLE  FOR  EGYPT 


363 

lous  occurrence  and  also  because,  by  the  constant  inflow  of  the  sea,  this 
desert  region,  which  was  formerly  exposed  to  the  intense  heat  of  the 
sun,  was  now  covered  with  water  and  frequented  by  boatmen.  This 
region,  now  become  very  productive,  was  filled  with  the  nets  of  fisher¬ 
men  and  yielded  a  harvest  heretofore  unknown. 

The  city  of  Farama,  referred  to  above,  is  now  uninhabited,  but  it 
was  once  the  home  of  a  large  population.  It  is  situated  on  the  border 
of  the  desert  near  Carabes,  the  first  arm  of  the  Nile,  at  the  point 
where  that  branch  of  the  river  flows  into  the  sea.  It  lies,  therefore, 
between  the  river,  the  sea,  and  the  desert  3  yet  it  is  three  miles  distant 
from  the  mouth  of  the  Nile. 

When  our  army  reached  Farama,  they  found  that  the  fleet  had 
already  arrived.  The  necessary  oarsmen  were  immediately  provided, 
and  the  entire  army  was  ferried  across  to  the  opposite  shore.  Then, 
leaving  on  the  left  Tanis,  formerly  a  noble  city  but  now  merely  a 
small  town,  the  army  proceeded  for  about  twenty  miles  along  a  road 
between  a  marsh  and  the  shore  and  finally,  after  a  march  of  two  days, 
arrived  at  Damietta. 

15.  "The  king  blockades  Damietta.  In  the  siege  of  that  city  both 
the  Greek  and  Latin  armies  exert  them.s elves  without  result, 

Damietta  is  one  of  the  oldest  and  most  famous  cities  of  Egypt.  It 
lies  on  the  bank  of  the  Nile  nearer  us  at  the  point  where  the  river 
flows  into  the  sea  through  its  second  mouth.  It  is  conveniently  placed 
between  the  river  and  the  sea,  from  which  it  is  about  a  mile  away. 
Our  land  army  reached  Damietta  on  October  27  and  encamped  be¬ 
tween  the  city  and  the  sea  to  await  the  arrival  of  the  fleet,  which  was 
detained  by  rough  seas  and  adverse  winds.  After  three  days  the  tu¬ 
mult  of  the  waves  subsided,  and  the  fleet,  taking  advantage  of  favor¬ 
ing  winds,  entered  the  river  and  anchored  in  a  quiet  harbor  along  the 
shore  midway  between  the  city  and  the  sea. 

On  the  opposite  bank  a  high  tower,  well  garrisoned  by  a  company 
of  armed  men  sufficient  to  afford  it  complete  protection,  stood  out 
boldly  by  itself.  From  this  tower  to  the  city  was  stretched  an  iron 
chain  which  completely  barred  the  passage  to  the  upper  part  of  the 
river  and  proved  a  great  hindrance  to  our  forces.  All  ships  coming 
from  above,  however,  from  Cairo  and  Babilyun,  could  pass  to  them 
freely  without  hindrance. 


364  STRUGGLE  FOR  EGYPT 

When  the  fleet  had  been  stationed  in  position,  the  troops  passed  on 
through  the  orchards  which  lay  between  their  place  of  encampment 
and  the  city  itself  and  set  up  their  tents  quite  near  Damietta,  where 
the  approach  to  the  walls  was  unhindered.  They  deferred  making  the 
attack  until  three  days  had  elapsed,  however,  and  thereby  learned  by 
experience  the  truth  of  the  saying,  “When  all  is  ready  it  is  dangerous 
to  delay.”  For  from  the  upper  parts  of  Egypt  came  a  host  of 
Turks,  infinite  in  number,  and  ships  loaded  with  armed  men.  Thus 
our  army  was  obliged  to  look  helplessly  on  while  the  city  which 
earlier  had  been  practically  empty  was  filled  to  overflowing.  It  soon 
became  apparent  that  without  the  assistance  of  machines  and  engines 
of  war  Damietta  could  not  be  taken,  although  on  the  arrival  of  the 
Christians  it  had  seemed  scarcely  able  to  sustain  the  first  attack. 

Workmen  were  accordingly  chosen  and  suitable  material  provided. 
Then,  at  the  cost  of  much  expense  and  labor,  a  lofty  tower  of  seven 
stories  was  built,  from  the  top  of  which  the  entire  city  could  be  sur¬ 
veyed.  Other  machines  of  various  kinds  were  also  constructed.  Some 
of  these  were  designed  to  hurl  huge  rocks  for  battering  down  the 
walls,  others,  to  protect  the  sappers  who,  enclosed  within  them  as 
within  hidden  caverns,  could  approach  the  fortifications  and,  by  con¬ 
structing  subterranean  tunnels  beneath  them,  cause  the  walls,  thus 
deprived  of  support,  to  topple  over. 

Meanwhile,  the  approaches  to  the  city  had  been  levelled  in  such  a 
manner  that  the  engines  which  had  now  been  built  could  be  applied 
to  the  walls.  The  fighters  in  the  movable  tower  kept  up  a  continual 
pressure  upon  the  besieged.  Without  intermission,  they  hurled  forth 
showers  of  arrows  and  stone  missiles  together  with  such  other  weapons 
as  their  fury  and  the  confined  space  furnished.  At  the  same  time  the 
men  stationed  at  the  hurling  engines  sent  forth  volleys  of  huge  rocks 
and  made  zealous  efforts  to  demolish  the  walls  and  the  houses 
attached  to  them. 

On  perceiving  these  attempts,  the  townsfolk  endeavored  to  circum¬ 
vent  ruse  by  ruse.  In  order  to  combat  our  efforts  with  equal  cunning, 
they  erected  a  high  tower  opposite  ours  and  manned  it  with  armed 
men  who  were  to  resist  our  efforts  from  a  similar  machine  and  re¬ 
spond  to  our  attacks  with  others  of  equal  fury.  Accordingly,  they 
stationed  their  engines  over  against  our  apparatus  and  put  forth  every 

Lucan  PharsaL  I.  281. 


STRUGGLE  FOR  EGYPT 


365 


ejffort  to  demolish  it.  The  need  of  defending  themselves  developed 
skill,  and  the  emerg'ency  lent  them  strengtli.  Those  who  up  to  this 
time  had  felt  unequal  to  resistance  now^  spurred  on  hy  necessit)’,  in- 
vejited  schemes  hitherto  unthoupht  of,  and  the  minds  of  e\’en  the 
dullest  became  alert  in  de^nsing  means  to  seciu*e  their  own  s;ifet\'. 
They  learned  by  dire  experience  the  truth  of  the  saving,  ‘'Adversit)- 
develops  shrewdness.’’ 

But  at  the  ven'  time  when  the  Christiajis  should  have  pressed  on 
the  sies^e  more  fierceh*  than  e^'er,  the\'  bep*an  to  show  sio-ns  of  coward- 
ice  and  indifference.  This  chanue  of  morale  has  been  attributed  bv  some 
to  treacher\’  and  bv  othei*s  to  mere  carelessness  and  neriect.  It  soon 
beaune  evident  that  our  troops  were  showino-  less  facilit\'  and  sao-acit^' 
than  usual  or,  at  all  e^^ents,  that  those  in  command  were  acting  with 
treacherous  intent.  The\'  ordered  that  oite  of  the  newh*  built  towers 

V  m 

be  applied  to  the  ^^’;^lls  in  a  steep  and  almost  impregnable  place. 
There  were  in  that  same  part  of  the  cit\’  mam’  places  where  the  wall 
was  lower  and  far  less  strong,  where  it  would  have  been  more  easlh’ 
taken,  )’et  the  mo^’'able  tou'er  was  set  up  at  the  strongest  and  best 
fortified  point,  at  a  place  which  presented  more  difficulties  than  any 
other  for  apphing  the  machines.  jMoreover,  from  that  position  the 
damage  would  be  infiicted  not  upon  the  townspeople  or  their  build¬ 
ing's  but  only  upon  the  chirrch  of  the  Hoh’  Mother  of  God,  which  was 
situated  close  to  the  Avails. 

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  delaA’  in  attacking'  Damietta  im- 

* 

media  tel)’  after  oiu*  arrival  there  proceeded  from  eA’il  intent.  At  that 
time  the  cin*  vus  practicalh*  deserted,  occupied  onh’  by  its  own  citi¬ 
zens,  who  were  weak  and  peaceable  people,  iitterh’  ignorant  of  the 
art  of  war.  If  the  Christians  had  attacked  the  cin*  boldlA’  at  once,  as 

m  « 

theA’  should  haA’e  done,  it  could  haA’e  been  taken  at  the  first  ass:uilt. 

■ 

But  the  besieged  Avere  alloAved  a  respite,  and  during  that  time  their 
number  AA*as  vreatlA’  increased  bA*  reinforcements  of  bntA’e  and  2:allant 
fighters.  The  result  was  that  theA'  AA-ere  able  to  AAithstand  our  attacks, 
not  only  AAathin  the  citA'  itself,  but  CA’en  on  the  field  outside. 


Ovid  VI. 


575 


366 


STRUGGLE  FOR  EGYPT 


A  famine  breaks  out  in  the  camf.  Our  fleet  barely  escapes 
destruction  by  fire.  All  our  efforts  prove  vain  and  the  siege 
is  finally  raised. 

At  this  juncture,  another  misfortune  was  added  to  the  troubles  of 
the  Christians.  The  Greeks  who  had  come  in  large  numbers  in  the 
fleet  now  began  to  suffer  from  a  shortage  of  provisions.  Their  bread 
supply  had  entirely  given  out,  and,  in  fact,  no  food  of  any  description 
was  to  be  found  among  them.  It  happened  that  a  grove  of  palm  trees 
near  the  camp  was  being  cut  down  for  use  in  various  ways.  As  the 
trees  fell,  the  starving  Greeks  eagerly  sought  a  tender  morsel  which 
grows  at  the  top  where  the  branches  spring  forth  and  which  supplies 
them  with  sap.  Being  edible,  this  furnished  a  kind  of  food,  albeit 
poor,  which  assuaged  the  pangs  of  hunger.  The  famished  condition 
of  these  people  rendered  them  skilful  in  seeking  food,  and  the  crav¬ 
ings  of  a  ravenous  stomach  developed  their  ingenuity  in  providing 
for  its  needs.  For  some  days  they  managed  to  eke  out  a  miserable 
existence  with  this  food.  Others  of  their  number,  not  wholly  destitute, 
satisfied  the  demands  of  hunger  with  oats,  raisins,  and  chestnuts.  The 
Christians  had  a  sufficient  supply  of  bread  and  other  provisions  of 
various  kinds,  but,  mindful  of  the  future,  they  were  sparing  of  their 
small  stock.  For  if  they  were  improvident  enough  to  share  supplies 
with  those  who  had  none,  there  was  danger  that  they  themselves 
might  sometime  be  in  want.  Moreover,  they  were  uncertain  how 
lengthy  a  stay  was  to  be  made  at  Damietta  and  suspected  that  it  would 
be  of  long  duration. 

A  great  deal  of  rain  fell  at  this  time,  and  the  storms  were  so 
violent  that  the  poorer  people  were  unable  by  any  device  to  keep  the 
water  from  dripping  through  their  tents.  Nor  were  the  rich  in  much 
better  condition,  for  their  pavilions  were  drenched  by  the  downpour 
or  rather  cloudbursts  from  the  sky.  Only  by  digging  ditches  around 
the  tents  to  carry  off  the  floods  of  water  could  they  obtain  even  a 
slight  protection. 

Another  serious  calamity  now  fell  upon  them.  The  galleys  and 
other  vessels  of  various  kinds  had  been  brought  into  the  river  from 
the  sea  and  stationed  near  the  city  in  a  position  apparently  quite  safe. 
The  townspeople,  however,  observing  that  the  wind  was  from  the 
south  and  that  the  waves  of  the  Nile  were  rolling  in  with  great 


STRUGGLE  FOR  EGYPT 


367 

violence,  seized  the  opportunity  to  carry  into  effect  a  plan  already 
conceived.  They  took  a  boat  of  ordinary,  size,  filled  it  to  capacity  with 
dry  wood,  pitch,  and  whatever  inflammable  materials  would  nourish 
flames  and  set  it  on  fire.  It  was  then  launched  on  the  river,  where  the 
waves  of  their  own  volition  carried  it  against  our  fleet.  Fanned  by  the 
south  wind,  the  flame  spread  rapidly  to  the  fuel  with  which  the  boat 
was  loaded.  The  blazing  craft  sailed  down  upon  the  fleet,  where  it 
was  caught  among  our  closely  massed  vessels  and  held  fast.  In  this 
manner  the  flaming  cargo  was  conveyed  to  our  vessels,  and  six  of  the 
beaked  ships  called  galleys  were  burned  to  ashes.  As  the  violence  of 
the  flames  increased,  the  entire  fleet  would  have  been  enveloped  in  its 
fury,  had  it  not  been  for  the  vigilance  of  the  king.  He  discovered  the 
fire,  and  without  waiting  even  to  put  on  his  shoes,  he  quickly  mounted 
his  horse  and  roused  the  sailors.  With  frantic  shouts  and  gestures, 
he  called  on  them  to  stop  the  flames.  This  they  succeeded  in  doing 
by  separating  the  vessels  from  one  another,  and  thus  the  fury  of  the 
all-pervading  flames  was  quelled.  Any  ship  which  chanced  to  catch 
fire  from  the  sparks,  and  other  inflammable  materials  borne  by  the 
wind  was  at  once  rescued  by  the  application  of  water,  thanks  to  the 
river  so  close  at  hand. 

Assaults  on  the  city  were  made  at  intervals  of  several  days,  but,  as 
usually  happens  when  the  outcome  of  battle  is  uncertain,  victory  fell 
now  to  the  Christians  and  again  to  the  infidels.  It  was  generally  the 
Christians  who  challenged  to  combat,  for  the  enemy,  unless  provoked, 
rarely  offered  battle.  Occasionally,  however,  the  besieged,  inspired  by 
some  feeling  of  confidence,  emerged  from  a  postern  gate  opposite  the 
camp  of  the  Greeks  and  made  unexpected  attacks  upon  that  part  of 
the  army.  Possibly  they  had  heard  that  the  Greek  forces  were  less 
strong  than  ours,  or  rumor  may  have  carried  the  news  that  they  were 
in  dire  extremity  through  hunger  and  so  less  able  to  withstand  attack. 
In  spite  of  this  handicap,  however,  whenever  opportunity  offered  the 
commander  Megalducas  and  all  the  other  Greeks  fought  gallantly 
and  boldly  in  battle  array.  Encouraged  by  the  example  of  their 
superiors,  those  of  lower  rank  again  and  again  attacked  with  unusual 
vigor  and  stood  their  ground  with  intrepidity. 

The  strength  of  the  besieged,  however,  was  continually  increased 
by  large  detachments  which  were  ever  arriving  both  by  land  and  by 
sea.  As  a  result  of  this,  the  citizens,  although  confined  within  a  city 


STRUGGLE  FOR  EGYPT 


368 

under  siege,  were  a  source  of  greater  terror  to  their  opponents  than 
were  the  Christians  to  them. 

Murmurs  now  began  to  creep  among  the  people,  and  the  feeling 
was  almost  unanimous  that  our  toil  was  being  wasted.  It  was  the 
general  opinion  that  the  expedition  had  been  undertaken  against  the 
will  of  the  Lord  and  that,  therefore.  His  face  was  turned  from  us  in 
anger  j  far  wiser  would  it  be  to  return  home  than  to  languish  away 
in  Egypt  by  famine  or  to  perish  by  the  sword  of  the  infidel.  Accord- 
ingly,  a  treaty  with  certain  secret  stipulations  was  concluded  through 
the  combined  efforts  of  some  of  our  leaders  and  certain  Turkish  sa¬ 
traps,  notably  through  the  energetic  work  of  a  chief  named  Jevelino. 
The  Greeks  agreed  to  the  same  compromise,  and  presently  peace  was 
proclaimed  by  the  voice  of  the  herald."^ 

17.  The  expedition  is  recalled ^  and  the  king  returns  to  his  own 
land.  On  the  homezvard  voyagCy  almost  the  entire  Greek 
fleet  is  lost  by  reason  of  unfavorable  zvinds. 

Then  the  townspeople  and  the  allies  who  had  come  to  their  assistance 
went  out  freely  to  visit  our  camp,  and  those  of  our  soldiers  who 
wished  to  do  so  were  likewise  permitted  to  pass  back  and  forth  be¬ 
tween  the  city  and  the  camp  without  hindrance.  Now  at  length  both 
sides  could  freely  trade  with  each  other,  for  permission  was  given  to 
all  to  buy,  sell,  or  exchange  as  they  desired.  For  the  space  of  three 
days,  therefore,  the  Christians  used  the  market  place  in  common  with 
the  infidels  and  made  all  their  preparations  for  the  march.  They  then 
tore  down  the  engines  of  war  and  burned  them,  after  which  the  land 
army  followed  the  king  back  into  Syria.  By  forced  marches  they  re¬ 
traced  their  steps  over  the  route  by  which  they  had  come  and,  on 
December  21,  arrived  at  Ascalon.  Because  of  the  approaching  feast 

The  Greek  historians  have  much  to  say  about  this  expedition,  and,  needless  to 
add,  they  place  the  blame  on  the  Latins.  William,  despite  the  mention  of  charges 
against  the  Greeks,  really  affords  the  Greek  historians  much  support.  The  Latins  were 
evidently  divided  in  sentiment,  many  of  them  being  none  too  anxious  to  divide  Egypt 
with  the  Greeks.  Such  must  have  been  the  meaning  of  the  embassy  to  seek  aid  in  the 
West  in  1169,  though  they  already  had  an  alliance  for  the  purpose  with  Manuel. 
Such  too  had  been  the  meaning  of  Amaury’s  hasty  expedition  to  Egypt  in  1168, 
though  his  own  envoy  was  at  that  very  moment  returning  from  Manuel’s  court  with 
the  signed  treaty.  It  would  seem  that  there  is  much  to  support  Chalandon’s  conten¬ 
tions  (Chalandon,  Les  Comnene^  11,  546).  The  name  of  the  Turkish  leader  who 
negotiated  the  treaty  is  given  by  Chalandon  as  “Djawali.” 


STRUGGLE  FOR  EGYPT  369 

day,  the  king  hastened  on  to  Acre,  which  he  reached  on  the  eve  of  the 
Lord’s  Nativity. 

Those  who  had  come  by  ship,  however,  set  sail  under  evil  omens 
and  vmlucky  auspices.  Scarcely  had  they  started  on  the  voyage  when 
suddenly  a  severe  storm  arose.  The  inevitable  perils  of  the  sea  were 
experienced,  for  the  boats  were  shattered  by  the  waves  and  cast  upon 
the  shore.  Nearly  all  were  wrecked.  Of  the  great  fleet  which  had 
come  to  us,  only  a  few  ships,  some  large  and  some  small,  remained 
uninjured  and  were  able  to  return  under  their  own  power. 

Although  the  emperor’s  envoys  had  shown  all  possible  diligence  in 
their  efforts  to  complete  the  task  entrusted  to  them,  yet  they  were 
obliged  to  return  unsuccessful  and  sad  of  heart,  appalled  by  the  ad- 
versity  of  fate.  For  they  feared  that  his  imperial  majesty  might  charge 
to  them,  beyond  their  deserts,  the  disastrous  outcome  of  the  campaign. 
Although  this  result  was  wholly  due  to  inevitable  chance,  yet  it  was 
possible  that  he  in  his  anger  might  unjustly  ascribe  it  to  their  negli- 
grence  or  mishandling-. 

o  o 

I  recall  that  after  my  return,  I  made  earnest  and  careful  inquir)^ 
of  the  king  and  some  of  the  important  men  of  the  realm  why  it  was 
that  so  large  an  expedition  under  the  direction  of  such  distinguished 
princes  had  resulted  so  disastrously.  My  attention  dviring  that  year 
had  been  occupied  with  my  own  personal  affairs,  for  to  escape  the  un¬ 
just  enmity  of  my  archbishop  I  went  to  Rome.-^  On  my  retcurn,  I 
endeavored  to  investigate  the  true  inwardness  of  the  matter.  Bv  lis- 

O 

tening  to  manv  widely  differing  accoimts,  I  sought  to  discover  the 
actual  truth,  for  the  results  of  the  expedition  were  reported  to  have 
been  far  other  than  we  had  hoped.  I  used  great  care  in  this  matter,  for  I 
had  already  conceived  the  idea  of  writing  a  history  of  these  events. 
I  foimd  that  the  Greeks  had  not  been  vnthout  blame  in  the  matter. 
The  emperor  had  faithfully  promised  to  send  sufficient  money  to 
support  the  great  army,  but  in  that  respect  his  promises  proved  im- 


William  offers  no  further  explanation  of  his  difficulties  with  his  archbishop. 
It  would  be  reasonable  to  conjecture  that  Amaury  had  insisted  upon  a  generous  in¬ 
come  for  William  as  archdeacon  and  historiographer  beyond  the  usual  income  of 
the  office.  There  may  have  been  other  causes  also.  At  any  rate  William  was  absent 
from  the  kingdom  during  most  of  the  year  1169  and  had  to  obtain  his  information 
about  the  campaign  after  his  return  and  that  of  the  arm}%  sometime  after  Christmas 
day,  1169.  His  statement  that  he  had  already  conceived  the  idea  of  writing  a  history- 
tends  to  confirm  the  implication  that  this  decision  was  reached  in  ti5~.  He  was 
collecting  notes  at  this  time. 


STRUGGLE  FOR  EGYPT 


370 

reliable.  From  the  moment  when  his  archons  went  into  Egypt,  where 
they  should  have  been  able  to  provide  for  the  needs  of  others  from 
the  imperial  bounty,  they  themselves  began  to  experience  the  pres¬ 
sure  of  need  and  had  to  seek  money  to  provide  food  as  well  as  pay¬ 
ment  even  for  their  own  legions,  and  no  man  gave  it  unto  them. 


18.  A  great  earthquake  shakes  practically  the  entire  East,  An¬ 
cient  cities  are  destroyed. 

In  June  of  the  following  summer,  that  is  in  the  seventh  year  of 
King  Amaury,^®  a  great  and  terrible  earthquake,  far  more  violent 
than  any  other  within  the  memory  of  men  now  living,  occurred  in  the 
Orient.  Strongly  fortified  cities  dating  from  very  early  times  were 
completely  demolished.  The  inhabitants,  caught  in  the  ruins  of  their 
homes,  were  crushed  to  death,  and  only  a  very  few  survived.  Not  a 
spot  within  the  entire  country  was  left  untouched  by  loss  of  property 
and  domestic  tragedy.  Everywhere  were  signs  of  sorrow,  everywhere 
obsequies  for  the  dead.  The  largest  cities  of  our  provinces  and  those 
of  Syria  and  Phoenicia  as  well,  cities  famous  throughout  the  ages  for 
their  noble  antiquity,  were  prostrated.  In  Coelesyria,  Antioch,  the 
metropolis  of  several  provinces  and  once  the  head  of  many  kingdoms, 
was  utterly  overwhelmed  and  its  entire  population  destroyed.  The 
massive  walls  and  the  immensely  strong  towers  along  their  circuit  fell 
in  ruins.  Churches  and  buildings  of  every  kind  were  thrown  down 
with  such  violence  that  even  now,  although  much  labor  and  expense 
have  been  devoted  to  their  restoration,  they  are  only  partially  re¬ 
paired.  Among  other  places  destroyed  in  that  same  province  were 
Jabala  and  Laodicea,  famous  cities  on  the  coast.  Of  the  cities  farther 
inland  which  were  still  held  by  the  enemy,  there  were  destroyed 
Beroea,  also  known  as  Aleppo,  Shayzar,  Hama,  Hims,  and  others. 
The  number  of  fortresses  wrecked  was  beyond  counting. 

In  Phoenicia,  on  June  29,  about  the  first  hour  of  the  day,  the  great 
and  populous  city  of  Tripoli  was  suddenly  shaken  by  a  violent  earth¬ 
quake,  and  scarcely  a  person  within  its  walls  escaped.  The  entire  city 
was  reduced  to  a  heap  of  stones  and  became  the  burial  place  and  com¬ 
mon  sepulchre  of  the  citizens  who  perished  with  it.  At  Tyre,  the 
most  famous  city  of  this  province,  the  earth  movement  was  so  violent 
that  several  massive  towers  were  overthrown.  There  was,  however, 

^®June,  1170,  was  in  the  eighth  year  of  Atnaury’s  reign. 


I 


STRUGGLE  FOR  EGYPT 


371 

no  loss  of  life  here.  Both  in  our  territories  and  in  those  of  the  enemy 
were  found  half-ruined  fortresses,  open  on  everj^  side  and  freely  ex¬ 
posed  to  the  violence  and  wiles  of  the  foe.  But  since  each  man  feared 
that  the  wrath  of  the  Stern  Judge  might  descend  upon  him  individ¬ 
ually,  none  dared  molest  his  fellow  man.  Each  was  engrossed  in  his 
own  troubles  and  weighed  down  by  the  burden  of  his  own  affairs  j 
hence  none  thought  of  injuring  his  neighbor. 

Peace,  brought  about  by  the  desire  of  all,  ensued,  albeit  for  a  short 
interval,  and  a  truce  was  arranged  through  fear  of  the  divine  wrath. 
Each,  while  momentarily  expecting  the  outpouring  of  righteous  anger 
from  heaven  in  punishment  for  his  sins,  refrained  from  acts  of  hos¬ 
tility  and  curbed  his  own  evil  impulses. 

Nor  was  this  revelation  of  the  anger  of  God  a  momentary  thing,  as 
often  happens.  For  three  or  four  months,  indeed  even  longer,  that 
awful  tremor  was  felt  both  by  night  and  by  day,  three  or  four  times 
repeated,  or  more.  Every  movement  was  now  a  source  of  terror,  and 
nowhere  was  safe  rest  to  be  found.  Even  during  sleep  the  subcon¬ 
scious  mind,  terrified  by  the  image  of  that  which  had  frightened  it 
while  awake,  caused  the  sleeper  to  start  up  with  a  leap  into  conscious¬ 
ness  again. 

Through  the  merciful  providence  of  an  all-protecting  God,  the 
upper  portions  of  our  province,  that  is,  of  Palestine,  were  spared  these 
evils. 

19.  Saladin  invades  our  land  and  lays  siege  to  the  fortress  of 
Daron, 

In  December  of  this  same  year,  that  is  the  seventh  }'ear  of  King 
Amaury^s  reign, a  persistent  rumor  spread  among  the  people  to  the 
effect  that  Saladin  was  about  to  invade  our  land.  From  many  sources 

w 

it  was  reported  that  he  had  already  assembled  forces  from  all  parts 
of  Egypt  and  from  the  land  of  Damascus  as  well,  that  he  had  en¬ 
larged  his  numbers  greatly  by  levying  men  from  both  the  middle 
and  lower  classes  and  was  planning  to  advance  against  Palestine  to 
lay  waste  the  land.  As  soon  as  this  news  reached  the  king,  he  at  once 
repaired  to  the  land  of  Ascalon.  There  he  learned  definitely  from 

The  vividness  of  this  description  reflects  William’s  own  personal  experience  and 
implies  that  he  was  in  Tyre  when  the  earthquake  occurred, 

December,  1 1 70,  was  in  the  eig-hth  year  of  the  reign. 


372  STRUGGLE  FOR  EGYPT 

reliable  information  received  from  his  own  people  that  this  great  and 
powerful  prince  with  an  immense  army,  stronger  than  ever  before, 
had  for  two  days  been  besieging  the  fortress  of  Daron.  During  that 
time  he  had  given  the  besieged  no  rest  and  had  done  them  great  in¬ 
jury.  Those  in  the  fortress  had  been  showered  with  arrows  so  con¬ 
tinually  that  nearly  all  were  wounded  and  only  a  few  were  still  able 
to  take  arms  for  the  defense  of  the  place.  The  wall  had  been  under¬ 
mined  and  laid  open  by  force.  Saladin  was  already  in  possession  of  a 
part  of  the  place,  and  the  townspeople  had  perforce  taken  refuge  in 
the  citadel  which  seemed  to  be  the  most  strongly  fortified  part.  The 
enemy  had  forced  an  entrance  into  the  lower  part  of  one  of  the  tow¬ 
ers  and  had  burned  the  entrance,  but  the  besieged  were  still  defending 
the  upper  part.  This  was  the  report  which  was  brought  to  the  king, 
and  it  proved  to  be  true. 

The  commander  and  protector  of  the  fortress  Daron  was  the  noble 
Anselm  de  Pass,  a  religious  and  God-fearing  man,  a  valiant  warrior. 
If  he  had  happened  to  be  away  on  the  day  when  the  assault  occurred, 
the  place  would  unquestionably  have  fallen  into  the  enemy’s  hands. 

The  news  of  this  critical  situation  filled  the  king’s  heart  with  grief 
and  fury.  He  immediately  assembled  cavalry  and  infantry  forces 
from  all  directions  as  well  as  the  brief  space  of  time  and  the  close 
proximity  of  the  enemy  permitted  and,  on  the  eighteenth  day  of  this 
same  month,  left  Ascalon  and  hastened  to  Gaza.  He  was  accompanied 
by  the  lord  patriarch,  who  carried  the  revered  and  precious  Life- 
giving  Cross,  and  also  by  the  two  venerable  men,  Ralph,  bishop  of 
Bethlehem,  the  royal  chancellor,  and  Bernard,  bishop  of  Lydda.  A 
few  other  nobles  of  the  realm  also  accompanied  him.  The  forces  on 
being  numbered  were  found  to  consist  of  two  hundred  and  fifty 
knights  and  about  two  thousand  infantry. 

At  Gaza  the  troops  passed  a  sleepless  night,  dragging  out  the  weary 
hours  oppressed  by  the  weight  of  deep  anxiety.  About  sunrise  the 
next  morning  they  started  out  from  Gaza.  The  brothers  of  the 
Knights  Templars  who  had  come  thither  to  protect  the  place  joined 
forces  with  them,  and  together  they  proceeded  to  the  fortress  of 
Daron. 

This  fortress,  I  believe,  was  situated  in  Idumea,  that  is  Edom,  be¬ 
yond  the  stream  called  the  river  of  Egypt,  which  marks  the  boundary 
between  Palestine  and  the  region  just  named.  A  few  years  before  this 


STRUGGLE  FOR  EGYPT 


373 

time,  King  Amaury  had  built  this  fortress  on  a  slightly  elevated  site 
above  the  ancient  ruins,  some  traces  of  which  still  remain.  A  tradition 
received  from  the  ancient  inhabitants  of  these  parts  states  that  in 
earlier  days  there  was  a  Greek  monastery  in  this  place.  The  present 
name,  Daron,  that  is,  the  house  of  the  Greeks,  is  reminiscent  of  that 
fact. 

As  has  been  said,  the  king  had  caused  to  be  built  on  this  site  a 
fortress  of  moderate  dimensions,  covering  scarcely  more  than  a  stone^s 
throw  of  ground.  It  was  square  in  form  and  at  each  corner  was  a 
tower,  one  of  which  was  more  massive  and  better  fortified  than  the 
rest.  There  was  neither  moat  nor  barbican, 

Daron  lies  about  five  miles  from  the  sea  and  four  miles  from  Gaza. 
Here  a  few  cultivators  of  the  fields  near  by  had  united  with  some 
traders  and  formed  a  little  settlement.  They  built  a  village  and  a 
church  not  far  from  the  castle  and  took  up  their  abode  there.  It  was 
a  pleasant  spot  where  conditions  of  life  for  people  of  the  lower  ranks 
were  better  than  in  cities.^ ^ 

The  king  had  built  this  stronghold  with  a  view  to  extending  his 
boundaries  j  he  also  had  in  mind  the  fact  that  from  this  place  he  could 
more  easily  collect  the  full  revenues  due  annually  from  those  dwell¬ 
ing  in  the  Surrounding  villages  which  our  people  call  casalia,  A  fixed 
toll  could  also  be  levied  on  those  travelling  past  on  the  road, 

20.  The  king  hastens  thither  with  a  small  comfany  of  knights. 

Many  of  our  feofle  are  slain  by  the  foe^  both  in  the  city  of 
Gai.a  and  while  on  the  march. 

Our  army  accordingly  set  out  from  Gaza  and,  while  halting  on  a 
slight  elevation  along  the  line  of  march,  caught  sight  of  the  enemy’s 
camp.  Terrified  by  the  vast  numbers,  they  began  to  crowd  together 
more  than  usual,  with  the  result  that  the  very  density  of  their  ranks 
almost  prevented  any  further  advance.  The  infidels  at  once  charged 
and  tried  to  force  them  apart,  but  the  Christians,  by  divine  help, 
massed  themselves  even  more  closely  together  and  withstood  the 
enemy’s  attack.  Then  at  a  quickened  pace  they  marched  on  to  their 
destination,  where  the  entire  army  halted  and  set  up  tents.  The  lord 
patriarch  repaired  to  the  citadel,  but  all  the  rest  camped  outside, 

Such  sympathetic  concern  for  the  lot  of  peasants  and  lesser  folk  was  not  common 
in  the  court  literature  of  the  twelfth  century. 


374  STRUGGLE  FOR  EGYPT 

close  to  the  outlying  village.  It  was  then  about  the  sixth  hour  of  the 
day.  During  the  course  of  that  day  many  single  combats  occurred 
and  also  some  engagements  in  which  entire  companies  took  part.  Our 
men  displayed  great  courage,  both  in  attacking  and  resisting.  As  night 
was  now  drawing  on  apace,  Saladin  drew  up  his  lines  in  marching 
formation  and  led  them  toward  Gaza.  That  night  he  rested  near  the 
river  and  in  the  morning  marched  on  to  Gaza  and  halted  before  the 
city. 

The  very  ancient  city  of  Gaza  was  once  a  famous  metropolis  of 
the  Philistines.  It  is  frequently  mentioned  in  both  ecclesiastical  and 
secular  histories,  and  the  many  noble  buildings  still  remaining  give 
evidence  of  its  ancient  splendor.  For  a  long  time  it  had  lain  desolate 
without  a  single  inhabitant.  Finally,  before  the  capture  of  Ascalon, 
Baldwin  III,  of  illustrious  memory,  the  fourth  king  of  Jerusalem, 
gathered  the  strength  and  resources  of  the  realm  and  built  on  one 
part  of  the  hill  a  fairly  well  fortified  stronghold.^ On  the  completion 
of  the  place  he  gave  it  to  the  brethren  of  the  Temple  to  be  held  by 
them  in  perpetual  right.  The  fortress,  however,  did  not  occupy  the 
entire  hill  upon  which,  as  has  been  said,  the  city  was  built.  But,  in 
order  to  provide  for  their  own  security,  the  people  who  had  come 
there  to  live  tried  to  protect  the  rest  of  the  hill  with  a  wall  and  gates. 
This  wall  was,  however,  rather  low  and  far  from  strong. 

When  news  of  the  enemy’s  approach  reached  the  dwellers  on  the 
hill,  they  decided  to  take  refuge  in  the  fortress  with  their  wives  and 
children  and  to  abandon  the  remaining  undefended  part  of  the  city 
to  the  enemy.  For  they  were  tillers  of  the  soil,  unarmed  men,  wholly 
unfamiliar  with  things  pertaining  to  war.  Milon  de  Plancy,  however, 
one  of  the  great  nobles  of  the  kingdom  but  a  wicked  man,  desired  to 
encourage  them  to  resist.  He  therefore  refused  them  admission  and 
bade  them  defend  that  weaker  section  of  the  city. 

It  happened  that  there  was  at  Gaza  a  company  of  sixty-five  light¬ 
armed  youths,  valiant  fighters,  natives  of  a  town  called  Mahumaria, 
near  Jerusalem.^^  They  had  arrived  that  very  night  at  Gaza  on  their 
way  to  join  the  army  and  by  Milon’s  order  had  been  assigned  to  the 
gate  of  the  outer  city.  Here  they  were  fighting  valiantly  for  their 

See  Book  XVII,  chap.  12. 

Identified  as  modern  al-Bira,  on  the  main  road  north  from  Jerusalem,  and  is 
called  “La  Grande  Mahomerie”  on  the  Crusaders’  Map  of  Palestine. 


STRUGGLE  FOR  EGYPT 


375 

country  and  for  liberty,  bravely  resisting  the  enemy’s  attempts  to 
force  an  entrance  by  the  sword.  Suddenly  the  infidels  broke  into  the 
place  from  another  direction  between  the  citadel  and  the  gate  just 
mentioned.  They  made  a  sudden  attack  from  the  rear  on  the  little 
band  which  was  still  stoutly  defending  the  gate  and  completely  sur¬ 
rounded  them.  Thus  taken  by  surprise,  the  latter  were  unable  to  re¬ 
sist  longer  and  perished  by  the  sword.  Although  many  of  these  val¬ 
iant  youths  were  slain  and  still  more  wounded,  yet  the  enemy  did  not 
retire  from  this  encounter  unscathed,  for  theirs  was  a  bloody  victory. 

The  townspeople  now  made  another  attempt  to  enter  the  citadel, 
but,  although  the  Turks  were  already  inside  the  walls  and  were  caus¬ 
ing  terrible  and  indiscriminate  massacre  everywhere,  they  were  not 
permitted  to  enter,  nor  had  they  any  other  way  of  escape.  The  Turks 
at  once  rushed  in  and  took  possession  of  the  city.  Neither  age  nor  sex 
was  spared,  even  suckling  babes  were  dashed  against  the  stones,  yet 
the  boundless  fury  of  the  invaders  seemed  incapable  of  satiety.  The 
refugees  in  the  tower,  nevertheless,  kept  them  at  a  distance  by  con¬ 
tinually  hurling  down  stone  missiles  and  other  weapons,  and  thus, 
by  the  help  of  God,  the  stronghold  remained  intact. 

After  taking  the  city  and  murdering  the  inhabitants,  the  enemy 
marched  back  to  Daron  as  if  they  were  holding  the  palm  of  victory. 
While  on  the  way  thither,  they  came  upon  about  fifty  of  our  infantry 
forces  who  were  hastening  to  the  army  without  observing  proper 
precaution.  These  they  killed  to  a  man,  although  the  Christians  put 
up  a  valiant  fight  with  their  swords  in  a  desperate  attempt  to  save 
themselves. 

21.  Saladin  returns  to  his  own  land.  The  king  returns  to  Ascalon 
after  visiting  DaroUy  now  fartly  in  rums.  That  same  year 
Thomas y  archbishof  of  Canterbury y  a  glorious  martyr  in 
Christy  is  murdered  in  his  own  church. 

The  Turks  now  drew  up  their  ranks  in  battle  array  according  to  mili¬ 
tary  rule  and  divided  their  forces  into  forty-two  divisions.  Of  these 
twenty  were  ordered  to  proceed  by  the  shore  route  between  Daron  and 
the  sea.  The  rest  were  to  follow  the  road  inland  until  the  fortress  was 
passed,  when  all  the  troops  were  again  to  unite  into  one  body. 

Perceiving  that  the  enemy  was  returning  in  battle  array,  the  Chris¬ 
tians  also  prepared  for  the  conflict.  Their  numbers  were  few,  yet 


376  STRUGGLE  FOR  EGYPT 

their  trust  was  in  the  mercy  of  God.  After  first  invoking  aid  from  on 
highj  they  made  ready  for  the  encounter,  and  the  Lord  gave  them 
strength  and  firm  courage.  Nothing  seemed  more  certain  than  that 
the  Turks  had  returned  to  fight  with  them.  Far  different,  however, 
was  the  intention  of  the  latter  3  they  turned  neither  to  the  right  nor 
to  the  left,  but  made  all  haste  back  to  Egypt. 

Reliable  messengers  now  brought  word  that  the  foe  had  departed 
without  intention  of  returning.  Thereupon,  led  by  the  Lord,  the  king 
also  went  back  to  Ascalon  with  his  army.  He  left  behind  at  Daron  a 
force  of  men  to  rebuild  the  half-ruined  fortress,  which  after  its  recon¬ 
struction  was  to  be  more  substantially  fortified  and  carefully  guarded. 
Those  who  had  witnessed  many  campaigns  in  the  kingdom  said  that 
at  no  time  within  their  knowledge  had  so  great  a  host  of  Turks  as¬ 
sembled.  According  to  report,  the  number  of  knights  alone  was  about 
forty  thousand.^  ^ 

About  this  same  time,  on  December  29,  there  was  celebrated  at  the 
noble  and  famous  city  of  Canterbury  in  England,  the  passion  of  the 
glorious  martyr,  St.  Thomas,  archbishop  of  that  city.^*^  He  was  a 
native  of  London  and  under  Theobald,  of  blessed  memory,  arch¬ 
bishop  of  Canterbury,  he  became  archdeacon  of  that  church.  He  was 
later  called  by  Henry  II,  king  of  England,  to  share  in  the  responsi¬ 
bility  of  the  realm  and  as  chancellor  was  a  faithful,  wise,  and  able  ad¬ 
ministrator  of  the  entire  kingdom.  After  the  death  of  the  blessed 
Father  Theobald,  Thomas  was  called,  at  the  king’s  command,  to  the 
church  at  Canterbury,  as  the  reward  of  his  services.  With  fearless 
vigor  he  fought  for  the  rights  of  the  church  against  wickedness  and 
tyranny  and,  as  a  result,  was  compelled  to  flee  to  France  to  avoid  the 
persecution  of  King  Henry.  There  for  seven  years  he  endured  exile 
with  notable  patience  worthy  of  high  praise.  On  his  return  from  this 
enforced  absence,  while  awaiting  the  peace  that  had  been  promised 
him,  he  was  slain  by  the  swords  of  wicked  men  in  the  very  church 
over  which,  by  the  will  of  God,  he  had  presided.  While  in  the  act  of 
praying  for  his  persecutors,  he  was  ignominiously  struck  down  and, 
crowned  with  his  own  blood,  received  the  glorious  fate  of  martyrdom. 
Through  him,  in  that  same  church  and  indeed  throughout  the  whole 

Meaning  a  very  large  number,  as  it  doubtless  was,  but  not  to  be  taken  literally. 

Thomas  a  Becket,  archbishop  of  Canterbury,  w'as  murdered  December  25,  1170. 
This  brief  sketch  of  his  life  and  death  is  substantially  correct.  His  canonization  was 
proclaimed  by  Pope  Alexander  III,  probably  at  the  beginning  of  Lent,  1173. 


STRUGGLE  FOR  EGYPT 


377 

provincej  the  holy  and  merciful  Lord  has  deigned  to  work  so  many 
miracles  almost  daily  that  the  times  of  the  apostles  seem  verily  to 
have  returned. 


'^rhc  khig  visits  Constfintiiiofle  attended  by  some  of 
nobles.  The  emfe?‘or  showers  many  honors  upon  him. 


In  the  following  year,  which  was  the  seventh  of  Amaury’s  reign, 
the  king  summoned  all  his  nobles  to  him  and  laid  before  them  the 
needs  of  the  realm.  For  he  perceived  that  the  kingdom  was  weighed 
down  by  many  troubles,  that  the  enemies  of  the  Christian  faith  were 
constantly  increasing  not  only  in  number  and  valor  but  in  power  and 
riches  as  well.  On  the  other  hand,  our  realm  was  completely  without 
wise  and  discreet  leaders.  The  younger  generation  which  was  taking 
the  places  of  their  elders  were  growing  up  in  wickedness  j  without 
purpose  or  result  they  were  occupying  the  places  of  illustrious  men 
and  squandering  in  disgraceful  ways  the  inheritance  received  from 
their  fathers.  As  a  result,  the  realm  had  deteriorated  so  greatly  that 
its  weakness  was  apparent  even  to  the  dullest.  The  king  therefore 
requested  the  advice  of  his  nobles  as  to  how  these  evil  conditions 
could  be  remedied  and  the  kingdom  saved.  After  consulting  together, 
they  responded  almost  with  unanimity,  ^^It  is  because  of  our  sins  that 
the  realm  has  fallen  into  such  a  desperate  condition  that  it  can 
neither  attack  its  enemies  nor  sustain  their  onslaughts.’’  They  ad¬ 
vised  that  aid  from  the  princes  of  the  West  should  be  implored  to 
combat  these  troubles;  they  had  no  other  plan  of  relief  to  suggest. 

Accordingly,  with  the  common  consent  of  all,  it  was  resolved  that 
a  delegation  consisting  of  men  of  high  rank  be  sent  to  explain  the 
difficulties  of  the  kingdom  to  the  princes  of  the  West  and  to  ask  their 
aid.  The  envoys  were  instructed  to  visit  the  pope  and  those  illustrious 
lords,  the  emperor  of  the  Romans,  the  kings  of  France,  England, 
Sicily,  and  the  Spains,  and  also  other  distinguished  dukes  and  counts 
and  implore  their  assistance  in  combatting  the  imminent  perils  now 
threatening  the  kingdom.  It  was  further  resolved  that  the  precarious 
situation  of  the  realm  be  made  known  to  the  emperor  of  Constanti¬ 
nople.  Since  he  was  much  nearer  to  us  and  was  besides  far  richer  than 
the  others,  he  could  more  easily  furnish  the  desired  aid.  It  was  speci¬ 
fied  also  that  the  envoy  sent  to  the  emperor  should  be  a  person  so 


1 1 71  should  be  the  ninth,  not  seventh,  year  of  his  reign. 


STRUGGLE  FOR  EGYPT 


378 

gifted  with  wisdom,  eloquence,  and  authority  that  by  his  tact  and 
ability  he  might  incline  the  mind  of  that  great  prince  to  comply  with 
our  wishes. 

While  they  were  deliberating  over  the  selection  of  a  suitable  person 
to  undertake  this  important  mission,  the  king  had  been  consulting 
with  some  of  his  more  intimate  counsellors.  He  now  laid  before  the 
assembly  a  plan  which  he  had  conceived.  He  declared  that  a  mission 
of  such  importance  could  be  undertaken  by  no  one  but  himself  and 
added  that  he  was  prepared  to  undergo  all  perils  and  hardships  to  re¬ 
lieve  the  desperate  necessity  of  the  kingdom.  The  great  nobles  of  the 
realm,  though  filled  with  admiration,  were  almost  overcome  by  this 
proposal  and  protested  that  the  task  was  too  arduous  5  moreover, 
without  the  presence  of  the  king  the  realm  would  be  desolate.  Amaury 
answered,  however,  “Let  the  Lord,  whose  minister  I  am,  rule  the 
kingdom  3  as  for  me  I  am  determined  to  go  3  no  one  can  induce  me 
to  recall  that  decision.’^ 

Accordingly,  on  March  10,  attended  by  a  great  retinue  as  befitted 
the  royal  majesty,  he  set  out  on  the  journey  with  an  escort  of  ten 
galleys.  In  his  train  were  William,  bishop  of  Acre,  and  the  following 
nobles  of  the  realm:  Guarmond  of  Tiberias,  John  of  Arsuf,  Gerard 
de  Pougy,  the  royal  marshal,  Rohard,  the  governor  of  Jerusalem, 
and  Renaud  de  Nephins.  Philip  of  Nablus,  who  had  already  resigned 
his  office  as  master  of  the  Knights  Templars,  had  been  sent  on  ahead 
by  land.  Since  the  favor  of  the  Lord  was  with  him,  the  king  enjoyed 
a  prosperous  voyage  and  reached  in  safety  the  straits  of  Abydos  and 
the  mouth  of  the  Bosphorus,  which  in  common  parlance  is  known  as 
the  arm  of  St.  George. 

The  lord  emperor,  a  wise  and  discreet  prince  of  great  magnificence, 
worthy  of  praise  in  every  respect,  learned  with  surprise  that,  con¬ 
trary  to  custom,  a  mighty  prince,  the  ruler  of  a  great  and  famous 
kingdom  beloved  of  God,  was  about  to  visit  his  empire.  His  first 
thought  was  of  wonder  as  to  the  motive  for  so  unusual  and  difficult 
a  journey.  Then,  reflecting  how  greatly  such  an  incomparable  favor 
thus  freely  bestowed  upon  him  from  on  high  would  redound  to  his 
own  glory  and  honor,  he  was  filled  with  exultation.  Nowhere  in  the 
annals  of  his  empire  was  such  an  unusual  event  recorded,  never  be¬ 
fore  had  a  king  of  Jerusalem,  the  defender  and  advocate  of  the  vener¬ 
able  places  of  the  Lord’s  passion  and  resurrection,  visited  his  imperial 


STRUGGLE  FOR  EGYPT 


379 

predecessors.  He  determined  to  anticipate  the  king’s  arrival  and  to 
show  him  great  honor.  Accordingly  he  summoned  John  the  frotose- 
hastos  his  nephew,  one  of  the  most  illustrious  nobles  of  the  sacred 
palace,  whose  daughter  King  Amaury  had  married,  and  sent  him  to 
meet  the  royal  visitor.  He  instructed  the  frotosebastos  to  see  to  it 
that  in  all  the  cities  and  places  through  which  the  king  passed  great 
honor  should  be  shown  him,  in  accordance  with  the  long-established 
custom  of  the  empire  and  the  incomparable  magnificence  pertaining 
thereto.  Furthermore,  he  was  to  advise  the  king,  as  a  son,  to  await 
the  coming  of  the  imperial  representatives  who  would  escort  him 
into  the  royal  city. 

In  obedience  to  the  emperor’s  command,  this  magnificent  prince 
with  a  noble  retinue  met  the  king  at  Gallipolis,  a  city  on  the  Bos¬ 
phorus,  not  far  from  the  straits  of  Abydos.  Since  the  wind  was  not 
in  the  right  direction  at  the  time  to  waft  the  ship  on  to  the  imperial 
city,  the  king  disembarked  here  from  the  galley  and  with  the  mem¬ 
bers  of  his  personal  suite  proceeded  on  horseback  to  Heraclea,  a  city 
on  the  same  coast.  There,  in  the  harbor,  he  found  the  fleet.  It  had 
taken  advantage  of  a  favorable  change  of  wind  and  arrived  before 
him.  Accordingly  he  again  embarked  and  after  a  prosperous  sail  ar¬ 
rived  at  Constantinople. 

23.  The  king  is  introduced  into  the  fresence  of  the  emperor  y  who 
receives  him^  with  marked  honor.  Frequent  colloquies  take 
place  between  them  over  matters  of  serious  importance. 

In  this  city,  on  the  shore  of  the  sea  facing  east  is  the  imperial  resi¬ 
dence  known  as  the  palace  of  Constantine.  The  approach  leading  up 
to  it  from  the  sea  has  a  marvellous  pavement  of  magnificent  mar¬ 
ble  5  marble  steps  descend  to  the  water’s  edge,  and  statues  of  lions 
and  columns,  also  of  marble,  adorn  the  place  with  royal  splendor. 
This  entrance  was  ordinarily  reserved  for  the  use  of  the  emperor 
alone  when  he  wished  to  ascend  to  the  upper  part  of  the  palace,  but 
contrary  to  the  usual  custom,  as  a  mark  of  special  honor,  the  king 
was  given  the  privilege  of  using  it.  Here  the  great  nobles  of  the 
sacred  palace,  surrounded  by  a  throng  of  courtiers,  awaited  his  arrival, 
and  a  most  honorable  reception  was  accorded  him.  Thence,  attended 
by  his  suite  and  many  attaches  of  the  court,  he  was  conducted  through 
various  corridors  and  rooms  of  many  kinds  to  the  upper  part  of  the 


38o  struggle  for  EGYPT 

palace,  where  the  emperor,  with  his  illustrious  nobles,  had  his  resi¬ 
dence.  Before  the  imperial  audience  hall  hung  curtains  of  precious 
fabrics,  adorned  with  handiwork  not  inferior  to  the  material  itself^ 
to  it,  indeed,  might  be  aptly  applied  the  words  of  Naso,  “The  work¬ 
manship  far  surpassed  the  material.^^ 

Just  outside  this  hall,  the  king  was  met  by  the  great  lords  of  the 
empire,  who  conducted  him  beyond  the  curtains  just  mentioned.  This 
is  said  to  have  been  done  that  the  dignity  of  the  imperial  splendor 
might  be  maintained  and  at  the  same  time  the  good  will  of  the  king 
won  for  the  emperor.  For,  surrounded  only  by  the  most  illustrious 
nobles  of  his  court,  the  emperor  is  said  to  have  risen  in  a  friendly  way 
to  greet  the  king,  an  act  which,  had  it  been  done  in  the  presence  of 
the  assembled  court,  might  have  seemed  to  show  too  great  condescen¬ 
sion  on  the  part  of  his  imperial  majesty.'^^ 

As  soon  as  the  king  had  entered,  the  curtains  were  quickly  drawn 
aside,  and  the  emperor  became  visible  to  those  without.  He  was  seated 
on  a  throne  of  gold,  clad  in  the  imperial  robes.  By  his  side  was  seated 
the  king  on  another  throne,  splendid  but  slightly  lower  than  that  of 
the  emperor. 

The  emperor  very  graciously  bestowed  the  customary  salutation 
and  the  kiss  of  peace  upon  our  nobles  also  and  made  courteous  in¬ 
quiries  about  the  well-being  of  the  king  and  the  members  of  his  suite. 
Both  by  his  words  and  expression  he  plainly  showed  that  their  com¬ 
ing  had  given  him  great  pleasure.  He  had  directed  the  attendants  and 
officials  of  the  sacred  palace  to  prepare  certain  apartments  of  great 
magnificence  within  the  palace  itself  for  the  king  and  his  retinue. 
Separate  quarters  of  fitting  dignity  in  the  city  not  far  from  those  of 
the  king  had  also  been  prepared  for  each  of  the  attendant  nobles.  The 
visitors  then  withdrew  from  the  imperial  presence  and  retired  for  a 
time  in  attendance  on  the  king.  After  naming  the  hour  at  which  they 
were  to  return  to  him,  the  king  also  dismissed  them  and  sent  them 
away  to  their  own  quarters. 

Daily,  at  hours  specially  appointed  for  the  purpose,  the  envoys 
held  earnest  conferences,  now  with  the  emperor  and  now  among 

Ovid  Met,  II.  6.  This,  a  favorite  quotation  of  William,  probably  reflects  his 
own  interest  in  the  prbducts  of  craftsmanship. 

Chalandon,  who  has  retraced  Amaury’s  procession  from  the  ship  to  the  grand 
palace  step  by  step,  denies  the  significance  which  William  attached  to  the  etiquette 
of  the  curtain  (see  Chalandon,  Les  Conmene^  II,  547—49). 


STRUGGLE  FOR  EGYPT 


381 

themselves,  on  the  matters  which  had  brought  them  thither.  Above 
all,  they  gave  most  careful  consideration  to  the  measures  by  which 
the  purpose  of  their  journey  (for  the  furtherance  of  which  they  had 
endured  so  many  hardships)  might  be  accomplished  so  that  they 
might  return  home  crowned  with  success. 

In  frequent  intimate  talks  with  the  emperor,  sometimes  privately 
and  again  in  the  presence  of  the  illustrious  nobles  of  the  imperial 
court,  the  king  explained  the  reasons  that  had  led  to  his  visit  and  set 
forth  at  length  the  needs  of  his  kingdom.  He  dwelt  upon  the  im¬ 
mortal  fame  which  the  emperor  might  win  by  undertaking  the  sub¬ 
jugation  of  Egypt  and  demonstrated  by  positive  proofs  how  easily 
the  project  might  be  accomplished.  Persuaded  by  his  words,  the  em¬ 
peror  lent  a  favorable  ear  to  the  klng^s  proposition  and  promised  to 
carry  out  the  wishes  of  the  latter  to  the  full. 

Meanwhile,  as  befitted  his  imperial  magnificence,  he  showered 
numerous  gifts  upon  the  king  and  upon  the  nobles  of  his  suite  and 
during  frequent  visits  showed  much  solicitude  about  their  well-being 
and  health.  By  his  orders,  even  the  inner  parts  of  the  palace — the 
private  apartments  usually  accessible  only  to  his  own  people,  the  pri¬ 
vate  chambers  set  apart  for  his  own  use — were  thrown  open  to  them  as 
to  his  own  household.  These  privileges  were  extended  also  to  the 
basilicas  closed  to  the  common  people,  and  to  all  the  priceless  treas¬ 
ures  which  had  been  gathered  there  by  his  imperial  ancestors.  Even  the 
relics  of  the  saints  and  the  precious  memorials  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  the  Cross  and  the  nails,  the  Lance, the  sponge,  the  reed,  the 
crown  of  thorns,  the  linen  robe,  and  the  sandals  were  freely  shown 
to  them.  There  was  no  secret  or  mystical  object  reverently  preserved 
from  the  times  of  the  good  emperors  Constantine,  Theodosius,  and 
Justinian  in  the  private  repositories  of  the  sacred  chambers  which 
was  not  shown  to  them  without  reserve. 

From  time  to  time,  on  holidays  and  at  leisure  moments,  the  em¬ 
peror  invited  the  king  and  his  suite  to  enjoy  the  recreation  afforded 
by  novel  entertainments  of  dignified  character  such  as  befitted  the 
exalted  rank  of  both  monarchs.  At  times,  various  kinds  of  musical  in¬ 
struments  were  brought  in,  from  which  strains  of  marvellous  sweet- 

This  was  probably  the  Holy  Lance  that  had  figured  in  the  defeat  of  Karbuqa  at 
Antioch  in  1098.  It  had  been  retained  by  Raymond  of  St.  Gilles  and  g-iven  to  the 
Emperor  Alexius  when  Raymond  revisited  Constantinople  in  1100. 


STRUGGLE  FOR  EGYPT 


382 

ness  in  harmonious  measure  were  evoked  for  their  delight.  Again, 
choruses  of  maidens  sang,  and  pantomimes  of  great  merit  were  pre¬ 
sented.  Yet  decorum  and  good  manners  were  always  observed.  In 
the  king’s  honor  the  emperor  also  commanded  that  magnificent  and 
costly  games  resembling  those  which  we  call  theatrical  plays  or  cir¬ 
cuses  should  be  given  for  the  people  living  in  the  city.^^ 

24.  The  purfose  of  their  journey  accomplished y  the  king  and  his 
nobles  retut'71  to  their  own  land  laden  with  gifts, 

A  SOJOURN  of  several  days  was  made  in  the  palace  of  Constantine. 
Then,  for  the  sake  of  change,  which  is  the  most  effective  means  of 
relieving  monotony,  the  emperor,  accompanied  by  the  king,  moved 
his  residence  to  the  new  palace  called  Blachernae.^^  There  also  the 
emperor  observed  to  the  full  the  laws  of  hospitality.  For  several  days 
he  entertained  the  king  most  graciously  in  his  own  palace,  where  state 
apartments  were  assigned  to  King  Amaury  in  the  most  private  pre¬ 
cincts  of  the  imperial  residence  of  his  ancestors.  At  the  same  time  digni¬ 
fied  and  comfortable  quarters  not  far  from  this  palace  were  ordered 
provided  for  the  king’s  retinue.  Here,  as  before,  officers  of  the  ward¬ 
robe  and  others  specially  assigned  to  this  duty  did  not  cease  to  pro¬ 
vide  magnificently  and  in  superabundance  not  only  for  all  necessary 
expense  but  even  for  superfluous  luxuries. 

The  king  was  escorted  throughout  the  whole  city  both  within  the 
walls  and  without.  He  visited  the  churches  and  monasteries  of  which 
there  was  an  almost  infinite  number  j  he  looked  upon  triumphal  arches 
and  columns  adorned  with  trophies.  Great  nobles  who  knew  the 
places  well  were  his  guides,  and  on  his  inquiring  the  nature  and  pur¬ 
pose  of  each  object  he  was  given  full  information  by  the  oldest  and 
best-informed  men. 

At  this  time  also,  he  sailed  through  the  Bosphorus  to  the  mouth  of 
the  Black  sea,  where  the  body  of  water  known  as  the  Bosphorus  be¬ 
gins  its  course  to  the  Mediterranean.  Thus  the  king,  a  man  of  in¬ 
quiring  mind,  ever  eager  to  know  the  reason  of  things,  visited  places 
hitherto  unknown  to  him.  At  length,  fully  satisfied  with  what  he  had 

The  art  of  entertainment  and  public  amusement  was  more  hig-hly  developed  in 
Constantinople  at  this  time  than  anywhere  else  in  Europe.  Doubtless  this  added  to  its 
attractiveness  for  people  from  the  West. 

This  was  the  palace  in  the  northwestern  part  of  the  city,  in  which  the  emperor 
ordinarily  dwelt. 


STRUGGLE  FOR  EGYPT 


383 


seen  and  heard,  he  returned  to  the  city  and  resumed  the  friendly  con¬ 
ferences  with  the  emperor,  for  his  most  earnest  desire  was  to  bring 
his  mission  to  a  successful  end. 

After  a  suitable  time  had  passed,  the  necessary  matters  were 
brought  to  the  happy  termination  so  eagerly  desired.  The  agreement 
was  reduced  to  a  treaty  agreeable  to  both  the  emperor  and  the  king 
and  put  into  writing,  to  which  the  seals  of  both  were  affixed.  The  king 
then  took  leave  and,  followed  by  the  good  will  of  all,  began  to  make 
preparations  to  depart.  Then  more  than  ever  the  lavish  munificence 
of  the  emperor,  far  beyond  praise,  was  displayed  toward  the  king 
and  his  following.  For  an  immense  weight  of  gold  and  quantities  of 
silken  fabrics  together  with  most  excellent  gifts  of  foreign  wares  were 
bestowed  upon  the  king,  while  upon  his  retinue,  even  to  the  youngest, 
presents  without  stint  were  showered. 

The  illustrious  frotosebastos  also  showed  great  generosity  toward 
the  entire  embassy.  The  same  spirit  inspired  the  other  princes  alsoj 
they  vied  with  each  other  in  munificent  offerings  to  the  king,  wherein 
elegance  of  material  and  fine  workmanship  were  not  lacking  as  evi¬ 
dence  of  their  good  will.  When  the  fleet  was  ready,  the  king,  his  mis¬ 
sion  successfully  accomplished,  sailed  from  Constantinople  two  hun- 

« 

dred  miles  through  the  Bosphorus,  which  is  generally  recognized  as 
the  boundary  between  Europe  and  Asia.  Passing  between  the  famous 
cities  of  Sestos  and  Abydos,  the  homes  of  Leander  and  Hero,  he  en¬ 
tered  the  Mediterranean  sea  and,  borne  by  favoring  breezes,  landed 
on  the  seventeenth  day  before  the  Kalends  of  July  at  the  city  of 

Sidon.^^ 

25.  The  king  assembles  the  army  at  Sefhorie,  Frederick^  arch- 
bishof  of  TyrCy  returns  from  the  lands  across  the  sea,  Wil¬ 
liam  y  bis  ho  f  of  Acrey  is  murdered  in  Romania, 

On  his  return  to  the  kingdom,  the  king  learned  that  Nureddin  with 
a  large  army  was  still  lingering  in  the  vicinity  of  Banyas.  Fearing 
lest  he  might  try  to  make  incursions  into  our  land  from  there,  the 
king  summoned  the  barons  of  the  realm  and  advanced  into  Galilee  to 
provide  as  far  as  possible  against  such  a  contingency.  He  encamped 
near  that  famous  fountain  between  Nazareth  and  Sephorie.  Since  this 
lies  very  near  the  center  of  the  realm,  he  could  easily  move  from 

June  15,  1171.  This  sentence  is  redolent  of  Ovid’s  writings. 


STRUGGLE  FOR  EGYPT 


384 

there  to  any  part  of  the  country  where  he  might  be  needed.  Hence, 
for  the  reason  just  given,  Amaury  and  his  ancestors  before  him  had 
followed  the  custom  of  assembling  their  armies  in  that  place. 

About  the  same  time,  Frederick,  archbishop  of  Tyre,  our  prede¬ 
cessor,  who  had  been  sent  on  behalf  of  the  realm  to  implore  aid  and 
counsel  from  the  princes  of  the  West,  returned  home  unsuccessful 
after  a  sojourn  of  two  years  in  the  lands  beyond  the  sea.  His  efforts 
had  been  utterly  futile,  and  he  had  obtained  nothing  which  he  had 
asked  in  our  name.  He  had,  however,  sent  before  him  Count  Stephen, 
a  man  of  noble  family  but  of  far  from  noble  life.  Stephen  was  the  son 
of  the  elder  Count  Theobald  II  of  Blois,  Chartres,  and  Troyes. 
Through  the  archbishop’s  agency,  he  had  been  summoned  by  the 
king,  who  intended  to  make  him  his  son-in-law.  On  the  count’s  ar¬ 
rival  in  the  kingdom,  the  king  graciously  reminded  him  of  the  matter, 
but  although  the  offer  had  already  been  made  and  accepted,  Stephen 
now  rejected  it  and,  after  leading  a  disgracefully  licentious  life  for 
several  months  in  the  kingdom,  decided  to  return  home  overland.  In 
pursuance  of  this  purpose  he  went  first  to  Antioch  and  from  there 
into  Cilicia.  Thence,  after  obtaining  an  escort  from  the  sultan  of 
Iconium,  he  intended  to .  pass  through  that  land  on  his  way  to  Con¬ 
stantinople.  In  Cilicia,  however,  near  the  city  of  Mamistra,  he  had 
the  misfortune  to  fall  into  an  ambush  which  Milo  [Malih],^^  a  very 
powerful  Armenian  prince,  the  brother  of  Thoros,  had  laid  for  him. 
The  bandits  rushed  upon  him  from  their  lurking  place  and  carried 
off  as  booty  all  the  precious  treasures  which  he  had  with  him.  By  ur¬ 
gent  entreaties  he  finally  with  much  difficulty  induced  them  to  leave 
a  wretched  horse  for  his  use.  In  this  ignominious  style,  after  experi¬ 
encing  great  hardships,  he  finally  reached  Constantinople  with  a  few 
attendants.  The  hatred  of  all  the  people  of  the  East  followed  him.^® 

That  same  year,  another  Count  Stephen,  a  son  of  Count  William 
de  Saone,  arrived  in  the  kingdom  on  a  pilgrimage  of  prayer  and  de¬ 
votion.  Although  he  bore  the  same  name,  he  differed  greatly  from 
that  other  Stephen,  for  he  was  an  unassuming  man  of  honorable  life. 

This  was  Mich  or  Malih,  the  brother  of  Thoros  II  of  Armenia  (see  note  50). 

Possibly  it  was  the  experience  of  Stephen  or  others  similarly  beset  by  Mleh  that  led 
Henry  the  Lion  to  reject  the  offer  of  an  escort  through  his  lands  (see  E.  Joranson,  “The 
Pilgrimage  of  Henry  the  Lion,”  Medieval  and  Historio graphical  Essays  in  Honor 
of  James  Westfall  Thomfson^  p.  196). 

This  is  the  third  Stephen  of  Blois  to  figure  in  William^s  account.  He  was  a  grand¬ 
son  of  the  leader  in  the  First  Crusade  and  a  nephew  of  the  English  king  of  that  name. 


STRUGGLE  FOR  EGYPT 


385 

entirely  worthy  of  great  respect.  He  was  accompanied  by  Henry  the 
Younger,  duke  of  Burgundy,  the  son  of  a  sister  of  the  Stephen  spoken 
of  above.  After  a  short  stay  in  the  kingdom,  they  returned  to  their 
own  land  but  stopped  on  the  way  at  Constantinople,  where  the  em¬ 
peror  showed  them  marked  attention  and  dismissed  them  with  many 
gifts.'*’^ 

In  the  following  year,  which  was  the  eighth  of  King  Amaury’s 
reign,^®  William  of  good  memory,  bishop  of  Acre,  met  with  a  strange 
and  undeserved  fate.  The  king  had  sent  him  from  Constantinople  to 
Italy.  He  had  travelled  through  that  country,  trying  in  every  possible 
way  to  accomplish  the  mission  entrusted  to  him,  and  was  on  his  way 
home.  While  retracing  his  steps,  he  intended  to  visit  the  emperor, 
according  to  a  previous  arrangement,  and  had  arrived  at  Adrianople, 
a  famous  city  of  Thracia  Secunda.  Much  fatigued  by  his  long  journey, 

the  bishop  partook  of  food  at  the  noon  hour  and  then  lay  down  to 

# 

rest  his  weary  limbs.  A  certain  Robert  of  his  staff,  one  whom  he  him¬ 
self  had  raised  to  the  priesthood  and  received  among  his  personal 
retinue,  was  lying  in  the  same  room  where  the  bishop  was  resting. 
He  was  recovering  from  a  long  illness  during  which  he  had  suffered 
greatly.  Suddenly  a  madness  came  upon  himj  he  seized  his  sword 
and  stabbed  the  sleeping  bishop,  inflicting  fatal  wounds.  The  bishop’s 
people  outside  heard  his  cries  and  recognized  by  his  groans  and  out¬ 
cries  that  their  master  was  in  the  throes  of  death.  They  tried  to  rush 
to  his  aid,  but  the  door  was  securely  locked  on  the  inside  so  that  en¬ 
trance  was  impossible.  When  the  door  was  finally  broken  open  by 
force,  they  found  their  lord  almost  lifeless  although  his  heart  was 
still  faintly  beating.  Their  first  impulse  was  to  seize  the  murderer 
and  deliver  him  over  in  chains  to  the  punishment  due  him  according 
to  the  laws  against  homicide.  But  the  bishop  forbade  them  by  word 
and  gesture  and  most  earnestly  implored  them  that  for  the  good  of 
his  soul  full  indulgence  should  be  granted  the  murderer.  He  was 
still  begging  that  the  present  deed  should  not  be  held  against  the 
young  man  for  death  when  he  yielded  up  his  last  breath  to  the  Lord. 
This  happened  on  June  29. 

As  yet  we  have  been  unable  to  determine  the  reason  for  this  deed. 

Stephen  of  Saone  and  Henry  of  Burgundy.  It  is  strange  that  William  does  not 
mention  the  visit  of  Henry  the  Lion,  duke  of  Saxony,  to  Jerusalem  in  1172 — all  the 
more  so  since  one  of  Henry’s  retinue,  Conrad,  bishop  of  Liibeck,  died  in  Tyre. 

The  year  1172  would  be  the  tenth  of  Amaury’s  reign. 


386  STRUGGLE  FOR  EGYPT 

It  is  said  by  some  that  Robert,  the  perpetrator  of  the  outrage,  had 
been  suffering  from  a  long  illness  j  that,  although  convalescent,  he 
was  attacked  by  a  sudden  violent  frenzy  and  therefore  was  not  respom 
sible  for  his  wicked  act.  Others,  on  the  contrary,  assert  that  he  com¬ 
mitted  the  crime  through  hatred  of  a  certain  chamberlain  of  the 
bishop,  who,  presuming  too  much  on  his  lord^s  favor,  had  treated 
Robert  and  others  badJy.^® 

On  November  23  of  that  same  year,  Joscius,  a  canon  and  subdeacon 
of  that  same  church,  was  made  bishop  of  Acre  in  William’s  stead. 

26.  Malth  the  Armeman^^  a  brother  of  T horos^  joins  forces  with 
N ureddin  and  ravages  the  land  of  Antioch*  The  king  hastens 
thither  to  check  his  evil-doing. 

About  this  time  occurred  the  death  of  Thoros,  a  magnificent  and 
noble  man  whom  I  have  often  mentioned  as  a  powerful  prince  of 
the  Armenians.  His  brother  Malih,  a  most  wicked  man,  desired  to 
seize  the  heritage  for  himself.  He  accordingly  went  to  Nureddin  and 
earnestly  begged  that  he  be  given  a  body  of  cavalry  with  which  to 
take  forcible  possession  of  his  brother’s  domains.  Now  after  the  death 
of  Thoros,  the  great  nobles  of  that  land  had  sent  for  Thomas,^ ^  a 
nephew  of  these  two  lords  on  the  sister’s  side,  and  had  placed  him 
in  peaceful  possession  of  his  uncle’s  entire  principality.  Thomas  was 
of  Latin  birth,  but  he  utterly  lacked  the  energy  and  sense  to  adapt 
himself  readily  to  those  who  had  called  him. 

On  certain  well-defined  terms  satisfactory  to  Nureddin,  Malih  was 
able  to  obtain  a  considerable  force  of  cavalry.  By  thus  employing  the 
aid  of  an  enemy  and  introducing  an  armed  body  of  infidels  into  his 
patrimony,  the  hereditary  land  of  his  forefathers,  Malih  was  the  first 
of  his  race  to  violate  the  customs  of  his  ancestors.  He  invaded  the 

This  is  an  excellent  instance  not  only  of  William’s  judicial  attitude  but  also  of 
medieval  justice,  which  evidently  recog'nized  insanity  as  a  plea  in  behalf  of  a  defendant. 
Doubtless  William  was  personally  acquainted  with  the  individuals  involved. 

Mleh  or  Malih  was  a  renegade  in  several  ways.  He  had  become  a  member  of  the 
western  church  and  a  Templar.  Later  he  fled  to  the  court  of  Nureddin,  to  whom  he 
became  very  devoted.  With  the  latter’s  help  he  conquered  his  nephew’s  kingdom  and 
mistreated  the  Templars,  He  was  finally  murdered  by  his  own  troops  in  1175  (see 
Frederic  Macler,  “Armenia,”  Cambridge  Medieval  History y  IV,  1170— 71). 

51  Little  is  known  of  this  Thomas  beyond  these  statements  of  William.  His  mother 
was  a  sister  of  Thoros  II  and  Malih,  his  father  a  Latin  noble.  He  was  called  upon  to 
act  as  regent  for  Rupen  II,  son  of  Thoros  II.  Malih  drove  him  out  and  disposed  of 
the  true  heir  (see  Joranson,  “Henry  the  Lion,”  of.  cit.,  p.  196,  note  177). 


STRUGGLE  FOR  EGYPT 


387 

domains  of  his  forefathers  by  force,  drove  out  his  nephew,  and  seized 
the  whole  region.  One  of  the  first  acts  of  his  rule  after  taking  posses¬ 
sion  of  the  power  was  to  dispossess  the  Knights  Templars  of  all  their 
holdings  in  Cilicia,  although  he  had  once  belonged  to  their  order. 
He  then  formed  an  alliance  with  Nureddin  and  the  Turks  under  a 
treaty  such  as  is  rarely  made  even  between  brothers.  Having  become, 
as  it  were,  an  infidel,  he  cast  aside  the  law  of  God  and  did  the  Chris¬ 
tians  all  the  injury  he  could.  All  those  who  chanced  to  fall  into  his 
hands,  either  in  battle  or  in  the  storming  of  fortresses,  were  cast  into 
chains  and  carried  off  into  the  enemy’s  country  to  be  sold  as  slaves. 

The  outrages  committed  by  this  wicked  man  against  the  Christians 
soon  showed  him  to  be  one  of  their  worst  enemies.  Accordingly  the 
prince  of  Antioch  and  the  great  men  of  that  land  took  up  arms  against 
him,  although  it  seemed  a  dangerous  anomaly  for  Christians  to  rise 
against  one  who  professed  the  same  faith — almost,  in  fact,  equivalent 
to  civil  war.  Yet,  since  it  was  impossible  to  pass  over  the  wrongs  done 
to  their  brethren,  they  declared  war  against  Malih  and  denounced 
him  as  an  enemy  of  the  realm. 

On  learning  of  the  trouble  that  had  risen  in  that  country,  the  king 
hastened  with  his  own  forces  to  the  land  of  Antioch,  for  he  desired 
to  do  his  part  in  any  measure  that  tended  toward  peace.  From  there 
he  dispatched  his  personal  messengers  to  that  wretch  Malih,  a  man 
wholly  without  the  favor  of  God,  and  urgently  demanded  that  he 
agree  to  a  conference  with  himself  at  a  suitable  time  and  place.  Malih 
pretended  that  he  was  pleased  by  this  message,  but  actually  his  senti¬ 
ments  were  quite  different.  Several  times  the  king  sent  envoys  to  him 
and  endeavored  to  bring  about  this  meeting,  but  in  the  end  he  found 
that  he  was  being  deceived  by  the  subtle  tricks  of  the  wicked  man 
and,  accordingly,  that  nothing  could  be  accomplished  in  this  way.  He 
finally  assembled  all  the  Christian  forces  of  that  locality  and  with 
this  army  invaded  the  land  of  his  enemy.  While  marching  through 
the  plain  of  Cilicia  (for  to  proceed  by  the  steep  mountainous  way 
would  have  been  too  difficult),  the  troops  burned  the  crops  and  en¬ 
deavored  to  storm  the  castles  along  their  line  of  march.  But  suddenly 
a  messenger  arrived  with  the  sinister  tidings  that  Nureddin  had  laid 
siege  to  Petra,  the  capital  of  Arabia  Secunda,  also  known  as  Kerak — 
a  report  which  proved  to  be  true. 

This  news  caused  the  king  serious  distress.  He  at  once  took  leave 


388  STRUGGLE  FOR  EGYPT 

of  the  prince  and  hastily  set  forth  with  his  own  personal  following. 
But  before  he  arrived  in  his  own  land,  the  barons  of  the  realm  with 
prompt  and  sagacious  action  had  assembled  all  the  military  strength 
of  the  kingdom.  Humphrey  the  constable  had  been  put  in  entire  charge 
of  the  army,  while  to  Ralph,  bishop  of  Bethlehem,  was  assigned  the 
honor  of  carrying  the  Cross  of  the  Lord.  Without  delay  the  troops 
were  hastening  valiantly  to  the  appointed  place  when  they  were  met 
by  a  messenger  who  brought  the  important  news,  which  proved  to 
be  true,  that  Nureddin  had  abandoned  the  siege  without  doing  harm 
to  the  place  and  had  returned  to  his  own  land.  Thus  it  happened  that 
the  king  on  reaching  the  kingdom  found,  contrary  to  his  expectation, 
that  all  was  as  peaceful  as  could  be  desired. 

27.  Saladin  besieges  Montreal y  a  fortress  beyond  the  Jordan,  His 
efforts  frove  futile  y  how  every  and  he  returns  to  his  ozvn  land. 

The  following  year,  about  the  beginning  of  autumn,  Saladin  pre¬ 
pared  to  invade  our  land  with  mighty  forces  and  a  vast  number  of 
cavalry.  At  the  head  of  innumerable  hosts  drawn  from  all, over  the 
land  of  Egypt,  he  crossed  the  desert  and  reached  the  place  called 
Cannes  of  the  Turks. 

The  king  had  anticipated  his  coming,  however,  and  had  already 
assembled  his  own  army.  Accompanied  by  the  lord  patriarch,  who 
bore  the  Life-giving  and  Venerated  Cross  of  the  Lord,  he  had  placed 
his  camp  near  Beersheba,  whence  he  would  be  able  to  meet  the  ad¬ 
vancing  enemy  more  easily. 

The  forces  of  Saladin  were  reported  to  be  scarcely  sixteen  miles 
away  from  the  king^s  camp,  but  Amaury  was  not  yet  confident  that 
the  Turks  had  actually  reached  that  place.  The  report  proved  to  be 
true,  however  3  Saladin  had  established  his  camp  there  because  of  the 
convenient  water  supply. 

After  a  conference  with  his  nobles,  the  king  decided  to  change  his 
route  in  order  to  avoid  a  meeting  with  the  Turk.  Accordingly,  under 
pretense  of  seeking  the  enemy  whom  they  had  carefully  avoided 
while  he  was  close  at  hand,  the  forces  and  all  the  people  proceeded 
toward  Ascalon.  From  Ascalon  they  marched  on  to  Daron  and  thence 
back  again  to  their  original  starting  point,  after  a  useless  waste  of 
effort  and  expense. 


f 


STRUGGLE  FOR  EGYPT 


389 

Meanwhile,  Saladin  marched  through  the  plains  of  Idumea  and 
led  his  cohorts  into  Syria  SobaL  There  he  laid  siege  to  a  fortress 
which  is  the  principal  and  outstanding  stronghold  of  that  entire  dis¬ 
trict.  This  he  assailed  with  furious  energy  as  far  as  the  situation  per¬ 
mitted,  for  it  lay  on  a  lofty  hill  and  was  splendidly  fortified  with 
walls,  towers,  and  ramparts.  The  village  outside  was  situated  on  the 
slope  of  the  hill,  yet  in  a  place  so  steep  and  high  that  it  need  fear 
neither  assaults  nor  attacks  by  machines  or  bows.  The  inhabitants  were 
all  Christians  and  therefore  more  reliance  could  be  placed  upon  them. 
Moreover,  the  fortress  was  well  supplied  with  arms  and  provisions 
and  had  a  garrison  of  men  sufficient  to  defend  it. 

For  some  days  the  infidels  expended  their  efforts  on  this  place 
without  success.  Finally,  convinced  that  it  was  impregnable,  Saladin 
gave  the  order  to  depart  and  returned  to  Egypt  by  the  desert  route 
with  his  forces. 

28.  Saladin  lays  waste  the  entire  country  beyond  the  Jordan,  The 
king  holds  his  army  in  a  flace  called  Carmel.  Count  Ray- 
mond  of  Tripoli  returns  from  prison. 

In  the  following  year,  which  was  the  tenth  of  King  Amaury’s  reign, 
Saladin  again  made  preparations  to  invade  the  realm.  Realizing  that 
he  had  accomplished  but  little  against  our  forces  the  preceding  year, 
he  desired  to  retrieve  this  failure  and  accordingly  assembled  a  mighty 
host  of  warriors  from  all  over  Egypt  and  from  elsewhere  as  well. 
That  his  movements  might  be  less  noticeable  and,  as  a  result,  greater 
injury  might  be  done  to  the  inhabitants,  he  advanced  by  way  of  the 
desert  and,  in  the  month  of  July,  reached  the  same  locality  which 
he  had  occupied  with  his  armies  the  preceding  year.^^ 

The  king,  however,  had  been  informed  of  his  advance.  Accordingly, 
with  the  flower  of  the  military  forces  of  the  realm,  he  went  out  into 
the  desert  to  meet  the  infidel  prince.  Again,  as  in  the  preceding  year, 
he  was  told  that  Saladin  had  turned  aside  into  Syria  Sobal.  Fearing 
to  follow  him  thither,  lest  perchance  Saladin,  on  learning  that  he  was 
pursued,  might  enter  from  another  direction  and  devastate  the  realm, 

Saladin’s  several  expeditions  into  southern  Palestine  and  the  region  of  Kerak  and 
Montreal  recounted  by  William  are  so  similar  as  to  raise  a  question  of  his  possible 
confusion  in  the  matter  (see  W,  B.  Stevenson,  The  Crusaders  in  the  Easty  pp.  201—2; 

R.K.J.y  pp.  35^“57)- 


390  STRUGGLE  FOR  EGYPT 

the  king  went  up  into  the  mountainous  country.  There  he  selected  a 
convenient  position  and  retired  to  Carmel. 

This  is  not  the  famous  Mt.  Carmel  on  the  coast,  once  the  abode  of 
Elias,  but  a  village  where,  as  we  read,  the  foolish  Nabal  formerly 
lived.  The  king  chose  this  position  wisely  because  of  the  conven¬ 
ience  of  water.  For  there  was  an  ancient  pool  of  great  extent  there 
which  would  furnish  ample  water  for  the  entire  army.  Moreover, 
Carmel  was  near  the  country  beyond  the  Jordan,  separated  from  it 
only  by  the  famous  valley  which  forms  the  boundary  between  the 
two  regions  and  in  which  lies  the  Dead  sea.  Hence  our  army  could 
readily  obtain  frequent  news  of  the  enemy’s  movements  and  ascer¬ 
tain  the  condition  of  Saladin’s  forces. 

Meanwhile,  since  the  king  hesitated  to  approach  that  region  for 
the  reasons  just  given,  Saladin  ravaged  the  whole  country  as  he 
would.  He  caused  everything  found  outside  the  fortresses  to  be 
burned,  bushes  and  vines  to  be  cut  down,  and  villages  to  be  destroyed. 
Finally,  toward  the  end  of  September,  after  completely  overrunning 
the  country  at  his  tyrannical  pleasure,  he  returned  to  Egypt. 

About  this  time,  Raymond  the  Younger,  count  of  Tripoli,  re¬ 
turned  to  his  ancestral  domains.  He  had  passed  eight  years  as  a 
prisoner  in  beggary  and  chains  but  was  finally  released  on  payment 
of  a  ransom  of  eighty  thousand  gold  pieces  and  restored  to  his 
former  state  of  liberty.^^  The  king  welcomed  him  on  his  return  most 
kindly  and,  without  making  any  difficulty,  restored  to  him  the  terri¬ 
tory  which  had  been  under  his  own  care  during  Raymond’s  absence. 
In  addition,  with  royal  bounty  he  gave  him  large  gifts  to  assist  in  pay¬ 
ing  the  price  of  his  ransom  and  induced  his  nobles  and  the  prelates 
of  the  church  also  to  follow  his  example. 

29.  The  sect  of  the  Assassins  is  described.  Also  of  the  embassy 
sent  by  them  to  the  king. 

About  this  same  time  there  occurred  among  us  a  dreadful  affair 
fraught  with  dire  consequences  to  the  kingdom  and  the  church,  a 
catastrophe  to  be  regretted  even  today,  perchance  forever.  In  order 

I  Sam.  25 :  2. 

He  had  been  captured  at  Harim  in  1164.  The  eight  years  of  captivity  would  end 
October  18,  1172,  though  the  general  context  seems  to  indicate  the  summer  of  1173 
as  the  year  of  his  release. 


STRUGGLE  FOR  EGYPT 


391 

to  obtain  a  clear  understanding  of  the  matter  it  is  necessary  to  begin 
the  account  somewhat  further  back. 

In  the  province  of  Tyre  in  Phoenicia  and  in  the  diocese  of  Tor- 
tosa  there  lives  a  tribe  of  people  who  possess  ten  fortresses  with  the 
villages  attached  to  them.  Their  number,  as  we  have  often  heard,  is 
about  sixty  thousand  or  possibly  more.  It  is  the  custom  of  this  people 
to  choose  their  ruler,  not  by  hereditary  right,  but  by  the  prerogative 
of  merit.  This  chief,  when  elected,  they  call  the  Old  Man,  disdain¬ 
ing  a  more  dignified  title.  Their  subjection  and  obedience  to  him  is 
such  that  they  regard  nothing  as  too  harsh  or  difficult  and  eagerly 
undertake  even  the  most  dangerous  tasks  at  his  command.^ ^  For  in¬ 
stance,  if  there  happens  to  be  a  prince  who  has  incurred  the  hatred  or 
distrust  of  this  people,  the  chief  places  a  dagger  in  the  hand  of  one 
or  several  of  his  followers  j  those  thus  designated  hasten  away  at 
once,  regardless  of  the  consequences  of  the  deed  or  the  probability  of 
personal  escape.  Zealously  they  labor  for  as  long  as  may  be  necessary, 
until  at  last  the  favorable  chance  comes  which  enables  them  to  carry 
out  the  mandate  of  the  chief.^®  Neither  Christians  nor  Saracens  know 
whence  this  name,  the  Assassins,  is  derived. For  about  four  hundred 
years  they  have  followed  the  law  and  traditions  of  the  Saracens  so 
strictly  that  by  comparison  all  other  peoples  seem  as  prevaricators  and 
they  alone  the  complete  observers  of  the  law.  But  during  our  times 
they  happened  to  choose  as  ruler  over  them  a  very  eloquent  man,  of 
subtle  and  brilliant  intelligence.  Contrary  to  the  habits  of  his  an¬ 
cestors,  this  man  possessed  the  books  of  the  Evangels  and  the  apostolic 
law.  Over  these  he  pored  continually  and  for  some  time  had  with 
much  labor  tried  to  follow  the  marvellous  precepts  of  Christ  and  also 
the  apostolic  doctrine. 

Hitti  gives  a  brief  account  of  this  Muslim  sect,  tracing  its  origin  from  the  Fatimid 
caliphate.  William’s  allusion  to  the  extraordinary  obedience  of  the  followers  of  the 
Old  Man  of  the  Mountain  suggests  that  he  was  aware  of  the  story  of  the  hashish  cere¬ 
mony  which  Hitti  quotes  from  Marco  Polo’s  account.  William  may  have  told  it  in 
his  Gesta  orientaUum  frincifunty  for  Jacques  de  Vitry,  who  used  William’s  work,  tells 
this  story  (see  P.  K.  Hitti,  History  of  the  ArabSy  pp.  446— 48) . 

Both  Muslim  and  Christian  leaders  were  murdered  by  the  Assassins.  William  has 
already  noted  Raymond  II  of  Xripoli  as  one  of  their  victims.  Qalanisi  ascribes  several 
assassinations  in  Damascus  to  them.  They  made  an  attempt  to  murder  Saladin,  but 
his  threat  to  destroy  the  sect  ended  those  attempts  (see  Hitti,  ArabSy  p.  447). 

It  is  now  generally  accepted  that  the  name  is  derived  from  hashushtmy  or  ‘^users 
of  hashish,”  the  stupefying  drug  derived  from  hemp,  or  marijuana  (Hitti,  ArabSy 
p.  446). 


STRUGGLE  FOR  EGYPT 


392 

The  gentle  and  noble  doctrine  of  Christ  and  His  followers,  when 
compared  with  that  which  the  miserable  seducer  Muhammad  had 
transmitted  to  his  accomplices  and  deluded  followers,  caused  him  to 
despise  the  beliefs  which  he  had  absorbed  with  his  mother’s  milk  and 
to  abominate  the  unclean  tenets  of  that  deceiver.  He  instructed  his 
people  also  in  the  same  way  and  made  them  cease  observing  the  su¬ 
perstition  of  the  prophet.  He  tore  down  the  places  of  prayer  which 
they  had  been  accustomed  to  use,  absolved  them  from  fasting,  and 
permitted  the  use  of  wine  and  pork.  At  length,  desirous  of  advancing 
into  a  fuller  understanding  of  the  mysteries  of  God’s  law,  he  sent  an 
envoy  to  the  king.  This  man,  Boaldelle  [Abdallah]  by  name,  was 
wise  and  eloquent,  skilled  in  counsel,  and  fully  instructed  in  the  doc¬ 
trine  of  his  master.  He  bore  secret  propositions,  the  main  burden  and 
most  important  article  of  which  was  that  if  the  brethren  of  the  Tem¬ 
ple,  who  held  certain  fortresses  adjacent  to  the  lands  of  the  Assassins, 
would  remit  the  tribute  of  two  thousand  gold  pieces  which  was  paid 
to  them  yearly  by  his  people  and  would  thereafter  observe  brotherly 
kindness  toward  them,  the  race  of  the  Assassins  would  embrace  the 
faith  of  Christ  and  receive  baptism. 

30.  The  envoy  of  the  Assassins  is  slain  by  the  brothers  of  the 

Knights  Temflars,  As  the  result  of  thisy  a  violent  disturbance 

I 

arises  in  the  kingdom,  Ralfhy  bishof  of  Bethlehemy  dies. 

The  king  received  the  envoy  gladly  and,  being  a  man  of  good  sense, 
agreed  fully  to  the  demands  made.  He  was  even  prepared,  it  is  said, 
to  compensate  the  brethren  from  his  own  treasury  for  the  two  thou¬ 
sand  gold  pieces,  the  amount  of  the  annual  tribute  which  the  Assassins 
asked  to  have  remitted.  He  detained  the  envoy  with  him  long  enough 
to  complete  the  details  of  the  agreement  and  then  sent  him  back  to 
his  master  to  make  the  final  arrangements,  accompanied  by  a  guide  to 
lead  and  protect  him  on  the  way.  Under  the  escort  of  the  guide  and 
companion  thus  provided  by  the  king,  Abdallah  had  already  passed 
Tripoli  and  was  about  to  enter  his  own  land,  when  suddenly  some  of 
the  Knights  of  the  Temple  rushed  upon  the  party  with  drawn  swords 
and  killed  the  envoy.  The  latter,  far  from  anticipating  any  such  ac¬ 
tion,  was  pursuing  his  journey  without  caution,  in  full  reliance  upon 
the  king’s  safe  conduct  and  the  sincere  good  faith  of  our  nation.  By 


STRUGGLE  FOR  EGYPT  393 

this  crime,  the  knights  brought  upon  themselves  the  charge  of  trea¬ 
son.®® 

The  news  of  this  atrocious  deed  roused  the  king  to  violent  anger. 
Almost  frenzied,  he  summoned  the  barons  and,  declaring  that  the 
outrage  amounted  to  injury  against  himself,  he  demanded  their  ad¬ 
vice  as  to  the  course  of  action  to  be  adopted.  The  barons  were  of  one 
mind  that  such  wickedness  should  not  be  passed  over.  For  by  that 
crime  the  royal  authority  seemed  to  be  put  to  naught  and  undeserved 
infamy  brought  upon  the  good  faith  and  constancy  of  the  Christian 
profession.  Moreover,  through  this  act  the  church  in  the  Orient 
seemed  likely  to  lose  the  increase  so  pleasing  to  God  that  had  been 
already  prepared  for  it. 

By  consent  of  all,  therefore,  two  nobles,  Selher  de  Mamedunc  and 
Godescalous  [Godechaux]  de  Turout,  were  selected  as  special  mes¬ 
sengers  to  demand  from  the  master  of  the  Templars,  Eudes  de  Saint- 
Amand,  that  satisfaction  be  rendered  to  the  king  and  the  entire  realm 
for  this  sacrilegious  outrage. 

It  was  said  that  one  of  the  brethren  named  Walter  du  Maisnilio 
[Mesnil],  a  one-eyed  man  of  evil  repute,  wholly  lacking  in  discre¬ 
tion,  ^^whose  breath  is  in  his  nostrils,”  was  the  actual  perpetrator  of 
the  crime,  but  that  it  was  done  with  the  cognizance  of  the  brethren. 
It  is  further  said  that  the  master,  in  his  desire  to  spare  this  man  far 
beyond  his  deserts,  sent  word  to  the  king  by  a  messenger  that  he  had 
enjoined  a  penance  on  the  guilty  brother  and  was  about  to  send  him 
to  the  pope.  He  forbade  anyone,  on  the  part  of  the  pope,  to  lay  violent 
hands  upon  the  said  brother.®®  He  added  other  remarks,  dictated  by 
the  spirit  of  overweening  arrogance  with  which  he  was  possessed,  but 
it  is  unnecessary  to  record  them  here. 

Lundgreen,  who  is  unable  to  cite  any  authority  to  the  contrary,  nevertheless  scouts 
this  story  as  another  instance  of  William’s  prejudice,  his  desire  to  accuse  them  of 
cupidity.  His  only  evidence  is  the  circumstance  that  Henry,  duke  of  Saxony  and  Bavaria, 
had  given  a  generous  grant  of  money  to  the  Templars  about  this  time  (Wilhelm  von 
Tyrus  und  der  Temflerorden^  pp.  1 11—14). 

Is.  2 :  22. 

The  Templars,  like  the  Hospitallers,  had  by  a  series  of  decrees,  especially  that  of 
1154,  come  under  papal  protection.  As  a  religious  order  they  could,  of  course,  plead 
benefit  of  clergy,  as  here,  to  gain  immunity  from  secular  jurisdiction.  This  plea,  so 
long  ignored  by  feudal  authorities,  had  gained  great  force  during  the  twelfth  cen¬ 
tury.  It  is  interesting  to  note,  however,  that  even  in  the  Holy  Land  Amaury  gave  it  only 
partial  respect.  The  treatment  of  “criminous  clerks”  had  been  one  of  the  chief  subjects 
of  the  quarrel  between  Henry  II  and  Thomas  a  Becket  at  almost  the  same  period. 


STRUGGLE  FOR  EGYPT 


394 

The  king  went  himself  to  Sidon  on  this  matter  and  found  the 
master  with  many  of  the  other  brethren,  including  the  culprit  him¬ 
self.  After  consulting  with  those  who  had  accompanied  him  thither, 
the  king  caused  that  man  guilty  of  treason  to  be  dragged  forcibly 
from  the  house  and  had  him  sent  in  chains  to  Tyre,  where  he  was 
cast  into  prison.  This  outrage  against  the  envoy  came  near  plunging 
the  whole  kingdom  into  irreparable  ruin.  By  declaring  his  innocence, 
however,  to  the  master  of  the  Assassins,  whose  representative  had 
perished  in  so  unfortunate  a  manner,  the  king  was  able  to  clear  his 
own  honor.  In  dealing  with  the  brethren  of  the  Temple  he  exercised 
such  moderation  that  the  matter  remained  in  abeyance  even  to  the 
day  of  his  death.  It  is  said,  however,  that  if  he  had  recovered  from 
that  last  illness,  Amaury  had  intended  to  take  up  the  matter  with  the 
kings  and  princes  of  the  earth,  through  envoys  of  high  degree,  when 
it  would  have  been  given  most  careful  consideration.®^ 

In  the  following  spring  occurred  the  death  of  the  royal  chancellor, 
the  venerable  brother  Ralph  of  happy  memory,  bishop  of  Bethlehem, 
a  man  of  liberal  and  genial  nature.  He  was  interred  with  high  honors 
in  the  chapel  of  his  church.  After  his  death,  the  matter  of  electing  his 
successor  came  up.  While  this  was  under  discussion  in  the  same  church, 
difEculties  caused  by  the  conflicting  views  of  the  electors  arose,  which 
were  hardly  settled  until  the  second  year  of  King  Baldwin,  the  son 
and  successor  of  King  Amaury.  Because  of  this  disagreement  the 
church  at  Bethlehem  incurred  great  expense. 

3 1 .  Nureddm  dies.  The  king  lays  siege  to  B  any  as  but  finally  con¬ 
cludes  a  truce  and  withdraws.  He  is  stricken  with  illness 
and  hastens  to  J erusalemy  where  he  dies  within  a  few  days. 

In  the  month  of  May,  scarcely  a  month  after  this  time,  Nureddin, 
a  mighty  persecutor  of  the  Christian  name  and  faith,  died  in  the 
twenty-ninth  year  of  his  rule.®-  He  was  a  just  prince,  valiant  and  wise, 
and,  according  to  the  traditions  of  his  race,  a  religious  man. 

On  learning  of  his  death,  the  king  immediately  convoked  all  the 

William  doubtless  had  this  account  of  Amaury’s  intentions  directly  from  the  king 
himself.  As  archbishop,  William  resented  the  independence  of  the  Templars  from 
local  ecclesiastical  control  and  probably  lent  his  own  hearty  assent  to  such  an  appeal. 

Nureddin’s  death  took  place  May  15,  1174.  His  father,  Zangi,  had  been  killed 
September  14,  1146,  which  renders  William’s  reckoning  of  the  length  of  his  reign 
a  third  of  a  year  too  long. 


STRUGGLE  FOR  EGYPT 


395 

strength  of  the  kingdom  and  laid  siege  to  the  city  of  Banyas,  At  this, 
Nureddin’s  widow,  with  courage  beyond  that  of  most  women,  sent  a 
message  to  the  king  demanding  that  he  abandon  the  siege  and  grant 
them  a  temporary  peace.  She  promised  to  pay  a  large  sum  of  money 
in  return.  The  king,  however,  in  the  hope  of  extorting  a  larger  bribe, 
at  first  pretended  to  spurn  her  plea  and  continued  the  siege. 

For  about  fifteen  days  he  prosecuted  the  undertaking  wdth  vigor 
and  zeal  and  caused  the  foe  great  trouble  with  his  siege  engines  and 
in  various  other  ways.  Finally  he  perceived,  how^ever,  that  the  ability 
of  the  Turks  to  resist  was  steadily  increasing  and  began  to  realize 
that  he  had  no  chance  of  success.  Meanwhile  the  envoys  of  the  noble 
lady  kept  insistently  demanding  peace.  He  finally  decided  to  accept 
the  proffered  money,  and,  on  the  release  of  twenty  captive  Christian 
knights  in  addition,  he  raised  the  siege  with  the  intention  of  under¬ 
taking  greater  projects  later. 

On  the  way  home,  he  complained  to  those  about  him  that  he  w^as 
feeling  rather  ill  and  was  far  from  being  in  good  condition.  He  dis¬ 
missed  his  forces  and  went  on  with  his  personal  retinue  to  Tiberias, 
where  he  began  to  suffer  from  a  severe  attack  of  dysentery.  Fearing 
the  approach  of  illness,  he  continued  from  there  on  horseback  (for 
his  strength  was  still  sufficient  for  that  effort)  by  way  of  Nazareth  and 
Nablus  to  Jerusalem.  There  he  continued  to  grow  w^orse,  and  a  vio¬ 
lent  fever  came  on,  although  the  dysentery  yielded  to  the  physician’s 
skill.  After  suffering  intolerably  from  the  fever  for  several  days,  he 
ordered  physicians  of  the  Greek,  Syrian,  and  other  nations  noted  for 
skill  in  diseases  to  be  called  and  insisted  that  they  give  him  some 
purgative  remedy.  As  they  would  not  consent  to  this,  he  had  Latin 
physicians  called  and  made  the  same  request  of  them,  adding  that 
whatever  the  result  might  be  he  would  take  the  responsibility  upon 
himself.  They  administered  medicines  which  produced  the  desired 
result  easily  and  seemed  to  give  him  some  relief.  But  before  he  could 
take  nourishment  to  strengthen  his  body  which  had  been  weakened 
by  the  violent  remedy,  the  usual  fever  returned,  and  he  yielded  to  his 
fate.  He  died  on  July  ii,  in  the  year  of  the  Incarnation  of  our  Lord 
1173,  in  the  twelfth  year  and  fifth  month  of  his  reign  and  in  the 
thirty-eighth  year  of  his  life.®^  He  was  buried  by  the  side  of  his 

It  should  be  July  ii,  1174.  William  is  thus  in  error  on  the  last  as  well  as  first 
year  of  JVmaury’s  reign.  Doubtless  this  ending  is  part  of  the  chronological  framework 


STRUGGLE  FOR  EGYPT 


396 

brother  among  his  predecessors  of  the  same  line,  before  the  place 
Calvary.  He  was  a  man  of  wisdom  and  discretion,  fully  competent  to 
hold  the  reins  of  government  in  the  kingdom.  It  was  due  to  his 
urgent  entreaties  that  we  determined  to  write  this  history  concerning 
the  deeds  of  himself  and  his  predecessors. 


which  he  constructed,  probably  in  1182.  It  is  the  irony  of  fate  that  William  should 
have  made  more  chronolog-ical  misstatements  in  the  reig-n  of  Amaury  than  in  that 
of  any  other  ruler.  The  chief  cause  of  these  errors  was,  of  course,  the  fact  that  he 
had  postponed  the  work  on  Amaury^s  earlier  years,  before  1167,  until  he  had  com¬ 
pleted  the  introductory  royal  chronicle.  The  latter  task  had  not  been  done  when  Amaury 
died.  The  year  1174  is  established  by  the  known  date  of  Nureddin’s  death  and  William’s 
account  of  Amaury’s  activities  as  a  result  of  it.  William  seldom  errs  in  his  statements 
of  the  sequence  of  related  events  (see  Stevenson,  CrusaderSy  p.  213). 


HERE  ENDS  THE  TWENTIETH  BOOK 


THE  TWENTY-FIRST  BOOK  BEGINS 


BALDWIN  IV,  THE  LEPER,  FORCED 
TO  ASSUME  RULE  OF  JERUSALEM 


I.  Concerning  the  beginning  of  the  reign  of  Baldwin  IV y  the 
sixth  king  of  Jerusalem;  also  of  his  manner  of  lifey  his  a  gey 
and  his  affearance. 

The  sixth  Latin  king  ^  of  Jerusalem  was  Baldwin  IV,  son  of  Amaury, 
that  king  of  illustrious  memory  of  whom  we  have  just  been  writ¬ 
ing,  and  the  Countess  Agnes,  daughter  of  the  younger  Joscelin, 
count  of  Edessa,  who  has  also  been  frequently  mentioned  in  the  fore¬ 
going  pages.  When  Amaury  was  called  by  hereditary  right  to  ascend 
the  throne  of  his  ancestors,  he  divorced  Agnes,  as  has  been  already 
related.  He  was  led  to  this  act  by  the  coercion  of  the  church,  for 
Amalrich  of  good  memory,  at  that  time  patriarch  of  Jerusalem, 
following  in  the  footsteps  of  his  predecessor  Fulcher,  obliged  him  to 
put  her  away.  It  was  claimed,  as  was  indeed  true,  that  the  blood 
relationship  between  the  two  was  too  close.  This  fact  I  carefully  ex¬ 
plained  when  treating  in  detail  of  the  reign  of  King  Amaury.^ 

While  I  was  archdeacon  of  Tyre,  King  Amaury,  anxious  about  the 
education  of  his  son,  after  many  entreaties  and  under  assurance  of 
his  favor,  prevailed  upon  me  to  undertake  the  task  of  tutor.^  The  boy, 
then  about  nine  years  old,  was  accordingly  committed  to  my  care  to 
be  instructed  and  nurtured  in  liberal  studies.  While  he  was  under 
my  charge,  I  devoted  myself  to  my  royal  pupil  with  vigilant  care  and 
watched  over  him  with  the  solicitude  befitting  his  exalted  position.  I 
endeavored  to  train  him  in  the  formation  of  character  as  well  as  to 
instruct  him  in  the  knowledge  of  letters.  He  was  playing  one  day 

^  This  was  obviously  written  before  the  Prologue,  in  which  William  reached  the 
decision  to  include  Godfrey  as  a  king  and  called  Baldwin  IV  the  ‘^seventh’^  king. 

2  Book  XIX,  chap.  4. 

®  This  request  could  not  have  been  made  before  the  end  of  the  year  1169,  for  Wil¬ 
liam  was  absent  in  the  West  during  most  of  that  year  and  Amaury  did  not  return 
from  Egypt  until  December  25,  1169  (see  Book  XX,  chap.  17).  William  therefore 
undertook  the  education  of  young  Baldwin  in  1170,  when  he  was  “nine  years  old,” 
and  continued  his  duties  until  Baldwin  was  crowned  king  four  years  later  when  he 
was  “barely  thirteen  years  old.”  This  helps  to  correct  the  misstatement  of  Amaury’s 
death  in  **1173.” 


398  BALDWIN  IV,  THE  LEPER 

with  his  companions  of  noble  rank,  when  they  began,  as  playful  boys 
often  do,  to  pinch  each  others’  arms  and  hands  with  their  nails.  The 
other  boys  gave  evidence  of  pain  by  their  outcries,  but  Baldwin, 
although  his  comrades  did  not  spare  him,  endured  it  altogether  too 
patiently,  as  if  he  felt  nothing.  After  this  had  occurred  several  times 
it  was  reported  to  me.  At  first  I  supposed  that  it  proceeded  from  his 
capacity  for  endurance  and  not  from  lack  of  sensitiveness.  But  when 
I  called  him  and  began  to  inquire  what  it  meant,  I  discovered  that  his 
right  arm  and  hand  were  partially  numb,  so  that  he  did  not  feel 
pinching  or  even  biting  in  the  least.  I  began  to  be  uneasy,  remember¬ 
ing  the  words  of  the  wise  man,  ^‘There  is  no  question  that  a  member 
which  is  without  feeling  detracts  greatly  from  the  health  of  the  body, 
and  one  who  does  not  realize  that  he  is  sick  is  in  danger.” 

The  lad’s  father  was  informed  of  his  condition,  and  physicians  were 
consulted.  Repeated  fomentations,  oil  rubs,  and  even  poisonous 
remedies  were  employed  without  result  in  the  attempt  to  help  him. 
For,  as  we  recognized  in  process  of  time,  these  were  the  premonitory 
symptoms  of  a  most  serious  and  incurable  disease  which  later  became 
plainly  apparent. 

It  is  impossible  to  refrain  from  tears  while  speaking  of  this  great 
misfortune.  For,  as  he  began  to  reach  years  of  maturity,  it  was  evident 
that  he  was  suffering  from  the  terrible  disease  of  leprosy.  Day  by  day 
his  condition  became  worse.  The  extremities  and  the  face  were  es¬ 
pecially  attacked,  so  that  his  faithful  followers  were  moved  with  com¬ 
passion  when  they  looked  at  him.  Nevertheless,  he  continued  to  make 
progress  in  the  pursuit  of  letters  and  gave  ever-increasing  promise  of 
developing  a  lovable  disposition.  He  was  comely  of  appearance  for  his 
age,  and  far  beyond  the  custom  of  his  forefathers  he  was  an  excellent 
horseman  and  understood  the  handling  of  horses.  He  had  a  retentive 
memory  and  loved  to  talk.  He  was  economical  but  always  remembered 
both  favors  and  injuries.  In  every  respect  he  resembled  his  father,  not 
alone  in  face  but  in  his  entire  mien  3  even  his  walk  and  the  tones  of 
his  voice  were  the  same.  His  intellect  was  keen,  but  his  speech  was 
somwhat  halting.  Like  his  father  he  eagerly  listened  to  history  and 
was  well  disposed  to  follow  good  advice.^ 

^  This  phrase  reflects  Hippocrates  Afkarism  vi.  2. 

^  William  could  speak  with  authority  on  this  point,  for  he  was  himself  one  of  the 
advisors. 


BALDWIN  IV,  THE  LEPER 


399 


2.  Concerning  the  time  of  his  consecration  and  coronation* 

At  the  time  of  his  father’s  death  he  was  barely  thirteen  years  old. 
An  older  sister  named  Sibylla,  born  of  the  same  mother,  had  been 
brought  up  in  the  convent  of  St.  Lazarus  at  Bethany  by  the  Lady 
Iveta,  her  father’s  maternal  aunt,  who  was  the  abbess  of  the  place. 

On  the  death  of  King  Amaury,  the  nobles  of  the  realm,  both  ecclesi¬ 
astical  and  secular,  met  in  assembly,  and  the  wishes  of  all  were  found 
to  be  in  perfect  harmony.  Accordingly,  on  July  15,  the  fourth  day 
after  the  death  of  his  father,  Baldwin  was  solemnly  consecrated  and 
crowned,  according  to  custom,  in  the  church  of  the  Sepulchre  of  the 
Lord.  The  rites  were  solemnized  by  Amalrich,  patriarch  of  Jerusalem 
of  good  memory,  assisted  by  the  archbishops  and  other  prelates  of  the 
church . 

At  this  time  Pope  Alexander  III  was  head  of  the  holy  Roman 
church.  Aimery  was  the  patriarch  of  the  holy  church  at  Antioch,  and 
Amalrich  was  patriarch  of  Jerusalem.  Frederick  was  archbishop  of 
Tyre.  At  Constantinople,  Emperor  Manuel  of  great  renown  and  pious 
memory  ruled.  Frederick  was  the  emperor  of  the  Romans,  and  Louis 
king  of  the  Franks.  In  England,  Henry,  son  of  Geoffrey,  count  of 
Anjou,  was  reigning,  and  in  Sicily,  William  II,  son  of  William  the 
Elder.  Bohemond,  son  of  Prince  Raymond,  was  governing  Antioch  j 
and  the  younger  Raymond,  son  of  the  elder  Count  Raymond,  ruled 
over  Tripoli. 

3,  In  the  first  year  of  the  reign  of  Baldwin  IV  a  fleet  sent  by 
the  king  of  Sicily  suffers  an  enor^nous  loss  before  A lexandria. 

The  count  of  Trifoliy  as  next  of  kiny  demands  the  regency 
of  the  kingdom  and  the  guardianshif  of  the  king. 

During  the  first  year  of  this  king’s  reign,  about  the  beginning  of 
August,®  King  William  of  Sicily  sent  a  fleet  of  two  hundred  ships  to 
attack  Alexandria.  With  a  splendid  force  of  both  cavalry  and  infantry, 
it  sailed  down  to  Egypt.  During  the  stay  of  five  or  six  days  made 
before  that  city,  through  the  lack  of  caution  displayed  by  the  gover- 

®  Chalandon  has  dated  this  attack  on  Alexandria  as  July  28-August  i,  1174.  This 
expedition  had  resulted  from  Amaury’s  call  for  aid  upon  the  West  and  failed  to  receive 
the  expected  support  by  land  because  of  Amaury’s  death  (see  F.  Chalandon,  Histoire 
de  la  domination  normande  en  Italic  et  en  Sidle ^  II,  396). 


400  BALDWIN  IV,  THE  LEPER 

nors  and  leaders,  both  the  infantry  and  cavalry  forces  sustained  great 
losses  by  death  and  capture  and  were  finally  obliged  to  retire  in 
confusion. 

In  our  kingdom  the  aifairs  of  the  realm  were  in  the  charge  of 
Milon  de  Plancy.  A  serious  enmity  now  arose  between  this  noble  and 
some  of  the  barons  of  the  realm.  They  were  jealous  of  his  power  and 
could  not  brook  the  fact  that  they  were  ignored  and  never  summoned, 
while  he  alone,  with  overweening  presumption  and  scorn  of  others, 
was  always  at  the  side  of  the  king  ready  to  assist  him.  Meanwhile,  the 
rest  were  shut  out  from  personal  contact  with  the  king,  and  Milon 
conducted  the  affairs  of  state  without  consulting  them. 

About  this  time,  the  count  of  Tripoli  came  to  the  king  and,  in  the 
presence  of  the  barons  who  chanced  to  be  there,  demanded  the  regency 
of  the  realm.  He  asserted  that  by  the  right  of  next  of  kin  the  legal 
guardianship  of  the  king,  who  was  still  a  minor,  was  due  to  him. 
And  this  office,  he  said,  belonged  to  him  for  more  than  one  reason: 
not  only  because  he  was  the  nearest  of  Baldwin’s  blood  relations,  but 
also  because  he  was  the  richest  and  most  powerful  of  all  the  loyal 
subjects  of  the  king.’’^  He  added  as  a  third  very  cogent  reason,  ^^that 
when  he  himself  was  taken  captive,  from  prison  itself  he  had  ordered 
his  faithful  people,  under  their  pledge  of  loyalty,  to  surrender  all 
his  lands,  strongholds,  and  castles  to  King  Amaury,  the  father  of  this 
boy,  and  to  place  everything  under  his  orders  and  sovereign  care.” 
Furthermore  he  had  added  as  a  final  direction  that  if  it  should  be  his 
fate  as  a  man  to  end  his  life  in  prison,  he  constituted  the  aforesaid 
king  his  sole  heir,  as  next  of  kin.  In  recognition  of  all  these  favors, 
he  asked  that  this  return  be  made  to  him,  rather  on  account  of  the 
honor  than  through  any  hope  of  future  advantage.  A  response  to 
these  demands  of  the  count  was  deferred  on  the  ground  that  the  king 
had  about  him  at  the  time  only  a  few  of  the  barons  of  the  realm 
whom  he  might  consult.  At  an  opportune  time  as  quickly  and  as 
generally  as  possible  they  should  be  summoned  and  consulted,  when, 
by  the  help  of  God,  fitting  response  on  all  these  matters  would  be 
given.  On  receiving  this  reply,  the  count  returned  to  his  own  land. 
Practically  all  the  people  favored  the  cause  of  the  count.  Among  the 
barons,  Humphrey  of  Toron,  the  royal  constable,  Baldwin  of  Ramlah, 

^  These  statements  are  amplified  in  chapter  5.  Of  interest  here  is  William’s  apparent 
implication  that  Tripoli  was  a  vassal  state  of  the  king-  of  Jerusalem. 


BALDWIN  IV,  THE  LEPER  401 

Balian,  his  brother,  Renaud  of  Sidon,  and  all  the  bishops  were  his 
partisans. 

4.  Mtlon  de  Plancy  is  killed  at  Acre.  Fredericky  archbishof  of 
TyrCy  dies. 

I 

This  Milon  de  Plancy  of  whom  we  have  been  speaking  was  a  noble¬ 
man  of  Champagne  beyond  the  mountains,  from  the  land  of  Henry, 
count  of  Troyes.  He  had  been  on  very  intimate  terms  with  King 
Amaury,  his  kinsman,  who  made  him  the  seneschal  of  his  kingdom. 
On  the  death  of  the  younger  Humphrey,  son  of  Humphrey  of  Toron, 
Stephanie,  his  widow,  the  daughter  of  Philip  of  Nablus,  was  given 
by  Amaury  to  Milon  as  his  wife.  By  virtue  of  his  wife,  Milon  was 
lord  of  Syria  Sobal,  that  is,  of  the  region  beyond  the  Jordan  which  is 
generally  called  Montreal.  By  her  former  husband,  however, 
Stephanie  had  two  children,  a  son  and  a  daughter. 

Milon,  as  has  been  said,  presumed  on  the  close  friendship  which  he 
had  enjoyed  with  the  father  of  the  present  king  and  scorned  the 
barons  of  the  realm,  even  those  greater  than  himself.  In  character  he 
was  far  from  discreet,  a  proud  and  even  arrogant  man,  lavish  of  high- 
sounding  phrases  and  filled  with  a  spirit  of  excessive  presumption. 
With  a  view  to  lessening  the  jealousy  of  the  others  in  some  way,  he 
made  use  of  a  subterfuge  only  too  apparent.  He  suborned  a  certain 
Rohard,  guardian  of  the  citadel  at  Jerusalem,  a  very  ordinary  man 
and  utterly  inefficient.  Milon  pretended  to  obey  the  orders  of  this  man 
as  if  he  himself  were  under  his  direction.  In  reality  it  was  quite  the 
contrary  3  the  one  bore  a  title  splendid  rather  than  substantial,  while 
the  other,  under  that  guise,  carried  on  the  affairs  of  the  realm  just  as 
he  liked.  Though  conducting  himself  carelessly  and  talking  impru¬ 
dently,  he  brought  under  his  own  direction  the  affairs  of  the  kingdom 
in  spite  of  the  others.  He  arranged  all  matters  and  dispensed  all 
favors  according  to  his  wish,  thereby  rousing  intense  hatred  against 
himself.  At  length  matters  came  to  such  a  pass  that  certain  men  were 
secretly  incited  to  plot  against  his  life. 

When  this  was  reported  to  him,  he  made  light  of  it  and  continued 
to  conduct  himself  as  usual  without  taking  proper  precautions.  One 
day  while  staying  at  the  city  of  Acre,  he  was  stabbed  on  the  public 
street  just  at  dusk  and  died  after  suffering  ignominious  and  shameful 
treatment.  The  sentiment  among  the  people  concerning  his  death  was 


I 


402  BALDWIN  IV,  THE  LEPER 

varied.  Some  said  that  he  had  been  murdered  because  of  the  devoted 
loyalty  which  he  had  showed  toward  the  king.  Others,  on  the  con¬ 
trary,  claimed  that  he  was  secretly  taking  steps  to  seize  the  royal 
power.  It  was  said  that  he  had  sent  messengers  to  his  friends  and 
acquaintances  in  France,  urging  them  to  hasten  to  him,  that  by  their 
help  he  might  be  enabled  to  lay  hold  on  the  kingdom.  I  have  not 
ascertained  definitely  whether  either  of  these  views  is  correct.  It  is 
well  known,  however,  that  Balian  of  Jaffa,  the  brother  of  the  Rohard 
mentioned  above,  had  been  sent  to  the  lands  across  the  sea  with  royal 
dispatches  and  gifts  and  that  his  return  was  daily  awaited. 

About  this  time,  in  fact  on  the  thirtieth  of  this  same  month  of 
October,  Frederick,®  archbishop  of  Tyre,  our  predecessor,  a  man  of 
very  noble  rank  according  to  the  flesh,  died  at  Nablus,  where  he  had 
been  detained  for  some  time  by  a  serious  illness.  His  body  was  borne 
with  fitting  obsequies  and  honors  to  Jerusalem  and  buried  in  the 
chapel  of  the  Temple  of  the  Lord,  of  which  church  he  had  been  a 
regular  canon. 

5.  The  count  of  Trlfoli  is  described;  the  ancestors  from  whom 
he  descended;  and  how  he  undertook  the  regency^  The 
writer  of  this  history  is  made  royal  chancellor. 

About  this  same  time,  also,  the  barons  of  the  realm  and  the  prel¬ 
ates  of  the  church  having  convened  and  the  king  also  being  at  Jeru¬ 
salem,  the  count  of  Tripoli  returned  to  receive  the  answer  to  the 
petition  which  he  had  presented  in  regard  to  the  regency.  Again  he 
repeated  his  demand  and  pressed  the  same  claims.  After  a  deliberation 
lasting  for  two  successive  days,  the  king  finally  agreed,  with  the  con¬ 
sent  of  all  5  and  amid  the  loud  acclamations  of  the  people  the  count 
was  invested  in  the  chapel  of  the  Sepulchre  of  the  Lord  with  the 
entire  government  and  powers  of  the  realm,  second  only  to  that  of 
the  king.  Since  the  count^s  name  is  thus  brought  into  prominence  in 
the  recapitulation  of  the  events  which  we  are  presenting,  this  seems 
a  fitting  time  to  record  for  the  benefit  of  posterity  the  facts  that  we 
have  learned  with  certainty  about  him;  not  that  we  propose  to  write 
a  panegyric,  but  as  far  as  the  necessarily  limited  compass  of  a  brief 
history  permits,  we  shall  state  who  he  was  and  of  what  lineage. 

Count  Raymond,  the  subject  of  our  discussion,  traced  his  descent 

®  October  30,  1174. 


BALDWIN  IV,  THE  LEPER  403 

according  to  the  flesh  to  that  elder  Raymond  who  was  an  important 
leader  in  that  army  of  the  Lord  by  whose  zealous  work  and  labors  the 
kingdom  of  the  East  was  restored  to  the  service  of  Christ.  These  facts 
were  carefully  recorded  when  we  were  treating  of  those  first  chiefs 
who  came  with  the  first  expedition.  This  elder  Count  Raymond,  of 
precious  memory,  had  a  son  Bertram,  who  after  his  father’s  death 
and  the  assassination  of  William  Jordan,  the  latter’s  nephew,  became 
count  of  Tripoli.  Bertram  had  a  son  Pons,  who,  on  his  father’s  death, 
succeeded  to  the  rule  by  hereditary  right.  He  married  Cecilia,  the 
widow  of  Tancred  and  daughter  of  Philip,  king  of  France,  and  by 
her  had  a  son  Raymond,  who  succeeded  him  in  the  government  of 
Tripoli.  Raymond  married  Hodierna,  daughter  of  Baldwin,  the 
second  king  of  Jerusalem,  who  became  the  mother  of  this  Raymond 
now  under  discussion.  The  latter  succeeded  his  father  as  count  of 
Tripoli  when  the  elder  Raymond  was  killed  at  the  city  gate  of  Tripoli 
in  a  sudden  attack  by  the  Assassins.  On  the  mother’s  side,  therefore, 
this  count  was  the  cousin  of  King  Amaury  and  King  Baldwin,  for  they 
were  the  sons  of  two  sisters.  On  the  father’s  side  he  was  of  lesser 
degree j  his  grandmother  on  his  father’s  side,  the  Cecilia  just 
mentioned,  was  the  sister  of  King  Fulk,  the  father  of  kings  Baldwin 
and  Amaury,  having  the  same  mother,  but  not  the  same  father.  For 
the  mother  of  both,  who  was  the  sister  of  Amaury  de  Montfort,  had. 
first  been  the  wife  of  the  elder  Fulk,  count  of  Anjou.  After  the  birth 
of  the  younger  Fulk,  she  left  her  husband  and  fled  to  Philip,  king  of 
the  Franks,  by  whom  she  had  this  Cecilia  and  several  other  sons. 
Philip,  infatuated  with  the  Countess  [Bertrada] ,  had,  contrary  to  the 
law  of  the  church,  driven  out  the  queen,  his  legitimate  wife  by  whom 
he  already  had  two  children,  Louis  and  Constance.  Thixs  the  count 
and  the  two  kings  mentioned  were  closely  connected  on  both  sides. 

The  count  was  a  man  of  slender  build,  extremely  spare,  of  medium 
height  and  swarthy  complexion.  His  hair  was  straight  and  rather  dark 
in  color.  He  had  piercing  eyes  and  carried  his  shoulders  very  erect. 
He  was  prompt  and  vigorous  in  action,  gifted  with  equanimity  and 
foresight,  and  temperate  in  his  use  of  both  food  and  drink,  far  more 
than  the  average  man.  He  showed  munificence  toward  strangers,  but 
toward  his  own  people  he  was  not  so  lavish.  He  was  fairly  well- 
lettered,  an  accomplishment  which  he  had  acquired  while  a  prisoner 
among  the  enemy,  at  the  expense  of  much  effort,  aided  greatly,  how- 


404 


BALDWIN  IV,  THE  LEPER 

ever,  by  his  natural  keenness  of  mind.^  Like  King  Amaury,  he  eagerly 
sought  the  knowledge  contained  in  written  works.  He  was  indefati¬ 
gable  in  asking  questions  if  there  happened  to  be  anyone  present  who 

in  his  opinion  was  capable  of  answering. 

The  same  year  that  he  entered  upon  the  administration  of  the 
kingdom  he  married  Eschiva,  a  very  wealthy  woman,  widow  of 
Walter,  prince  of  Galilee,  by  whom  she  had  many  children.  For  some 
unknown  reason,  however,  after  her  marriage  with  the  count  she  had 
no  more.  But  he  is  said  to  have  loved  her  and  her  children  as  tenderly 

as  though  she  had  borne  them  all  to  him. 

Now,  after  this  short  digression,  let  us  return  to  the  main  account. 

During  the  preceding  summer,^®  Ralph  of  precious  memory,  bishop 
of  Bethlehem  and  chancellor  of  the  kingdom,  had  departed  from  the 
light  of  this  world.  In  order  that  there  might  be  someone  in  charge 
of  the  royal  correspondence,  the  king,  by  the  advice  of  his  barons, 
appointed  me  to  that  office  and  invested  me  with  the  dignity  of 
chancellor. 

6.  At  the  request  of  the  feofle  of  Damascus y  Saladtn  takes  fos^ 
session  of  that  city  and  the  other  farts  of  that  region.  The 
count  of  Trifoli  marches  against  him  to  oppose  his  plans. 

During  the  course  of  that  same  year,  Saladin,  son  of  Najm  al-Din, 
who  had  succeeded  his  uncle  Shirkuh,  his  father’s  brother,  over  the 
kingdom  of  Egypt,  was  secretly  summoned  by  the  important  men  of 
Damascus.  Their  legitimate  lord,  Melehe  Salah  [al-Malik  al-Salah], 
son  of  Nureddin,  who  had  not  yet  reached  the  age  of  maturity,  had 
his  residence  at  Aleppo.  Saladin  committed  the  care  of  Egypt  to  one 
of  his  brothers  named  Seifedin  [Sayf  al-Din]  and,  hastening  through 
the  desert  wastes  of  Syria,  arrived  at  Damascus  to  take  possession  of 
the  kingdom.  A  few  days  later,  after  receiving  the  city  at  the  hands 
of  the  citizens,  he  advanced  to  Coelesyria  where  he  hoped  to  bring  all 

®  This  statement  seems  to  contradict  the  earlier  one  about  his  captivity,  in  which 
he  was  represented  as  in  chains  and  confinement.  Raymond  was  generally  regarded  by 
Muslim  historians  of  the  period  as  a  man  of  very  keen  intellect,  the  ablest  of  the 
Christian  leaders  at  this  time. 

Ralph^s  last  extant  signature  as  chancellor  is  on  a  document  of  April  i8,  1174 
(R.  Rohricht,  Regesta  regni  Hierosolyinitani^  no.  514),  William’s  first  is  on  a  docu¬ 
ment  of  December  13,  1174  (R.  Reg.y  no.  518).  Earlier  (Book  XX,  chaps.  30  and  31) 
William  implied  that  the  death  of  Ralph  had  occurred  in  April,  about  a  month  before 
the  death  of  Nureddin, 


BALDWIN  IV,  THE  LEPER  405 

the  cities  of  that  land  under  his  rule  without  war.  Nor  did  this  hope 
prove  false,  for  within  a  short  time  the  inhabitants  of  those  places 
surrendered  and  voluntarily  unbarred  their  gates  to  him.  Thus,  con¬ 
trary  to  the  loyalty  he  owed  to  his  lord  and  master,  Saladin  took  over 
all  the  cities  of  that  province:  namely,  Heliopolis,  so  called  in  the 
Greek  tongue  and  now  known  as  Malbec  or,  in  Arabic,  Baalbeth 
[Baalbec]  j  Hims,  commonly  called  Camelaj  Hama  5  and  Shayzar, 
usually  called  Caesarea  the  Great.  He  took  it  for  granted  that 
Aleppo  and  the  young  lord  would  pass  into  his  power  through  the 
work  of  certain  traitors,  but  that  was  prevented  by  an  accident. 

This,  then,  was  the  situation  in  that  part  of  the  country.  Meanwhile 
the  king  had  taken  advice  as  to  the  necessary  action  in  so  sudden  a 
crisis  when  other  important  changes  were  impending.  After  a  long 
conference  with  the  nobles,  it  was  finally  decided  with  the  approval  of 
all  that  the  count,  with  an  army  drawn  from  the  forces  of  both  the 
kingdom  and  the  county  of  Tripoli,  should  march  as  quickly  as 
possible  toward  Coelesyria  and  use  every  effort  to  oppose  Saladin’s 
advance.  This  was  a  wise  procedure,  for  any  increase  of  Saladin’s 
power  was  cause  for  suspicion  in  our  eyes  and  whatever  augmented 
his  authority  seemed  wholly  injurious  to  the  good  of  the  kingdom. 
For  he  was  a  man  wise  in  counsel,  valiant  in  war,  and  generous  be¬ 
yond  measure.  All  the  more,  for  this  very  reason,  he  was  distrusted 
by  those  of  our  nobles  who  had  keener  foresight.  Even  in  our  day 
there  is  no  better  means  by  which  princes  can  win  the  hearts  of  their 
subjects,  or,  for  that  matter,  of  others,  than  by  showing  lavish  bounty 
toward  themj  and  nothing  more  readily  attracts  the  minds  of 
strangers,  especially  when  it  proceeds  from  princes.  So  our  chief  men 

I 

had  great  reason  to  fear  that  when  Saladin  had  doubled  his  possessions 
and  had  increased  his  empire  twofold  he  would  by  this  strength  rise 
against  the  kingdom  with  greater  force  and  harass  us  more  violently 
than  ever.  In  spite  of  all  our  efforts,  however,  all  attempts  to  restrain 
him  have  been  in  vain,  and  today,^^  with  tearful  eyes,  we  see  that  our 
apprehensions  have  been  realized.  For  so  powerfully  has  he  risen 
against  us  by  land  and  by  sea  that  if  the  Dayspring  from  on  high 
had  not  mercifully  visited  us,  we  should  have  no  hope  of  resisting. 

It  seemed  wiser  to  lend  aid  to  the  boy  king  who  was  not  yet  of  age, 
not  that  some  show  of  kindness  might  be  displayed  toward  him  for  his 

This  was  probably  not  written  earlier  than  1182,  in  the  latter  part  of  the  year. 


4o6  BALDWIN  IV,  THE  LEPER 

own  sake,  but  to  encourage  him  as  an  adversary  against  our  distrusted 
rival,  Saladin,  that  the  latter’s  plans  might  be  hindered  and  his 
attacks  against  the  kingdom  rendered  less  effective. 

7.  Why  the  enemy  became  more  fowerful  against  the  Christians. 

At  this  point  I  must  digress  somewhat  from  the  course  of  my  story, 
not  to  wander  about  aimlessly,  but  to  bring  out  something  of  value. 
The  question  is  often  asked,  and  quite  justly,  why  it  was  that  our 
fathers,  though  less  in  number,  so  often  bravely  withstood  in  battle 
the  far  larger  forces  of  the  enemy  and  that  often  by  divine  grace  a 
small  force  destroyed  the  multitudes  of  the  enemy,  with  the  result 
that  the  very  name  of  Christian  became  a  terror  to  nations  ignorant 
of  God,  and  thus  the  Lord  was  glorified  in  the  works  of  our  fathers. 
In  contrast  to  this,  the  men  of  our  times  too  often  have  been  con¬ 
quered  by  inferior  forces  j  in  fact,  when  with  superior  numbers  they 
have  attempted  some  exploit  against  adversaries  less  strong,  their 
efforts  have  been  fruitless  and  they  have  usually  been  forced  to 
succumb. 

The  first  reason  that  presents  itself,  as  we  carefully  and  thought¬ 
fully  study  this  condition  of  our  times,  looking  for  aid  to  God,  the 
author  of  all  things,  is  that  our  forefathers  were  religious  men  and 
feared  God.  Now  in  their  places  a  wicked  generation  has  grown  up, 
sinful  sons,  falsifiers  of  the  Christian  faith,  who  run  the  course  of  all 
unlawful  things  without  discrimination.  They  are  such  as,  or  even 
worse  than,  those  who  said  to  their  Lord,  “Depart  from  usj  for  we 
desire  not  the  knowledge  of  thy  ways.”  From  such,  because  of  their 
sins,  the  Lord  justly  withdraws  His  favor,  as  if  provoked  to  wrath. 
Such  are  the  men  of  the  present  age,  especially  those  dwelling  in  the 
East.  One  who  would  undertake  with  careful  pen  to  portray  their 
morals,  or  rather  their  monstrous  vices,  would  succumb  under  the 
vast  amount  of  material  5  in  short,  he  would  seem  to  be  writing  satire 
rather  than  compiling  history. 

A  second  reason  occurs  to  us  in  passing.  In  earlier  times,  those  first 
revered  men  who  came  to  the  lands  of  the  East  led  by  divine  zeal 
and  aflame  with  spiritual  enthusiasm  for  the  faith  were  accustomed 

Job  2 1 :  14. 

This  reflects  William’s  familiarity  with  the  classical  writers,  Juvenal  and  perhaps 
other  satirists.  The  gfeneral  indictment  of  the  morals  of  his  contemporaries  may  be 
more  accurate  than  the  usual  discount  of  a  churchman’s  views  would  indicate. 


BALDWIN  IV,  THE  LEPER  407 

to  military  discipline  3  they  were  trained  in  battle  and  familiar  with 
the  use  of  weapons.^^  The  people  of  the  East,  on  the  contrary, 
through  long-continued  peace,  had  become  enervated  3  they  were  un¬ 
used  to  the  art  of  war,  unfamiliar  with  the  rules  of  battle,  and  gloried 
in  their  state  of  inactivity.  Therefore  it  is  not  strange  that  men  of 
war,  even  though  few  in  number,  easily  held  their  own  even  against 

r 

larger  numbers  and  could  boast  of  their  superiority  in  carrying  off  the 
palm  of  victory.  For  in  such  matters  (as  those  who  have  had  more 
experience  in  war  know  better  than  I),  facility  in  arms  due  to  long 
and  continual  practice,  when  opposed  to  untrained  strength  and  lack 
of  persistence,  generally  wins. 

A  third  reason,  no  less  important  and  effective,  forces  itself  upon 
my  attention.  In  former  times  almost  every  city  had  its  own  ruler. 
To  speak  after  the  manner  of  Aristotle,  they  were  not  dependent  on 
one  another  3  they  were  rarely  actuated  by  the  same  motives  but,  in 
fact,  very  often  by  those  directly  opposite.  To  contend  in  battle 
against  adversaries  of  widely  differing  and  frequently  conflicting 
ideas,  adversaries  who  distrusted  each  other,  involved  less  peril. 
Those  who  feared  their  own  allies  not  less  than  the  Christians  could 
not  or  would  not  readily  unite  to  repulse  the  common  danger  or 
arm  themselves  for  our  destruction.  But  now,  since  God  has  so  willed 
it,  all  the  kingdoms  adjacent  to  us  have  been  brought  under  the  power 
of  one  man.  Within  quite  recent  times,  Zangi,  a  monster  who  ab¬ 
horred  the  name  of  Christian  as  he  would  a  pestilence,  the  father  of 
this  Nureddin  who  has  lately  died,  first  conquered  many  other  king¬ 
doms  by  force  and  then  laid  violent  hands  on  Rages,  also  called 
Edessa,  which  even  within  our  memory  was  the  splendid  and  notable 
metropolis  of  the  Medes.  He  took  this  city  with  all  its  territories  and 
put  to  death  all  faithful  believers  found  within  its  borders. 

Then  his  son,  Nureddin,  drove  the  king  of  Damascus  from  his  own 
land,  more  through  the  treachery  of  the  latter’s  subjects  than  by  any 
real  valor,  seized  that  realm  for  himself,  and  added  it  to  his  paternal 
heritage.  Still  more  recently,  the  same  Nureddin,  with  the  assiduous 
aid  of  Shirkuh,  seized  the  ancient  and  wealthy  kingdom  of  Egypt  as 
his  own,  in  the  manner  already  related  more  fully  when  the  reign  of 
King  Amaury  was  under  discussion. 

Their  training  in  the  use  of  arms  was  more  pronounced  than  their  discipline  in 
the  ordinary  military  sense. 


4o8  BALDWIN  IV,  THE  LEPER 

Thus,  as  has  been  said,  all  the  kingdoms  round  about  us  obey  one 
ruler,  they  do  the  will  of  one  man,  and  at  his  command  alone,  how¬ 
ever  reluctantly,  they'  are  ready,  as  a  unit,  to  take  up  arms  for  our 
injury.  Not  one  among  them  is  free  to  indulge  any  inclination  of  his 
own  or  may  with  impunity  disregard  the  commands  of  his  overlord. 
This  Saladin,  whom  we  have  had  occasion  to  mention  so  frequently, 
a  man  of  humble  antecedents  and  lowly  station,  now  holds  under  his 
control  all  these  kingdoms,  for  fortune  has  smiled  too  graciously  upon 
him.  From  Egypt  and  the  countries  adjacent  to  it,  he  draws  an  in¬ 
estimable  supply  of  the  purest  gold  of  the  first  quality  known  as 
ohryzum.^^  Other  provinces  furnish  him  numberless  companies  of 
horsemen  and  fighters,  men  thirsty  for  gold,  since  it  is  an  easy  matter 
for  those  possessing  a  plenteous  supply  of  this  commodity  to  draw 
men  to  them.  But  let  us  resume  our  story.^® 

It  seemed  desirable  in  the  opinion  of  all  present,  as  we  have  said, 
that  every  possible  effort  be  made  to  oppose  this  magnificent  man  in 
his  swift  progress  through  successive  triumphs  to  the  highest  pinnacle 
of  his  ambition.  It  was  the  general  feeling  that,  as  he  became  more 
and  more  powerful,  he  might  prove  to  be  a  most  formidable  adver¬ 
sary  to  us.  Accordingly,  the  count  assembled  forces  from  all  about 
and,  accompanied  by  the  barons  of  the  realm,  hurried  to  the  land  of 
Tripoli.  There  he  took  up  a  position  in  that  part  of  the  district  known 
as  the  land  of  Galifa  and  established  his  camp  near  the  city  of  Arka. 

8.  The  lord  of  Mosid  hastens  to  the  aid  of  his  nefhew,  Saladin 
f revails  over  him  and  seizes  the  %vhole  region.  The  count 
makes  a  treaty  with  him.  He  receives  hostages. 

While  these  things  were  happening  in  our  midst,  the  uncle  of 
Nureddin’s  son,  a  very  great  prince  named  Cotabedi  [Qutb  al-Din], 
one  of  the  most  powerful  among  the  Orientals  of  the  Parthian  race, 
had  learned  of  his  brother’s  death  and  all  the  circumstances  following 
it.  Now  Saladin,  in  defiance  of  the  laws  of  humanity,  wholly  regard¬ 
less  of  his  lowly  condition,  and  ungrateful  for  the  benefits  that  had 
been  showered  upon  him  by  the  father  of  that  boy  king,  had  risen 
against  his  rightful  lord.  Gathering  a  great  force  of  cavalry  in  which 

Ohry%um  is  one  of  the  few  late  Latin  terms  used  by  William. 

Any  comparison  of  this  analysis  of  the  causes  for  the  chang'e  in  the  relations  of 
Latin  crusaders  and  their  Muslim  foe  between  the  First  and  Third  crusades  with  that 
of  modern  historians  reveals  William’s  remarkable  ability  as  an  historian. 


BALDWIN  IV,  THE  LEPER  409 

he  was  said  to  be  very  strong,  Qutb  al-Din  crossed  the  Euphrates  and 
marched  against  the  traitors  to  bear  aid  to  his  nephew. 

This  great  prince  was  the  lord  of  that  very  ancient  and  famous  city 
of  Nineveh,  which  is  said  long  ago  to  have  repented  in  sackcloth  and 
ashes  at  the  warning  of  the  prophet  Jonah.  Not  far  from  that  more 
ancient  city  a  new  one  under  the  altered  name  of  Mosul  has  arisen. 
Built  from  the  remains  of  ancient  Nineveh,  it  houses  the  descendants 
of  that  former  city  and  retains  the  honorable  distinction  of  being  the 
metropolis  of  all  Assyria.  On  his  arrival,  the  prince  placed  his  camp 
in  the  plain  around  Aleppo. 

During  this  time  Saladin  was  by  no  means  idle.  He  had  laid  siege 
to  Bostrum,  the  most  important  city  of  Arabia  Prima,  and  also  to 
Heliopolis,  now  usually  called  Malbec,  both  of  which  the  citizens 
surrendered  voluntarily  without  battle.  He  then  laid  siege  to  Hims, 
known  also  as  Camela. 

Without  the  slightest  delay,  the  citizens  surrendered  the  lower  part 
of  this  city,  for  those  who  remained  faithful  to  the  young  king  had 
retired  to  the  citadel.  This  was  situated  upon  a  somewhat  elevated 
hill  and  had  been  previously  stoutly  fortified  and  well  furnished  with 
arms  and  provisions.  Saladin  had  also  received  at  the  hands  of  their 
citizens  the  surrender  of  some  other  cities  in  the  vicinity  of  this  prov¬ 
ince,  namely,  Hama,  Shayzar,  and  all  the  country  as  far  as  Aleppo 
itself. 

Meanwhile,  the  refugees  in  the  citadel  of  Hims  had  dispatched 
messengers  to  the  count  of  Tripoli  and  to  our  forces  who  had  en¬ 
camped  in  the  place  named  above  and  were  waiting  in  the  hope  that 
in  so  great  a  disturbance  one  side  or  the  other  would  call  them  under 
the  desired  conditions.  These  envoys  were  instructed  to  beg  them  to 
come  without  delay  and  to  promise  that  any  aid  which  they  might 
render  against  such  a  pestilential  enemy  should  not  lack  a  fitting 
reward. 

Furthermore,  it  was  in  this  same  fortress  that  the  hostages  were 
held  whom  the  count  had  given  to  Nureddin,  father  of  the  young 
king,  in  exchange  for  his  own  release  from  captivity  and  as  guarantee 
for  a  sum  amounting  to  at  least  sixty  thousand  pieces  of  gold.  Certain 
hostages  given  by  Renaud  of  Sidon  for  the  restoration  of  his  brother 
Eustace  were  also  held  there. 

Stimulated  by  the  hope  of  effecting  some  arrangement  whereby 


410  BALDWIN  IV,  THE  LEPER 

they  might  obtain  the  release  of  these  prisoners  from  the  commander 
of  the  citadel  where  they  were  confined,  in  return  for  the  prospect  of 
assistance,  the  Christians  hastened  thither  as  speedily  as  possible  with 
all  their  forces.  They  discovered,  however,  that  no  reliance  could  be 
placed  upon  the  words  of  the  infidels,  for  the  latter  had  some  hope 
that  through  the  efforts  of  the  above-named  prince  the  siege  might 
be  raised.  After  carefully  considering  the  matter  from  various  angles 
for  a  long  time,  the  Christians  at  length  returned  to  the  camp  which 
they  had  left  shortly  before. 

The  fact  that  the  Christians  had  retired  as  if  in  anger  increased 
Saladin’s  arrogance,  and  placing  too  much  importance  on  their  with¬ 
drawal,  he  began  to  approach  Aleppo.  There,  by  a  series  of  repeated 
attacks,  he  harassed  the  chiefs’  forces  greatly  and  tried  to  provoke 
them  to  combat.  Finally,  after  many  such  challenges  the  forces  met 
in  a  fierce  and  desperately  contested  battle  at  close  quarters  in  which 
the  tide  of  battle  finally  turned  in  favor  of  Saladin,  and  the  Ninevites 
were  forced  to  give  way.  It  is  said  that  they  were  betrayed  by  some  of 
their  own  people  who  had  been  bribed  by  large  sums  of  money. 
Saladin  now  returned  to  Hims  and  seized  the  citadel  just  as  he  had 
previously  taken  the  city. 

From  Hims  he  sent  a  message  to  the  Christians  requesting  the 
count  not  to  interfere  with  his  victorious  progress  but  to  permit  him 
to  contend  alone  with  the  son  of  Nureddin  and  the  others  who  had 
come  to  his  aid.  Lest  this  proposition  be  rejected  with  scorn  as  without 
due  recompense,  he  offered  to  release  without  payment  the  count’s 
own  hostages  and  those  of  Renaud.  The  count  agreed  to  this  proposal  j 
the  hostages  were  returned  as  agreed  upon  in  the  pact  5  and  the  rest 
of  the  nobles  who  had  taken  part  in  this  expedition  were  dismissed 
with  fitting  munificence.  The  camp  was  then  abandoned  and  all 
returned  home. 

Humphrey  of  Toron,  the  king’s  constable,  is  said  to  have  been  the 
mediator  in  these  negotiations,  and  he  was  accused  of  having  been 
too  closely  associated  in  the  bonds  of  friendship  with  Saladin.  His 
action  was  decidedly  detrimental  to  our  interests,  for  thus  this  prince 
who  should  have  been  resisted  to  the  utmost,  lest  his  insolence  toward 
us  increase  with  his  power,  won  our  good  will,  and  he  whose  ever- 
increasing  strength  was  to  the  disadvantage  of  the  Christians  dared 
to  count  upon  us. 


BALDWIN  IV,  THE  LEPER  411 

Thereupon^  the  forces  which  had  left  the  kingdom  about  the  first 
of  January  returned  home  again  about  the  first  of  MayP*^ 

9.  Mainardy  htshof  of  Beiruty  dies.  The  author  of  this  history  is 
raised  to  the  dignity  of  metrofolitan  of  Tyre, 

About  this  time,  on  April  25,  Mainard  of  happy  memory,  bishop 
of  Beirut,  died  at  Tyre  after  a  lingering  illness  of  some  duration. 
May  his  soul  rest  in  peace ! 

The  church  at  Tyre  had  now  been  without  a  head  for  seven  suc¬ 
cessive  months.  In  this  same  month, however,  by  the  unanimous 
wish  of  the  clergy  and  people,  the  king  also,  as  is  customary,  confirm¬ 
ing  it,  I  was  called,  through  the  long-suffering  of  God  rather  than 
by  any  merit  of  my  own,  to  undertake  the  charge  of  that  church.  Ten 
days  later,  on  June  8,  by  the  will  of  God,  I,  though  all  unworthy, 
received  the  gift  of  consecration  in  the  church  of  the  Sepulchre  of  the 
Lord  at  the  hands  of  Amalrich,  patriarch  of  Jerusalem. 

10.  The  king  invades  the  land  of  the  Damascenes  and  ravages 
the  country,  H ernesius y  archbishop  of  Caesareay  dies. 

About  this  same  time,  while  Saladin  was  busily  engaged  in  the 
vicinity  of  Aleppo,  news  reached  the  king  that  the  land  of  Damascus, 
without  an  army  and  without  a  leader,  lay  exposed  to  pillage,  an  easy 
prey  to  any  damage  which  by  right  of  war  an  enemy  might  inflict 
upon  it.  On  receiving  this  information,  Baldwin  gathered  a  force  of 
cavalry  and  crossed  the  Jordan.  He  passed  through  the  forest  near 
the  city  of  Banyas,  from  which  it  derives  its  name,  and,  with  the 
famous  range  of  Lebanon  on  his  left,  arrived  in  the  plain  of  Damascus. 
It  was  the  time  of  harvest.  Our  forces  dispersed  over  the  plains  and 
roamed  freely  in  every  direction.  The  growing  crops  and  the  stacks 
standing  in  the  fields  as  well  as  the  harvests  already  stored  away  in 
barns  were  consigned  to  the  flames.  The  farmers  themselves,  how¬ 
ever,  forewarned  of  our  coming,  had  retreated  with  their  wives  and 
little  ones  to  places  more  strongly  fortified.  Consequently  our  forces, 

January  to  May,  1175. 

Hardly  the  “same”  month,  though  justified  in  the  Latin  reckoning,  which  counts 
the  last  half  of  the  month  in  terms  of  the  Kalends  of  the  next  month.  He  does  not 
reckon  the  date  of  his  own  election,  about  May  30,  in  the  same  manner,  however.  Wil¬ 
liam  thus  became  archbishop  of  Tyre  on  June  8,  1175. 


412 


BALDWIN  IV,  THE  LEPER 

having  the  whole  region  at  their  commandj  proceeded  as  far  as 

Daria.  This  is  a  village  of  the  plain  in  the  neighborhood  of  Damascus, 

■ 

about  four  miles  away  from  that  city.  From  there  they  went  on  to 
Bedegene,  which  lies  at  the  foot  of  Mt.  Lebanon^  the  clear  waters 
flowing  from  those  heights  have  given  the  place  the  name  of  the 
house  of  Pleasure.  This  place  they  took  by  force  in  spite  of  the  brave 
resistance  of  its  people.  Then  they  departed,  carrying  off  with  them 
rich  booty  and  plunder  before  the  very  eyes  of  the  helpless  Dama¬ 
scenes  and,  after  several  days,  arrived  at  home  safe  and  sound. 

About  this  same  time,  Hernesius  of  good  memory,  archbishop  of 
Caesarea,  died.  Heraclius,  archdeacon  of  Jerusalem,  was  chosen  as  his 
successor  and  duly  consecrated. 


again  invades  the 
waste  a  valley  called  Baccar.  Benaud  de  Chatillon  and  Jos- 
celtny  the  king^s  unclcy  are  released  jrom  the  chains  of  the 
enemy. 


II.  The  king 


territory  of  the  enemy  and  lays 


In  the  second  year  of  the  reign  of  King  Baldwin  IV,  on  the  first 
day  of  the  month  of  August,^®  while  Saladin  was  still  engaged  before 
Aleppo,  the  king  summoned  the  chief  men  of  the  kingdom,  assembled 
his  cavalry,  and  again  invaded  the  territory  of  the  enemy.  After  pass¬ 
ing  through  the  land  of  Sidon,  he  went  up  into  the  mountains  which 
lie  between  our  land  and  that  of  the  enemy  and  came  to  Messaara, 
a  place  blessed  with  fertile  soil  and  well  watered  by  springs,  in  fact, 
seemingly  supplied  with  almost  every  temporal  good.  From  there  he 
again  descended  into  a  valley  called  Baccar,  where  he  found  the  land 
flowing  with  milk  and  honey,  as  we  read  in  the  Scriptures.  Some  think 
that  this  is  the  region  which  in  ancient  times  was  called  Ituraea,  of 
which,  as  we  are  told  in  the  Gospel  of  Luke,  Philip,  son  of  Herod 
the  Elder,  was  tetrarch,  as  he  was  also  of  the  land  of  the  Traconites. 
In  still  more  remote  time,  perhaps  during  the  days  of  the  kings  of 
Israel,  it  was  called  the  forest  of  Lebanon  because  the  valley  extended 
to  the  foot  of  Mt.  Lebanon.  This  region  is  highly  desirable  on  ac¬ 
count  of  its  fertile  soil,  its  healthful  waters,  the  numerous  population 
of  its  many  hamlets,  and  its  agreeable  climate.  In  the  lower  part  of 


This  is  one  of  William’s  most  precise  dates  and  indicates  his  normal  intention  to 
begin  the  regnal  year  from  the  day  of  accession.  At  this  day  Baldwin’s  second  year 
is  about  two  weeks  old.  The  events  are  clearly  of  1175  and  offer  additional  correction. 


BALDWIN  IV,  THE  LEPER  413 

this  valley  is  shown  a  city  even  today  surrounded  by  strong  walls,  the 
buildings  of  which,  under  the  modern  name  of  Amegara,  give  many 
evidences  of  its  early  grandeur. 

Some  students  of  antiquity  think  that  this  is  Palmyra,  once  a  noble 
colony  of  Phoenicia,  which  Ulpian  of  Tyre  mentions  in  the  new 
Digest  under  the  chapter  “De  censibus.” 

As  soon  as  our  forces  reached  this  place,  they  began  to  overrun  the 
whole  region  without  hindrance  and  set  fire  to  everything.  No  one 
prevented  them,  for  the  inhabitants  had  fled  to  the  mountains,  whither 
no  road  that  was  passable  for  the  troops  led.  Forewarned  of  our  ap¬ 
proach,  they  had  driven  the  greater  part  of  their  flocks  and  herds  to 
the  marshy  meadows  in  the  middle  of  the  valley  where  the  pasturage 
was  very  luxuriant. 

Meanwhile,  the  count  of  Tripoli,  having  passed  through  the  plain 
of  Jubail  near  the  castle  called  Monethera,  as  had  been  arranged, 
suddenly  advanced  with  his  men  into  the  vicinity  of  Heliopolis  in  the 
same  valley,  where  he  was  reported  to  be  burning  everything.  At  this 
news,  our  people  eagerly  hastened  in  that  direction,  and  as  the  count 
was  no  less  desirous  of  meeting  us,  the  two  armies  joined  forces  nearly 
in  the  middle  of  the  valley. 

Semsedolus  [Shams  al-Dula],  the  brother  of  Saladin,  was  residing 
as  governor  at  Damascus.  As  soon  as  news  of  this  movement  reached 
him,  he  at  once  assembled  his  forces  and  with  the  assistance  of  the 
townspeople  made  an  effort  to  resist.  He  drew  up  his  lines  in  battle 
array  and  prepared  to  march  against  us.  Our  forces  likewise  arranged 
their  battalions  in  good  order  and  came  on  with  valiant  spirit  to  the 
encounter.  Both  sides  fought  manfully.  Many  were  killed,  more 
wounded,  and  great  numbers  taken  prisoners.  At  last,  however,  by 
the  help  of  God,  the  enemy  was  put  to  flight.  Shams  al-Dula  escaped 
with  a  few  followers  and  fled  to  the  steep  hilly  country.  But  the 
Christians  went  back  laden  with  the  spoils  of  the  enemy,  with  herds 
of  cattle  and  a  vast  amount  of  plunder.  The  victors  suffered  the  loss 
of  a  few  men  who,  though  unfamiliar  with  the  roads,  had  impru¬ 
dently  ventured  into  the  marshes  to  pillage  and  did  not  know  of  the 
sudden  withdrawal  of  the  Christian  forces. 

Thus  the  king  and  his  men  by  the  will  of  God  returned  in  entire 
safety  to  Tyre.  With  them  they  brought  rich  possessions  of  every 

20  Corf  us  juris  civilisy  Digest  L.  xv.  1.5. 


414-  BALDWIN  IV,  THE  LEPER 

kind,  including  herds  of  cattle  and  flocks  of  sheep,  as  notable  proofs 
of  their  victorious  prowess. 

The  count  of  Tripoli,  also  richly  laden  with  immense  booty,  joy¬ 
fully  led  his  troops  back  to  his  own  domains  by  the  same  road  along 
which  he  had  come. 

During  that  same  year,^^  Renaud  de  Chatillon,  who  by  espousing 
Constance,  the  widow  of  Raymond,  prince  of  Antioch,  had  succeeded 
to  that  principality,  was  restored  to  freedom.  After  many  years  of 
hard  captivity  at  Aleppo,  he  obtained  his  release  when  a  large  ransom 
was  paid  by  his  friends.  With  him  was  Joscelin,  son  of  Count  Joscelin 
of  Edessa  and  uncle  of  the  king,  who  through  the  persistent  efforts 
of  his  sister,  the  Countess  Agnes,  wife  of  Renaud  of  Sidon  and  mother 
of  the  king,  was  rescued  from  prison  and  restored  to  liberty. 

In  that  same  year,  on  the  second  day  of  the  month  of  May,  Odo, 
bishop-elect  of  Sidon,  who  had  been  precentor  of  the  church  at  Tyre, 
and  Raymond,  bishop-elect  of  Beirut,  received  through  our  ministry 
the  gift  of  consecration  in  the  church  at  Tyre. 

12.  The  emferor  oj  C onstantinofle  is  defeated  ignominiously  at 
Icontum. 

About  this  same  time  also  Manuel,  emperor  of  Constantinople,  of 
illustrious  memory  and  loving  remembrance  in  Christ,  whose  favors 
and  most  liberal  munificence  nearly  everyone  had  experienced,  met 
with  a  serious  disaster  in  Iconium.  With  praiseworthy  piety  he  was 
endeavoring  to  extend  the  Christian  name  by  fighting  against  the 
monstrous  race  of  the  Turks  and  their  wicked  leader,  the  sultan  of 
Iconium.  But,  because  of  our  sins,  he  suffered  there  a  great  massacre. 
This  involved  not  only  his  own  personal  following  but  also  the 
imperial  forces  which  he  was  leading  with  him  in  numbers  so  vast  as 
almost  to  exceed  human  imagination.  This  engagement  was  attended 
by  an  enormous  loss  of  men,  among  whom  were  some  illustrious  kins¬ 
men  of  his  own,  well  worthy  of  special  mention.  In  the  number  was 
his  nephew,  John  the  frotosebastos,  his  brother’s  son,  a  man  of  dis¬ 
tinguished  liberality  and  noteworthy  munificence,  whose  daughter 
Maria  King  Amaury  had  married.  While  making  a  vigorous  resistance 

-^Presumably  the  regnal  year  is  meant,  July  15,  1175-July  14,  1176,  so  that  the 
release  probably  occurred  in  1176  as  did  the  consecration  of  the  two  bishops  which 
is  mentioned  next. 


BALDWIN  IV,  THE  LEPER  415 

against  the  foe  he  fell,  pierced  with  many  wounds.  The  emperor  him¬ 
self  succeeded  in  rallying  most  of  his  army  and  reached  his  own  land, 
safe  in  body  but  almost  overwhelmed  in  mind  by  the  unfortunate 
disaster.  This  tragedy  is  said  to  have  been  due  rather  to  the  impru¬ 
dence  of  the  imperial  officers  in  charge  of  the  battalions  than  to  the 
strength  of  the  foe.  For,  although  there  were  broad  and  open  roads 
well  adapted  for  the  passage  of  the  army  and  for  transporting  the 
mass  of  baggage  and  impedimenta  of  all  kinds,  which  is  said  to  have 
been  beyond  estimating,  they  incautiously  entrusted  themselves  head¬ 
long  to  dangerous  narrow  places  which  had  been  already  seized  by 
the  enemy.  Under  such  circumstances  it  was  impossible  to  offer  resist¬ 
ance,  nor  was  there  any  opportunity  to  turn  the  tables  against  the 
enemy.  From  that  day  the  emperor  is  said  to  have  borne,  ever  deeply 
impressed  upon  his  heart,  the  memory  of  that  fatal  disaster.  Never 
thereafter  did  he  exhibit  the  gaiety  of  spirit  which  had  been  so 
characteristic  of  him  or  show  himself  joyful  before  his  people,  no 
matter  how  much  they  entreated  him.  Never,  as  long  as  he  lived,  did 
he  enjoy  the  good  health  which  before  that  time  he  had  possessed  in 
so  remarkable  a  degree.  In  short,  the  ever-present  memory  of  that 
defeat  so  oppressed  him  that  never  again  did  he  enjoy  peace  of  mind 
or  his  usual  tranquillity  of  spirit.^- 

13.  Wtlliam  the  Younger y  marquis  of  Montferraty  arrives  in 
Syria  and  marries  the  king^s  sister. 

In  the  third  year  of  King  Baldwin  IV,  about  the  beginning  of  Octo¬ 
ber,  Marquis  William,  surnamed  Long  Sword,  son  of  the  elder 
William,  marquis  of  Monferrat,  arrived  at  the  port  of  Sidon  by  invita¬ 
tion  of  the  king  and  all  the  barons  of  the  realm,  both  ecclesiastical  and 
secular.  Within  forty  days  after  his  arrival,  he  was  given  the  king^s 
elder  sister  as  wife.  This  marriage  had  been  arranged  the  year  before  at 
the  time  when  William  was  invited  to  come  for  this  purpose  and  had 
been  confirmed  by  the  hand  of  the  king  and  all  the  barons,  under  solemn 
oath.  With  his  wife,  William  received  the  maritime  cities  of  Jaffa 
and  Ascalon  with  their  appurtenances  and  the  entire  county  also,  as 

This  was  the  famous  disaster  of  Myrokephalion,  1176  (see  F.  Chalandon,  Les 
Comnene^  II,  507  if.). 

This  title  never  really  descended  to  William  Long  Sword,  for  he  died  before  his 
father.  Our  historian,  however,  applies  it  no  doubt  as  a  title  of  courtesy.  The  arrival 
of  William  Long  Sword  is  here  dated  October,  1176. 


4i6  BALDWIN  IV,  THE  LEPER 

had  been  agreed  upon  at  that  time.  Some,  however,  were  opposed  to 
this  measure  and  did  not  hesitate  to  express  themselves  openly.  They 
had  been  among  those  who,  without  giving  the  matter  adequate  con¬ 
sideration,  had  approved  of  the  invitation  to  William.  Now,  as  is 
characteristic  of  changeable  and  inconstant  natures,  they  changed  their 
views. 

The  marquis  was  a  rather  tall,  good-looking  young  man  with  blond 
hair.  He  was  exceedingly  irascible  but  very  generous  and  of  an  open 
disposition  and  manly  courage.  He  never  concealed  any  purpose  but 
showed  frankly  just  what  he  thought  in  his  own  mind.  He  was  fond 
of  eating  and  altogether  too  devoted  to  drinking,  although  not  to  such 
an  extent  as  to  injure  his  mind.  He  had  been  trained  in  arms  from 
his  earliest  youth  and  had  the  reputation  of  being  experienced  in  the 
art  of  war.  His  worldly  position  was  exalted — in  fact,  few  if  any  could 
claim  to  be  his  equals.  His  father  was  the  uncle  of  King  Louis  of 
France,  the  brother  of  the  king^s  mother.  His  mother  had  been  the 
sister  of  Conrad,  the  illustrious  emperor  of  the  Romans,  and  aunt 
of  Frederick  who  now,  since  the  death  of  Lord  Conrad  of  distin¬ 
guished  memory,  his  paternal  uncle,  vigorously  administers  the 
Roman  empire.  Thus  the  marquis  was  connected  with  these  two  illus¬ 
trious  monarchs  by  the  same  degree  of  relationship. 

Barely  three  months  after  his  marriage  he  was  seized  with  a  serious 
illness.  For  about  two  months  he  suffered  without  intermission,  and 
in  the  following  June,  at  the  time  when  the  king  likewise  was  very 
ill  at  Ascalon,  he  died,  leaving  his  wife  pregnant.  His  body  was  borne 
to  Jerusalem  and  buried  with  great  magnificence  in  the  vestibule  of  the 
church  of  the  house  of  the  Hospital  to  the  left  of  the  entrance,  the 
present  writer  officiating.^'^ 

About  that  time,  Humphrey  of  Toron,  the  king’s  constable,  married 
the  Lady  Philippa.  She  was  the  daughter  of  Prince  Raymond  of 
Antioch  and  sister  of  Bohemond  III,  who  now  governs  this  princi¬ 
pality,  and  of  Maria,  empress  of  Constantinople.  Philippa  had  first 
married  Andronicus,  a  kinsman  of  the  emperor,  but  he  put  her  away 

The  writer^s  modesty  almost  causes  the  reader  to  overlook  the  importance  of 
the  statement.  The  funeral  of  the  king’s  brother-in-law  and  intended  successor  was  an 
event  of  major  importance  at  which  the  head  of  the  church,  the  patriarch,  would 
normally  preside.  The  choice  of  William  to  act  for  him,  presumably  because  he  was 
old  and  ill  at  the  time,  carried  with  it  some  possibility  of  succession  in  the  event  of 
the  patriarch’s  death. 


BALDWIN  IV,  THE  LEPER  417 

and  clandestinely  carried  off  Theodora,  the  widow  of  King  Baldwin 
and  his  own  niece,  an  act  both  shameless  and  unchaste.^^  This  Hum¬ 
phrey,  of  whom  we  have  just  been  speaking,  had  no  sooner  led 
Philippa  home  than  he  began  to  be  desperately  illj  his  wife  too  was 
seized  with  a  grave  malady  and  died  within  a  few  days. 


14.  The  count  of  Flanders^  whose  corning  had  been  long 
awaited y  arrives  In  the  kingdom. 

In  the  fourth  year  and  the  second  month  of  the  reign  of  King  Bald¬ 
win  IV,  about  the  first  of  August,  Philip,  count  of  Flanders,  whose 
arrival  had  been  expected  for  a  long  time,  landed  at  Acre.“^  The 
king,  although  still  ill,  caused  himself  to  be  carried  in  a  litter 
from  Ascalon  to  Jerusalem.  Greatly  delighted,  he  sent  some  of  his 
barons  and  ecclesiastical  nobles  to  welcome  Philip  with  due  ceremony. 
On  the  count’s  arrival  at  Jerusalem,  where  the  king  was  still  lying 
seriously  ill,  by  the  unanimous  advice  of  the  lord  patriarch,  the  arch¬ 
bishops,  bishops,  abbots  and  priors,  the  masters  of  the  Hospital  and 
the  Temple,  and  all  the  chief  laity,  Philip  was  offered  the  power  and 
the  general  administration  of  the  entire  kingdom  without  restraint. 
In  peace  and  in  war,  both  without  and  within,  he  was  to  have 
full  jurisdiction  over  the  greater  and  the  less  and  to  exercise  his  will 
freely  over  the  treasure  and  revenues  of  the  kingdom.^*^ 

After  conferring  with  his  followers,  the  count  responded  that  he 
had  not  come  for  the  purpose  of  receiving  any  power,  but  to  devote 
himself  to  the  divine  service  which  was  the  object  of  his  visit.  Nor 
was  it  his  plan  to  commit  himself  to  any  responsibility  j  on  the  con¬ 
trary,  he  wished  to  be  free  to  return  to  his  own  land  when  his  per¬ 
sonal  affairs  recalled  him.  Let  the  king  appoint  anyone  he  chose  as 
governor  in  his  realm,  and  he  himself  would  obey  that  one  for  the 
good  of  the  kingdom,  as  he  would  his  own  lord,  the  king  of  France. 

See  Book  XX,  note  4.  Philippa  represents  one  of  the  earlier  and  passing  affairs 
of  Andronicus. 

William’s  chronology  is  still  precise,  his  statement  being  equivalent  to  August  2, 
1177,  thus  further  correcting  the  error  of  1173  as  the  year  of  Amaury’s  death  and 
Baldwin’s  accession. 

It  may  be  of  some  interest  to  note  that  the  terminology  here  employed  is  reminiscent 
of  the  forms  used  by  the  Roman  emperors  in  conferring  powers  upon  their  procurators. 
The  legists  of  the  twelfth  century  appear  to  have  combined  formulae  from  the  Code 
and  the  Digest;  it  is  probable  that  William  drew  from  them  (cf.  Corfus  juris  cwilisy 
Code  ii.  xii.  105  Digest  i.  xix.  ij  ill.  iii.  i.  585  xv.  i.  7.  i). 


4-18  BALDWIN  IV,  THE  LEPER 

Perceiving  that  he  utterly  refused  the  honor  which  we  had  offered 
him,  the  king,  through  his  barons,  again  earnestly  requested  that  he 
at  least  consent  to  take  command  of  all  the  Christian  forces  on  the 
campaign  about  to  be  undertaken.  This  expedition  had  been  arranged 
with  the  emperor  of  Constantinople  long  before,  and  the  king  now 
besought  him  to  take  care  of  the  battles  of  the  Lord  against  the 
Egyptians.  To  this  request  the  count  gave  the  same  answer  as  before. 

Thereupon  the  king  constituted  Renaud,  formerly  the  prince  of 
Antioch,  regent  of  the  realm  and  commander  in  chief  of  the  army, 
as  had  been  arranged  before  the  count  arrived.  Renaud  was  a  man 
of  proved  loyalty  and  remarkable  steadfastness.  On  him  was  to  rest 
the  duty,  if  the  king  was  unable  to  appear  in  person,  of  directing  the 
affairs  of  the  kingdom  and  ruling  over  all  things,  with  the  assistance, 
however,  of  the  count. 

When  this  was  reported  to  the  count,  he  answered  that  such  a 
procurator  did  not  seem  to  him  necessary.  On  the  contrary,  someone 
should  be  appointed  who  would  personally  receive  the  glory  of  this 
war,  if  so  it  should  please  the  Lord,  or  the  disgrace  of  defeat,  if  God 
should  thus  ordain.  To  such  a  leader,  also,  should  be  given  the  king¬ 
dom  of  Egypt,  if  the  Lord  should  bring  that  under  our  sway. 

To  this  we  who  had  been  sent  by  the  king  made  answer  that  the 
king  could  not  appoint  an  official  with  such  powers  without  making 
the  same  a  king,  which  was  not  the  idea  of  the  king  nor  of  ourselves. 
This  being  the  situation,  the  count  at  last  revealed  the  secret  thought 
of  his  mind  and  did  not  try  to  conceal  to  what  end  all  his  plans  were 
directed.  He  remarked  that  it  was  strange  that  no  one  had  approached 
him  on  the  subject  of  the  marriage  of  his  kinswoman  [Sibylla]. 

As  we  listened  to  these  words,  we  were  amazed  at  the  subtlety  of 
the  man  and  his  evil  designs.  For  the  count  who  had  been  so  courte¬ 
ously  received  by  the  king  was  now,  in  defiance  of  the  laws  of  hos¬ 
pitality  and  the  claims  of  kindred,  attempting  to  supplant  him. 

15*  The  followers  of  the  count  tniluence  him  falsely  and  i>er- 
suade  him  not  to  acquiesce  in  the  views  of  the  barons  of  the 
realm. 

It  is  necessary  to  digress  a  little  at  this  point,  that  our  readers  may 
understand  more  fully  the  wicked  plan  which  the  count  was  endeavor¬ 
ing  to  carry  through.  Our  information  on  this  subject  has  been  ob- 


BALDWIN  IV,  THE  LEPER  419 

talned  not  only  from  many  individual  accounts  but  also  from  his  own 
confession. 

A  certain  man  of  great  influence,  the  advocate  of  Bethune,  had  ac¬ 
companied  the  count  on  his  pilgrimage  and  had  brought  with  him  his 
two  sons,  who  were  already  grown  men.  It  is  said  that  the  advocate, 
with  the  help  of  Count  William  de  Mandeville,  who  was  also  on 
this  same  pilgrimage,  began  to  influence  Philip  to  believe  that  he 
could  turn  the  situation  of  the  kingdom  greatly  to  his  own  advantage. 
He  claimed  to  own  extensive  hereditary  estates  in  the  count’s  own 
land,  all  of  which  he  promised  to  relinquish  to  the  count  as  a  per¬ 
petual  possession  with  hereditary  rights,  if  Philip  would  bring  about 
a  marriage  between  the  two  daughters  of  King  Amaury  and  the  two 
sons  of  the  advocate.  King  Amaury  had  left  two  daughters:  one  of 
these  was  the  widow  of  the  marquis  j  the  other,  now  of  marriageable 
age,  was  living  with  her  mother  the  queen  at  Nablus.  The  count 
agreed  to  this  proposal  and  was  endeavoring  to  bring  about  the  mar¬ 
riage,  But  to  return  to  our  story. 

We  had  now  learned  the  goal  toward  which  the  count’s  ambition 
was  directed.  Accordingly  we  answered  that  the  matter  must  first  be 
submitted  to  the  king^  on  the  following  day,  we  would  report  the 
response  which  the  king,  after  taking  counsel,  should  deem  advisable 
to  give. 

In  the  morning,  after  first  holding  a  conference,  we  returned  to 
the  count  and  made  answer  as  follows:  that  it  was  our  custom,  ap¬ 
proved  by  long  usage,  not  to  consider  the  remarriage  of  a  widow,  es¬ 
pecially  of  one  who  was  pregnant,  within  one  year  after  the  death 
of  her  husband,  for  that  would  not  be  honorable  mourning.  In  the 
case  of  this  lady,  scarcely  three  months  had  passed  since  the  death  of 
the  marquis  3  therefore  he  must  not  take  it  ill  that  we  could  not 
treat  of  her  remarriage,  since  that  would  be  contrary  to  the  customs 
of  the  times  and  of  our  land.  Yet  it  would  meet  with  the  favor  and 
approval  of  us  all  if  the  aforesaid  proposal  could  be  handled  with  the 
advice  of  him  from  whom  it  now  came,  for  assuredly,  in  this  as  in 
all  other  matters,  the  king  desired  to  be  governed  by  the  count’s  ad¬ 
vice  and  wished,  as  far  as  was  consistent  with  his  own  honor,  to  con¬ 
cur  with  his  wishes.  Let  the  count  take  the  initiative  and  name  a  suita¬ 
ble  person  for  that  alliance,  and  we  were  ready,  in  the  present  matter, 
to  act  according  to  the  general  desire. 


420 


BALDWIN  IV,  THE  LEPER 

The  count  was  offended  at  this  reply  and  answered  that  he  would 
in  no  wise  consent  to  do  this  unless  all  the  barons  would  first  swear 
to  abide  by  his  proposal  without  dispute,  for  any  noble  would  con¬ 
sider  himself  insulted  if,  after  being  named,  he  should  suffer  rejec¬ 
tion. 

To  this  we  responded  that  it  would  reflect  on  the  honor  of  the  king 
as  well  as  on  our  own,  if  we  should  give  his  sister  to  one  unknown  to 
us  even  by  name.  The  will  of  the  king  and  of  all  the  barons  being 
at  last  plain,  the  count  abandoned  his  design,  but  not  without  evinc¬ 
ing  much  angry  resentment. 

1 6.  Ambassadors  arrive  from  the  emferor  of  Constantino  fie. 

They  demand  that  the  treaty  which  the  king  had  concluded 
with  their  lord  be  carried  out  at  once  and  an  exf edition 
against  Egyft  made  ready. 

There  was  in  Jerusalem  at  this  time  an  imperial  embassy  composed 
of  eminent  men  of  high  rank:  namely.  Lord  Andronicus,  surnamed 
Angelus,  the  son  of  the  emperor’s  sister  3  the  NLe  gal  triarch  [j/V] 
John,  a  very  magnificent  man  3  Count  Alexander  of  Conversana  in 
Apulia,  a  nobleman  of  high  rankj  and  Georgius  of  Sinai  [George 
Sinaites],  a  member  of  the  imperial  court.^^  They  had  come  to  the 
king  by  command  of  the  emperor,  who  considered  the  time  now  ripe 
for  carrying  out  the  treaty  which  had  been  made  between  himself 
and  King  Amaury  and  had  subsequently  been  renewed  under  similar 
terms  with  the  present  King  Baldwin.  He  hoped  much  also,  with 
the  aid  of  God,  from  the  coming  of  the  count  of  Flanders.  Ac¬ 
cordingly,  a  general  assembly  was  called  at  the  same  Most  Holy  City 
to  consider  this  matter,  and  thither  all  the  barons  of  the  realm  re¬ 
paired.  One  and  all  cherished  the  same  hope,  that  by  the  counsel  and 

This  embassy  consisted  of  Andronicus  Angelus,  John  Dukas,  the  grand  heteriarch, 
George  Sinaites,  and  Count  Alexander  de  Gravina  (see  Chalandon,  Les  Comnency  II, 
551).  This  is  the  third  mission  of  Count  Alexander  to  Jerusalem  reported  by  William. 
Few  persons  of  the  twelfth  century  had  more  diplomatic  experience.  A  Norman  of  south¬ 
ern  Italy,  he  had  been  dispossessed  of  his  lands  in  a  revolt  of  the  barons  against  Roger  II. 
For  some  years  he  shuttled  back  and  forth  between  the  courts  of  Conrad  III  and  of 
Constantinople  seeking  to  recover  his  lands  with  the  help  of  either.  Both  courts  made 
use  of  him  as  an  envoy.  Finally  he  settled  down  at  Constantinople,  where  Manuel  en¬ 
trusted  him  with  the  command  of  the  Norman  troops  and  sent  him  on  missions  to 
Germany  and  Sicily  as  well  as  to  the  Holy  Land.  His  name  appears  prominently  for 
an  extraordinarily  long  time,  1132  to  1177  at  least  (see  Chalandon,  Les  Comneney  II, 
SSs.  et  fassim). 


BALDWIN  IV,  THE  LEPER  421 

aid  of  the  count  and  his  train  the  kingdom  beloved  of  God  might 
receive  the  desired  enlargement  and  that  effective  measures  might  be 
taken  for  the  destruction  of  the  enemies  of  Christ.  Then  without 
warning,  as  we  have  said,  the  count  made  an  about  turn  and,  unmind¬ 
ful  of  his  promises,  devoted  himself  to  other  projects.  Thus  the  very 
foundations  of  our  hope  were  destroyed. 

Notwithstanding  the  defection  of  the  count,  the  imperial  envoys 
insisted  that  the  treaty  should  be  carried  out.  They  argued  that  delay 
was  likely  to  be  attended  with  danger^  there  was  no  reason  on  the 
part  of  the  Greeks  why  the  proposed  campaign  should  not  proceed  5 
they  were  prepared  to  fulfil  all  the  terms  of  the  treaty  in  good  faith 
and  that  with  a  broad  interpretation. 

After  listening  to  the  words  of  the  envoys  and  conferring  together, 
we  decided  to  lay  the  matter  before  the  count  in  the  fullest  detail. 
He  was  called  3  and  when  he  arrived  the  substance  of  the  agreement 
between  the  emperor  and  ourselves  was  put  before  him,  accurately 
transcribed  and  sealed  with  the  golden  seal  of  the  emperor. 

After  he  had  carefully  perused  the  document  and  thoroughly  un¬ 
derstood  its  contents,  he  was  asked  for  his  opinion.  He  answered  that 
he  was  a  stranger,  unfamiliar  with  localities  and  especially  with  the 
land  of  Egypt,  which  was  said  to  lie  far  remote  from  all  other  coun¬ 
tries  and  to  be  subject  to  different  conditions,  as  when,  at  certain  sea¬ 
sons  of  the  year,  the  waters  overflow  their  banks  and  completely  sub¬ 
merge  the  land.  We  of  course  knew  the  nature  of  the  country  better 
and  the  chances  of  approaching  it,  yet  he  had  heard  from  those  who 
had  often  visited  Egypt  that  the  present  was  not  a  favorable  season 
for  an  invasion.  He  added  that  winter  was  at  hand  and  Egypt  was 
covered  with  the  overflow  of  the  Nile.  A^ain,  he  had  heard  that 

O  f 

Turks  had  flocked  there  in  vast  numbers.  Finally,  he  feared — and  this 
most  of  all — that  there  would  be  a  scarcity  of  supplies  during  the 
march  and  even  after  they  reached  Egypt  and  that,  as  a  result,  the 
army  would  suffer  from  famine. 

We  perceived  from  these  objections  that  he  was  seeking  to  find 
subtle  excuses  to  avoid  undertaking  the  campaign.  To  prevent  this, 
we  offered  him  six  hundred  camels  to  transport  food,  arms,  and  other 
baggage  by  land  and  promised  the  necessary  number  of  ships  to  carry 
by  sea  provisions,  engines,  and  all  the  necessary  equipment  for  war. 
He  rejected  these  offers  entirely,  however,  and  added  that  he  would 


422 


BALDWIN  IV,  THE  LEPER 

not  go  down  into  Egypt  with  us  on  any  terms,  lest  haply  he  and  his 
forces  might  be  compelled  to  suffer  from  famine.  He  added  that  he 
had  been  accustomed  to  lead  his  armies  through  rich  countries  and  his 
troops  could  not  endure  privations  of  this  kind.  But  should  we  choose 
another  region  whither  we  could  conduct  the  armies  more  easily  and 
conveniently  to  strive  for  the  increase  of  the  Christian  name  and  the 
destruction  of  the  enemies  of  Christ,  then  he  and  his  men  would 
gladly  make  preparations  to  set  forth. 

17.  The  count^s  offoshion  to  this  hono7'able  froject  hinders  the 
carrying  out  of  the  treaty. 

However,  it  was  neither  safe  nor  honorable  for  us  to  withdraw  from 
the  treaty.^^  The  imperial  envoys,  distinguished  men  of  rank,  were 
now  in  Jerusalem  with  large  pecuniary  resources  and  declared  that 
they  were  ready  to  carry  out  in  good  faith,  as  we  have  said,  the  con¬ 
ventions  initiated  between  the  emperor  and  ourselves.  They  had 
seventy  galleys  lying  in  the  port  of  Acre,  besides  other  ships,  sufficient 
for  the  voyage  and  the  campaign  as  agreed  upon.  To  refuse  to  fulfil 
the  agreement  to  which  we  had  pledged  ourselves  seemed  most  dis¬ 
honorable  and  in  fact  dangerous.  Even  if  the  imperial  deputies  would 
consent  to  defer  the  campaign  till  another  time,  we  felt  that  it  would 
be  unwise  to  lose  the  aid  of  the  emperor  now  prepared  for  usj  more¬ 
over,  we  feared  his  displeasure,  which  might  have  serious  results  for 
the  realm.  Therefore,  with  the  consent  of  both  parties,  we  resolved 
to  undertake  the  campaign,  in  accordance  with  the  treaty  and  the  ar¬ 
rangements  already  made,  and  to  proceed  with  the  preparations  for 
the  expedition  so  long  ago  agreed  upon  with  the  emperor. 

When  the  count  of  Flanders  learned  of  our  decision,  he  was  ex¬ 
tremely  angry  and  declared  that  the  whole  affair  had  been  framed 
as  an  insult  to  him.  Finally,  after  much  discussion,  that  we  might 
comply  with  his  wishes  in  some  measure,  the  expedition  was  again 
deferred  until  after  the  end  of  April  with  the  consent  of  both  the 
Greeks  and  our  people. 

Matters  were  accordingly  settled  in  this  fashion.  The  count  had 
now  been  at  Jerusalem  for  about  fifteen  days  and  had  accomplished 

The  treaty  to  which  William  alludes  is  probably  the  one  made  by  Amaury  on  his 
visit  to  Manuel  in  1171.  Various  events  had  intervened  to  postpone  the  execution  of 
the  treaty  (see  Book  XX,  chaps.  22  and  23). 


BALDWIN  IV,  THE  LEPER  423 

his  devotions.  Accordingly  he  assumed  the  palm,  which  is  with  us 
the  sign  of  a  completed  pilgrimage,  and  departed  for  Nablus  as  if 
intending  to  withdraw  entirely.  From  there,  after  several  days,  he 
sent  to  us  at  Jerusalem  the  advocate  of  Bethune  with  others  of  his 
company.  They  were  commissioned  to  declare,  on  the  part  of  the 
coxmt,  that  he  was  prepared — and  this  was  the  substance  of  his  de¬ 
liberations — ^to  follow  us  wherever  we  wished,  be  it  to  Egypt  or  to 
other  lands.  This  frequent  change  of  mind  seemed  to  us  ridiculous, 
and  we  felt  that  the  count  might  justly  be  accused  of  an  unstable 
character,  since  he  never  adhered  to  any  definite  project.  Yet,  on  the 
receipt  of  this  message  containing  the  news  of  his  decision,  we  re¬ 
luctantly  conferred  with  the  Greeks.  It  proved,  however,  that  he  had 
no  intention  of  making  good  his  words  by  works.  On  the  contrary, 
he  was  trying  with  all  his  might  to  put  us  in  the  wrong,  that  he  might 
be  able  to  write  to  the  princes  beyond  the  mountains  that  we  were 
responsible  for  deferring  the  campaign.^*^  He  had  sent  the  above- 
mentioned  envoys  hoping  that  the  Greeks  would  in  no  wise  consent 
to  our  request,  and  that  thus  his  own  error  would  recoil  upon  us. 

18.  The  emferor^s  envoys  return  to  their  own  land.  The  count 
froceeds  to  the  land  oj  Antioch,  Balian  marries  the  widow 
of  King  Amaury, 

Thereupon  we  addressed  the  Greeks  to  ascertain  whether  they  were 
still  willing  to  stand  by  their  original  agreement  and  go  down  into 
Egypt,  provided  the  count  would  come  with  us.  They  answered  that 
although  the  time  was  very  short  to  make  the  necessary  preparation 
for  their  armies,  yet  if  the  count  would  swear  by  his  own  hand  that 
he  would  go  with  us  and,  in  the  event  of  his  own  illness  either  here 
or  on  the  march,  would  send  his  forces  3  if  he  would  promise  to  strive 
for  the  expansion  of  Christianity  on  the  entire  campaign  in  good  faith, 
without  fraud  or  evil  intent  3  if,  furthermore,  he  would  guarantee 
that  the  agreement  which  had  been  arranged  and  committed  to  writ- 

These  negotiations  have  been  described  at  such  length,  no  doubt,  because  William 
was  apparently  the  king’s  chief  advisor  at  this  time  and  directly  in  charge  of  the  ne¬ 
gotiations  with  Philip.  Fearful  of  Philip’s  intentions  to  discredit  the  Latin  court  in 
the  eyes  of  Western  rulers,  William  not  only  reports  the  negotiations  in  detail  here, 
but  appears  also  to  have  sent  out  letters  to  the  same  effect.  Thus  both  Robert  of  Torigni 
and  William  of  Newburgh,  neither  of  whom  lived  long  enough  to  have  read  William’s 
book,  gave  a  somewhat  abbreviated  account  of  these  events  as  William  recounts  them. 


424 


BALDWIN  IV,  THE  LEPER 

ing  should  not  be  infringed  in  any  particular,  be  it  by  advice  or  aidj 
and  if  he  would  cause  his  people  to  swear  to  the  same,  then,  although 
his  many  changes  of  feeling  seemed  to  them  strange  and  inconsistent 
with  a  steadfast  and  virile  character,  they  would  go  with  us,  that  the 
glory  of  the  kingdom  dear  to  God  and  the  honor  of  the  emperor 
might  be  increased. 

The  advocate  and  those  who  had  been  sent  with  him  then  offered 
to  take  oath  on  the  terms  as  given  above.  Yet  they  were  not  willing 
to  include  therein  all  the  stipulations,  nor  would  they  promise  that 
the  count  also  would  take  oath.  Thereupon,  as  we  did  not  care  to 
continue  the  discussion  to  no  purpose,  the  conference  was  broken  off 
and  the  matter  so  often  under  negotiation  was  deferred  to  a  more 
opportune  season.  The  imperial  legates  then  took  leave  and  returned 
to  their  own  land. 

After  their  departure,  the  count’s  envoys  began  to  inquire  why  the 
proposed  campaign  should  not  take  place  at  once.  ^^What  project 
could  the  count  undertake  with  the  aid  of  the  kingdom,  that  he  might 
not  seem  utterly  idle?”  At  last  those  with  whom  the  final  decision 
lay  determined  to  move  into  the  territories  of  Tripoli  or  Antioch, 
where  it  seemed  possible  that  something  might  be  accomplished  for 
their  own  honor  and  the  advancement  of  Christianity. 

There  were  some  who  laid  it  to  the  charge  of  the  prince  of  Antioch, 
who  was  present  at  the  time,  and  also  to  the  count  of  Tripoli  that  the 
count  was  so  averse  to  the  expedition  into  Egypt. They  were  en¬ 
deavoring,  it  was  said,  to  draw  him  into  their  own  lands,  that  by  his 
aid  some  project  might  be  undertaken  that  would  lead  to  the  increase 
of  their  own  domains.  But  that  hope  was  frustrated,  for  neither  among 
us  nor,  forsooth,  among  them  was  the  count  permitted  from  on  high 
to  do  anything  worthy  of  record.  It  was  indeed  fitting  that  he  from 
whom  the  Lord  had  withdrawn  His  favor  should  prosper  in  nothing, 
for  “God  resisteth  the  proud,  and  giveth  grace  to  the  humble.” 

However,  the  king  promised  to  give  Philip  his  cooperation  and  aid 
and,  on  his  departure,  granted  him  a  hundred  of  his  own  knights  and 
a  force  of  two  thousand  foot  soldiers. 

This  was  the  condition  of  our  affairs  about  the  first  of  October.^^ 
At  that  time,  accompanied  by  the  count  of  Tripoli,  the  master  of  the 

William  is  here  not  sparing-  his  friend  Raymond  of  Tripoli  from  a  possible  share 
in  the  blame  for  the  failure  of  the  negotiations. 

IPe.  5:5,  October  I,  1 177. 


BALDWIN  IV,  THE  LEPER  425 

Hospital,  and  many  brethren  of  the  Knights  Templars,  the  count  left 
with  his  forces  for  the  land  of  Tripoli. 

About  the  same  time  Balian  dTbelin,  the  brother  of  Baldwin  of 
Ramlah,  with  the  king’s  consent  espoused  Queen  Maria,  widow  of 
King  Amaury  and  daughter  of  John  the  frotosehastosy  so  often  re¬ 
ferred  to  above.  With  Maria,  Balian  received  the  city  of  Nablus, 
which  had  been  given  her  under  the  name  of  jointure  at  the  time  of 
her  marriage  and  which  he  was  to  hold  during  the  life  of  his  wife. 

19.  T he  count  of  Flanders y  with  the  helf  of  the  'prince  of  Antioch 
and  the  count  of  Tripoliy  lays  siege  to  the  fortress  of  Hariniy 
hut  their  efforts  are  without  result. 

On  arriving  at  Tripoli,  after  all  necessary  preparations  for  the  march 
had  been  made  and  the  troops  well  organized,  the  count,  accompanied 
by  the  count  of  Tripoli,  led  his  forces  into  the  land  of  the  enemy. 
They  remained  for  a  time  near  the  cities  of  Hims  and  Hama,  a  step 
which  resulted  in  some  loss  to  the  enemy.  For  Saladin,  after  accom¬ 
plishing  his  purpose  in  that  vicinity  and  making  peace  with  the  son 
of  Nureddin  on  his  own  terms,  had  departed  for  Egypt.  The  prepara¬ 
tions  to  which  I  have  alluded  above  seemed  to  him  to  indicate  that 
the  long-threatened  campaign,  arrangements  for  which  had  been  made 
long  ago,  was  about  to  take  place.  Accordingly  he  led  with  him  all 
the  forces  to  be  obtained  from  any  source  and  concentrated  his  im¬ 
mense  strength  of  cavalry  at  the  strategic  points  where  it  seemed 
probable  that  the  most  important  events  would  occur.  As  a  result,  the 
count  and  his  forces  found  the  country  without  defenders  and  were 
able  to  overrun  the  land  without  opposition.  The  fortified  towns  and 
the  citadels  of  the  cities  were,  however,  well  supplied  with  provisions 
and  had  sufficient  guards  and  arms  for  their  defense. 

When  the  prince  of  Antioch  learned  that  the  two  counts  had  en¬ 
tered  the  enemy’s  country,  he  hastened  to  join  them  by  another  route, 
as  had  been  agreed  upon  between  them.  The  forces  thus  united  in 
body  were  of  one  mind  also  3  accordingly,  as  the  best  plan  under  the 
circumstances,  it  was  decided  to  besiege  the  fortress  of  Harim.  This 
place  lies  in  the  territory  of  Chalcis  and  is  now  called  Artasium.  It 
was  once  a  noble  city  but  is  now  reduced  to  the  status  of  a  very  small 
stronghold.  Both  city  and  fort  are  about  twelve  miles  distant  from 
Antioch. 


426  BALDWIN  IV,  THE  LEPER 

On  arriving  before  Harim,  the  camp  was  established  in  a  circle 
about  the  place.  Thus  surrounded  on  all  sides,  the  besieged  were  en¬ 
tirely  prevented  from  emerging,  nor  could  anyone,  however  desirous, 
approach  to  lend  them  aid.  Machines  and  all  the  necessary  engines 
for  carrying  on  a  siege  were  at  once  constructed.  As  an  intimation  that 
operations  would  be  continued  to  the  end,  the  Christians  also  built 
huts  of  osiers  and,  as  winter  was  approaching,  they  fortified  the  camp 
with  palisades  to  prevent  their  possessions  from  being  swept  away  by 
the  torrential  rains.  Meanwhile,  the  inhabitants  of  the  surrounding 
country  and  the  Christian  people  worked  zealously  to  bring  in  the 
necessary  provisions  from  Antioch  and  the  places  in  the  vicinity. 

The  fortress  of  Harim  belonged  to  the  son  of  Nureddin  and  was 
the  only  one  in  that  part  of  the  country  which  Saladin  had  permitted 
him  to  retain.  After  a  complete  blockade  on  all  sides  had  been  ef¬ 
fected,  the  Christians,  in  relays  according  to  custom,  made  assaults 
on  the  place  at  regular  intervals  and  battered  the  walls  with  their 
engines  and  machines  so  constantly  that  the  besieged  could  obtain  no 
rest  whatever. 

20.  Saladin  arrives  from  Egyft  with  vast  forces  and  invades  the 
kingdom.  He  takes  uf  a  position  before  Ascalon,  The  king 
marches  out  to  meet  him  with  all  the  strength  of  the  realm. 

An  important  engagement  takes  place  before  the  city. 

This,  then,  was  the  condition  of  affairs  in  Antioch.  In  the  meantime, 
Saladin  had  learned  that  the  count  and  the  entire  Christian  army  had 
advanced  into  the  land  of  Antioch  while  he,  not  without  grave  ap¬ 
prehension,  had  been  awaiting  them  in  the  land  of  Egypt.  It  seemed 
to  him  with  reason  that  he  could  safely  invade  a  land  thus  stripped 
of  its  troops,  when  one  of  two  things  might  easily  be  secured:  the  in¬ 
vasion  would  either  force  the  enemy  to  abandon  the  siege  of  Harim, 
or,  if  they  persisted  in  continuing  that,  he  could  obtain  a  victory  over 
those  left  in  the  kingdom. 

He  accordingly  assembled  troops  in  great  numbers  from  all  sources 
and  caused  them  to  be  equipped  even  better  than  usual  with  arms  and 
all  manner  of  things  commonly  used  in  warfare.  Then  with  this 
army  he  marched  out  of  Egypt.  After  traversing  by  forced  marches 
the  vast  intervening  wilderness,  he  arrived  at  the  ancient  city  of 


BALDWIN  IV,  THE  LEPER  427 

al-Arish,  now  deserted.  There  he  left  part  of  the  heavy  baggage  and 
the  packs  of  the  soldiers.  Then,  taking  with  him  the  lighter-armed 
troops  and  the  most  experienced  fighters,  he  passed  by  our  fortresses 
Daron  and  Gaza,  the  latter  a  very  famous  city,  and,  sending  scouts  on 
in  advance,  appeared  suddenly  before  Ascalon. 

However,  the  king  had  received  warning  of  his  advance  some  days 
before  j  he  had  hurriedly  mustered  the  forces  still  left  in  the  kingdom, 
and  his  troops  were  already  occupying  the  city. 

As  already  stated,  the  count  of  Tripoli  was  gone,  taking  with  him  a 
hundred  of  our  knights,  picked  men  selected  from  a  large  number; 
the  master  of  the  Hospital  with  his  brethren  and  a  large  number  of 
the  Knights  Templars  had  also  left.  The  rest  of  the  brethren  had 
retired  to  Gaza  in  the  expectation  that  Saladin  would  lay  siege  to  that 
place,  since  it  was  the  first  of  our  cities  which  he  would  reach.  Hum¬ 
phrey,  the  royal  constable,  was  suffering  from  a  serious  illness,  as  has 
been  mentioned.  The  king  therefore  had  but  few  with  him.  When  he 
learned  that  the  enemy  were  roving  freely  about  in  hostile  fashion, 
scattered  through  the  plains  adjoining  our  territory,  he  left  a  few 
men  to  guard  the  city  and,  invoking  aid  from  above,  marched  out 
with  his  forces  prepared  to  fight. 

Saladin  had  concentrated  his  troops  in  one  body  near  the  city.  When 
the  Christian  army  advanced  and  saw  the  vast  numbers  of  their  ad¬ 
versaries,  those  of  greater  experience  in  warfare  advised  that  the 
forces  remain  in  their  present  position  rather  than  risk  the  uncertain 
chances  of  battle.  Accordingly  the  Christians  stood  off  the  enemy’s 
attacks  until  evening,  although  during  that  time  single  combats  took 
place  at  intervals,  for  the  two  armies  were  not  far  apart.  As  the  day 
drew  to  a  close,  the  Christians  prudently  retired  to  the  city  again,  for 
in  view  of  the  enemy’s  superior  numbers  it  seemed  hazardous  to  trust 
their  modest  forces  to  a  camp  for  the  night.  This  act  roused  Saladin 
and  his  men  to  such  a  pitch  of  arrogance  that  they  no  longer  remained 
in  close  array  but  paraded  about  in  admiration  of  their  own  prowess. 
As  though  already  victorious,  Saladin  began  to  allot  definite  parts 
of  his  conquered  possessions  to  his  fellow  soldiers,  and  his  forces,  as 
if  they  had  already  secured  all  they  desired,  began  to  conduct  them¬ 
selves  with  utter  disregard  of  caution.  In  scattered  bands  they  wan¬ 
dered  freely  about  and  scoured  the  country  in  every  direction. 


428 


BALDWIN  IV,  THE  LEPER 


21.  The  Turks  devastate  the  land  jar  and  wide;  they  burn  cities 
and  outlying  districts » 

We  supposed  that  during  the  night  the  enemy  were  engaged  either 
in  establishing  their  camp  before  the  city,  where  they  had  been  the 
day  before,  or  had  drawn  nearer  and  were  already  investing  it.  But 
on  the  contrary,  without  allowing  themselves  or  their  horses  to  rest, 
they  spread  in  bands  over  the  whole  region  hither  and  yon,  as  the 
impulse  seized  each  one.  Among  their  satraps  was  a  certain  Jevelino,  a 
valiant  fighter,  ever  ready  for  any  daring  exploit.  He  was  an  Ar¬ 
menian  by  birth,  an  apostate  who,  abandoning  the  faith  of  the  Medi¬ 
ator  between  God  and  man,  had  gone  over  to  the  Gentiles  and  was 
following  devious  ways.^^  With  the  troops  which  he  commanded, 
this  man  proceeded  to  Ramlah,  a  city  in  the  plain,  and,  finding  it 
deserted,  burned  it.  Since  the  place  was  not  well  fortified,  the  citizens 
had  abandoned  it  in  despair;  some  had  gone  with  Baldwin’s  expedi¬ 
tion  to  Ascalon,  and  others,  with  the  weaker  ones  and  the  women  and 
children,  had  repaired  to  Jaffa.  Still  others  had  gone  up  to  a  fairly 
well  fortified  stronghold  in  the  mountains  called  Mirabel.  After 
burning  Ramlah,  Jevelino  marched  on  with  all  his  forces  to  the  neigh¬ 
boring  city  of  Lydda;  here  he  divided  his  troops  and  quickly  sur¬ 
rounded  the  place.  Then,  with  showers  of  arrows  and  weapons  of  all 
kinds,  he  attacked  the  citizens  and  harried  them  without  intermission. 
The  entire  population  fled  to  the  church  of  the  blessed  martyr  St. 
George. 

At  this  point  such  desperate  fear  laid  hold  on  the  Christians  that 
their  only  hope  seemed  to  lie  in  flight.  Great  terror  descended  not 
only  upon  the  people  in  the  plains,  where  the  enemy  was  roving 
about  freely  without  opposition,  but  even  upon  those  living  in  the 
mountains.  The  citizens  of  Jerusalem  itself  were  almost  ready  to 
abandon  the  Holy  City;  having  no  confidence  in  its  fortifications, 
they  hastened  in  all  eagerness  to  the  tower  of  David,  as  it  is  com¬ 
monly  called,  and  abandoned  the  rest  of  the  city.  Some  of  the  ma¬ 
rauders  had  advanced  as  far  as  the  place  called  Calcalia  and  had 
spread  over  almost  the  entire  surface  of  the  plain.  Now  they  were 
about  to  leave  the  level  country  and  ascend  to  the  hills. 

Jawali  (see  Book  XXj  note  28).  Beha  ed-Din  (^The  Life  of  SaladiUj  p.  89) 
calls  him  a  mamluk. 


BALDWIN  IV,  THE  LEPER  429 

Now  was  the  appearance  of  this  region  desolate  and  overwhelmed 
with  bitterness,  as  in  the  day  when  the  Lord,  provoked  to  wrath, 
“covered  the  daughter  of  Zion  with  a  cloud.”  Yet,  “even  in  his 
anger,  he  did  not  withhold  his  pity,  nor  did  he  forget  mercy  j” 
“but  he  inclined  toward  usj  he  consoled  and  aided  us  and  was  still 
favorable  toward  us”  and  “according  to  the  multitude  of  sorrows 
in  our  hearts,  his  comforts  delighted  our  souls.” 

22.  The  king  goes  jorth  jrom  Ascalon  and  meets  the  enemy. 

Both  sides  are  drawn  uf  in  battle  array  f  re  fared  for  the 
encounter. 

While  these  events  were  happening  in  that  part  of  the  country, 
news  was  brought  to  the  king  that  a  host  of  the  enemy,  scattered  far 
and  wide  over  his  land,  had  seized  upon  his  domain.  Thereupon,  he 
immediately  left  Ascalon  with  his  men  and  prepared  to  march  against 
the  foe,  for  he  felt  that  it  was  wiser  to  try  the  dubious  chances  of 
battle  with  the  enemy  than  to  suffer  his  people  to  be  exposed  to 
rapine,  fire,  and  massacre.  So,  marching  along  by  the  seashore,  he  was 
following  the  coast,  that  he  might  come  upon  the  enemy  stealthily 
and  suddenly  when  he  reached  the  place  where  Saladin  was  en¬ 
camped  on  the  plain.  He  immediately  directed  all  his  forces,  both 
cavalry  and  infantry,  in  all  their  martial  array  against  him.  He  was 
joined  by  the  brethren  of  the  Knights  Templars  who  had  remained 
at  Gaza,  and  together,  with  ranks  in  battle  formation,  they  prepared 
to  meet  the  foe.  As  they  advanced,  intent  on  the  one  purpose  of 
avenging  their  wrongs,  the  sight  of  the  fires  on  every  side  and  the 
reports  of  the  massacre  of  their  people  inspired  them  with  divine 
courage,  and  they  hastened  on  as  one  man.  Suddenly,  opposite  to 
them  and  not  far  away,  they  saw  the  enemy’s  lines.  It  was  about  the 
eighth  hour  of  the  day. 

During  this  interval,  Saladin  had  learned  that  the  Christians  were 
advancing  in  the  hope  of  fighting.  Dreading  the  engagement  which 
heretofore  he  had  apparently  desired,  he  sent  out  messengers  to  re¬ 
call  his  troops,  who  had  scattered  in  various  directions.  By  the  sound 
of  the  trumpet  and  the  roll  of  the  drums  and  by  admonitions  also,  as 

Lam.  2 :  i .  In  this  and  the  following'  passages  William  is  paraphrasing  Scripture 
to  meet  his  needs. 

^®Ps.  76:10.  ®'^Ps.  70:2,  ^®Ps.  76:8.  ®®Ps.  93:19. 


430  BALDWIN  IV,  THE  LEPER 

is  usual  at  such  timeSj  he  sought  to  encourage  his  men  for  the  con¬ 
flict  and  to  rouse  them  by  his  words,^^ 

With  the  king  were  Eudes  de  Saint-Amand,  the  master  of  the 
Knights  Templars,  and  eighty  of  his  brethren,  Prince  Renaud,  Bald¬ 
win  of  Ramlah  and  his  brother  Balian,  Renaud  of  Sidon,  and  Count 
Joscelin,  the  king’s  uncle  and  seneschal.  Their  numbers,  including  all 
ranks  and  conditions,  were  barely  three  hundred  and  seventy-five. 
Led  by  the  wondrous  Life-giving  Cross  which  was  borne  by  Albert, 
bishop  of  Bethlehem,  and  after  first  invoking  aid  from  on  high,  they 
all  advanced  in  battle  formation,  eager  for  the  encounter. 

In  the  meantime,  the  enemy’s  forces  who  had  ventured  some  dis¬ 
tance  away  to  seek  booty  and  spread  conflagration  began  to  arrive 
from  different  directions,  a  circumstance  which  greatly  increased  Sala- 
din’s  strength.  In  fact,  had  not  the  Lord,  who  never  fails  those  who 
put  their  trust  in  Him,^^  graciously  inspired  our  men  with  inward 
courage,  the  Christians  would  have  been  driven  to  despair,  not  only 
of  victory,  but  of  liberty  and  safety  as  well.  However,  they  nonethe¬ 
less  drew  up  their  forces  in  battle  array  and  arranged  their  lines  ac¬ 
cording  to  military  rules,  disposing  in  proper  order  those  who  were 
to  make  the  first  attack  and  the  reserves  who  were  to  come  to  their 
aid. 

23.  A  battle  ensues.  Saladin  is  dejeated  and  fut  to  flight  with  ex¬ 
treme  danger  and  ignominy. 

The  ranks  of  fighters  on  both  sides  now  gradually  approached  each 
other,  and  a  battle  ensued  which  was  at  first  indecisive,  but  the  forces 
were  very  unequal.  The  Christians,  however,  strengthened  by  the 
grace  shed  upon  them  from  on  high,  soon  began  to  press  on  with 
ever-increasing  boldness  j  Saladin’s  lines  were  broken  and,  after  a 
terrible  slaughter,  were  forced  to  flee. 

Wishing  to  ascertain  the  actual  facts,  I  made  a  careful  investiga¬ 
tion  of  the  enemy’s  numbers  and,  from  the  narratives  of  many  trust¬ 
worthy  people,  found  that  twenty-six  thousand  light-armed  cavalry, 
in  addition  to  others  mounted  on  camels  and  beasts  of  burden,  had 
entered  our  territory.^-  Of  these,  eight  thousand  belonged  to  those 

Reminiscent  of  Virgil  Aen.  ix.  717.  Ps.  33  :  23. 

It  is  probable  that  William  accompanied  the  king  on  this  campaign.  The  use 
of  the  first  person  here,  the  definiteness  of  detail,  and  the  fullness  of  his  description 
seem  to  indicate  that  fact. 


BALDWIN  IV,  THE  LEPER  431 

splendid  soldiers  called  in  their  own  language  toassin;  the  other 
eighteen  thousand  were  the  common  knights  known  as  carnagoles^^ 
A  thousand  of  the  most  valiant  knights  acted  as  a  bodyguard  to 
Saladin.  All  these  wore  yellow  silk  over  their  breastplates,  the  color 
that  Saladin  himself  bore.  It  is  the  custom  of  Turkish  satraps  and  of 
the  great  chiefs,  who  in  the  Arabic  tongue  are  called  amirs,  to  rear 
with  great  care  certain  young  men,  some  of  whom  are  slaves  captured 
in  war,  others  are  bought  or  perhaps  born  of  slave  mothers.  These 
youths  are  instructed  in  military  science,  and  when  they  have  reached 
manhood  are  given  wages  or  even  large  possessions,  according  to  the 
merit  of  each.  These  men  are  called  in  their  own  language  mamluks. 
To  them  is  entrusted  the  duty  of  protecting  the  person  of  their  lord 
in  the  vicissitudes  of  battle,  and  upon  them  in  no  slight  degree  de¬ 
pends  the  hope  of  obtaining  the  victory.  Always  surrounding  their 
lord,  they  endeavor  with  one  accord  to  protect  him  from  harm,  and 
they  cling  to  him  even  unto  death.  As  one  man,  they  continue  to 
fight  until  he  has  fled.  Consequently  it  often  happens  that  while  the 
rest  make  good  their  escape  by  flight,  nearly  all  the  mamluks  falL^^ 

The  Christians  pursued  the  defeated  foe  from  the  place  called 
Mons  Gisard  to  the  swamp  known  as  Cannaie  des  Etourneaux,  until 
day  declined  and  night  fell  upon  them.  For  twelve  miles  and  more, 
during  this  entire  flight,  the  foe  was  mercilessly  slaughtered,  nor 
would  any  of  their  number  have  survived,  had  not  the  swift  descent 
of  night  rescued  them  from  their  pursuers.  To  assist  them  in  their 
flight,  the  stronger  men  and  those  who  had  swift  horses  threw  away 
their  arms  and  apparel,  abandoned  their  packs,  and,  leaving  the 
weaker  people  behind,  fled  with  all  their  might.  Thanks  to  the  ap¬ 
proach  of  night,  these  escaped  death.  The  remainder  met  with  a 
worse  fate,  for  all  were  either  captured  or  put  to  the  sword. 

At  the  very  beginning  of  the  engagement,  we  lost  four  or  five 
knights  and  some  foot  soldiers,  but  the  exact  number  of  these  is  not 
known. 

When  those  who  had  escaped  by  flight  reached  the  marsh  just  men¬ 
tioned,  they  cast  into  the  sedges  and  into  the  water  itself  whatever 

Rohricht  quotes  Noldeke  in  identifying’  toassiny  or  tawasiriy  as  a  designation  of 
troops  having  religious  significance,  and  carnagoleSy  or  Caragholaniy  as  literally  “black 
servants’^  or  mamluks  (see  R.  Rohricht,  Geschichte  des  Komgreichs  Jerusalemy  jioo— 
i2giy  p.  377,  note  i). 

This  is  the  usual  description  of  mamluks. 


$ 


432  BALDWIN  IV,  THE  LEPER 

they  still  carried,  namely,  their  breastplates  and  ironshod  boots,  that 
they  themselves  might  proceed  unimpeded.  Even  weapons  were 
thrown  into  the  water,  that  the  Christians  might  not  use  them  even 
as  tokens  of  victory. 

All  these  things,  however,  were  soon  recovered  by  our  people,  for, 
following  hard  on  the  footsteps  of  the  flying  foe,  that  very  night  and 
the  next  day  they  carefully  searched  the  reedy  swamp  just  mentioned 
and,  by  combing  the  swamp  itself  with  poles  and  hooks,  speedily 
found  whatever  the  foe  had  hidden  there. 

We  have  heard  from  persons  worthy  of  credence  that  in  one  day 
they  saw  a  hundred  breastplates  recovered  from  that  place,  besides 
helmets,  iron  greaves,  and  other  articles  of  less  worth  which  still 
were  valuable  and  useful. 

This  notable  mercy,  worthy  of  remembrance  forever,  was  conferred 
upon  us  by  divine  grace  in  the  third  year  of  King  Baldwin  IV,  on 
November  25,  the  feast  day  of  the  holy  martyrs,  Peter  of  Alexandria 
and  the  virgin  Catherine.^ ^ 

The  king  went  back  to  Ascalon,  where  he  awaited  the  return  of 
his  forces  who  had  pursued  the  fugitives  by  different  roads.  Within 
four  days  they  had  all  arrived,  loaded  with  plunder.  Carrying  tents 
and  driving  before  them  slaves,  troops  of  camels,  and  horses,  they 
came,  according  to  the  words  of  the  prophet,  ^^as  men  rejoice  when 
they  divide  the  spoil.” 

24.  Stormy  weather  and  unusual  cold  exhaust  the  endurance  of 
the  fugitives  who  had  escafed  from  the  battle.  Great  num¬ 
bers  die  while  many  others  are  caftured.  The  king  returns 
victorious  to  J eru Salem. 

Still  another  circumstance  plainly  showed  that  divine  clemency  was 
with  us.  On  the  following  day  and  for  ten  successive  days  thereafter, 
violent  rains  accompanied  by  unusual  cold  occurred  so  that  it  almost 
seemed  that  the  very  elements  had  conspired  against  the  foe.  They 
had  lost  all  their  horses,  which,  during  the  three  days’  occupation  of 
our  territories,  had  received  neither  food  nor  drink,  nor  even  rest. 
They  had  also  voluntarily  thrown  away  their  baggage  and  all  kinds 

It  should  be  “fourth  year.’»  Either  William  is  here  using-  the  calendar  year  or  is 
guilty  of  a  slip  of  the  pen,  probably  the  latter.  The  date  is  November  2<,  1 177. 

Is.  9 :  3. 


BALDWIN  IV,  THE  LEPER  433 

of  clothing,  as  we  have  said.  To  add  to  the  sum  of  their  miseries, 
they  were  entirely  without  food  and  were  perishing  from  cold  and 
hunger,  from  fatigue  of  the  march  and  the  burden  of  unaccustomed 
hardships.  Everywhere  were  to  be  found,  now  a  few  of  these  fugi¬ 
tives,  and  again  larger  numbers,  against  whom  even  the  weak  and 
powerless  could  vent  their  fury  as  they  would.  Many,  in  their  igno¬ 
rance  of  the  localities  and  thinking  that  they  were  on  the  way  home, 
presented  themselves  in  our  villages  either  to  travellers  or  to  those 
who  were  hunting  them. 

Meanwhile  the  Arabs,  that  race  of  unbelievers,  perceiving  the  ca¬ 
tastrophe  that  had  befallen  the  Turks,  hastened  to  those  who,  as  we 
said  above,  had  been  left  to  guard  the  baggage  at  the  city  of  al-Arish. 
By  reporting  the  disaster  that  had  overtaken  their  people,  they  so 
terrified  them  that  they  fled  in  dismay.  These  Arabs  also  persistently 
pursued  any  who  by  chance  had  managed  to  evade  our  clutches.  Thus 
those  who  thought  they  had  escaped  from  us  fell  into  their  hands  as 
prey,  so  that  the  prophecy  seemed  to  be  fulfilled  which  says,  ^‘that 
which  the  locust  hath  left,  hath  the  canker-worm  eaten.”  The  fol¬ 
lowing  is  said  to  be  a  custom  of  that  wicked  race.  Under  whatever 
chief  they  advance  to  battle,  they  always  avoid  the  dangers  of  com¬ 
bat,  and,  as  long  as  the  result  of  the  battle  is  uncertain,  they  look  on 
at  a  distance  3  when  it  is  decided,  they  attach  themselves  to  the  victor, 
pursue  the  conquered  enemies,  and  enrich  themselves  by  the  spoils. 

For  many  days  captives  were  brought  in  from  the  forests  and  moun¬ 
tains,  even  from  the  desert.  Sometimes  they  came  to  us  of  their  own 
accord,  preferring  to  be  held  in  chains  and  prisons  rather  than  to 
waste  away  under  the  torture  of  cold  and  hunger. 

Meanwhile,  the  king,  after  distributing  the  spoils  and  treasures  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  rules  of  war,  hastened  to  Jerusalem  to  give  thanks  and 
make  offerings  for  the  blessings  bestowed  upon  him  by  the  Lord. 
But  Saladin,  who  had  gone  up  in  a  spirit  of  great  arrogance  with  a 
numerous  array  of  knights,  returned  stricken  by  the  divine  hand,  at¬ 
tended  by  barely  a  hundred  followers.  He  himself  is  said  to  have 
been  mounted  on  a  camel, 

b 

Let  us  regard  more  closely  and  carefully  the  bounty  of  this  divine 
gift  and  consider  how  in  the  liberality  shown  toward  us,  the  Holy 
Comforter  desired  all  the  glory  to  be  His  own.  For  if  the  count  of 


Joel  1 :  4. 


434 


BALDWIN  IV,  THE  LEPER 


Flanders,  the  prince  of  Antioch,  the  count  of  Tripoli,  and  the  great 
company  of  knights  who  were  not  present  had  participated  in  this 
victory  brought  about  by  divine  grace,  they  would  not  have  hesitated 
to  think,  even  though  they  did  not  say,  “Our  hand  is  high,  and  the 
Lord  hath  not  done  all  this.”  For  heedless  and  inconsiderate  per¬ 
sons  are  wont  to  creep  in  thus  when  all  is  prosperous. 

But  now,  according  to  His  word  as  it  is  written,  “my  glory  will  I 
not  give  to  another.”  He  has  retained  all  the  glory  and  authority 
for  Himself,  while  employing  the  aid  not  of  the  many  but  of  the  few. 
In  His  loving  kindness  he  renewed  the  miracle  of  Gideon,  he  scat¬ 
tered  a  great  multitude  and  thus  made  it  plain  that  it  was  He  alone 
and  not  another,  by  whose  aid  one  could  “chase  a  thousand,  and  two 
put  ten  thousand  to  flight.” 

Therefore  to  Him  from  whom  comes  every  good  and  perfect 
gift  let  it  be  ascribed,  for  in  this  present  instance  there  is  nothing 
which  man  can  attribute  to  his  own  works.  It  is  the  gift  of  divine 
grace,  and  it  has  been  shown  to  those  who  do  not  deserve  it.  “Thou 
stretchedst  out  thy  right  hand,  the  earth  swallowed  themj”  “in 
the  greatness  of  thine  excellency  thou  hast  overthrown  them  that  rose 
up  against  thee.” 


25.  The  besieging  forces  before  the  fortress  of  Harim  in  the  land 
of  Antioch  abandon  the  task  and  return  to  their  own  land. 

While  these  events  were  taking  place  among  us,  the  count  and 
those  with  him  continued  to  besiege  the  castle  referred  to  above,  but 
without  result.  For  they  were  given  over  to  frivolity  and  paid  more 
attention  to  games  of  chance  and  other  evil  pleasures  than  military 
discipline  or  the  rules  of  siege  operations  permitted.  They  were  con¬ 
tinually  going  back  and  forth  to  Antioch,  where  they  spent  their  time 
at  the  baths  and  at  banquets  and  indulged  in  drunken  debauches  and 
other  pleasures  of  the  flesh,  thereby  forsaking  the  work  of  the  siege 
for  the  delights  of  idleness. 

Even  those  who  seemed  to  be  assiduous  in  attendance  there  became 
lazy  and  careless  and  accomplished  nothing  of  importance.  They 
passed  their  time  in  idleness  and  led  vicious  lives. The  count  himself 
daily  remarked  that  he  must  return  home  and  intimated  that  he  was 


De.  32 :  27. 
Ex.  15  :  12, 


Is.  42 :  8. 
Ex.  15:7. 


De.  32:30. 

Persius  Sat.  v.  60. 


51 


Ja.  1:17 


BALDWIN  IV,  THE  LEPER  435 

detained  at  Harim  against  his  will.  This  attitude  not  only  hindered 
those  who  were  honorably  endeavoring  to  carry  on  the  siege  outside, 
but  it  furnished  an  incentive  to  a  bolder  resistance  on  the  part  of  the 
townspeople.  The  hope  that  the  siege  would  soon  be  raised  enabled 
them  to  endure  all  things  for  a  short  time.  To  bear  the  injuries  in¬ 
flicted  upon  them  was  hard,  yet  even  that  was  better  than  to  surrender 
to  the  hated  race  the  stronghold  which  had  been  committed  to  their 
loyalty  and  thus  to  incur  forever  the  opprobrium  of  traitors. 

The  fortress  of  Harim  occupies  an  elevated  position  on  a  hill  which 
is  apparently  largely  artificial  and  is  accessible  to  assailants  on  one 
side  only.  The  other  sides  are  practically  unapproachable  to  anyone 
wishing  to  make  an  assault,  yet  it  is  possible  for  hurling  machines  to 
scourge  it  from  all  directions  without  hindrance. 

Repeated  attacks  had  been  made,  with  varying  results.  These 
seemed  to  indicate  that  if  a  vigorous  assault  were  made,  with  divine 
assistance  the  place  might  be  taken.  Yet  the  affair  had  lapsed  into  a 
state  of  indifference,  as  we  have  said  and,  because  of  our  sins,  all  valor 
had  departed  from  us  and  all  prudence  had  vanished.  Although  those 
shut  up  within  its  walls  had  now  fallen  into  the  last  state  of  despair, 
the  Christians  began  to  consider  returning  home.  We  cannot  suffi¬ 
ciently  marvel  at  the  fact  (for  it  seems  beyond  human  understanding) 
that  the  Lord  brought  such  darkness  over  the  minds  of  these  great 
princes  and  in  His  wrath  so  blinded  them.  For,  although  no  one  con¬ 
strained  them  and  the  castle  was  now  almost  in  their  power,  yet, 
under  the  spur  of  jealousy  and  their  own  desire  for  idleness,  they 
abandoned  it  to  the  enemy.  When  the  prince  perceived  that  the  count 
of  Flanders  had  determined  on  his  course  and  was  irrevocably  set 
upon  this  decision,  he  accepted  from  the  besieged  a  sum  of  money, 
the  amount  of  which  is  unknown  to  us,  and  raised  the  siege. 

The  count  of  Flanders  then  returned  to  Jerusalem,  where  he  cele¬ 
brated  the  holy  days  of  Easter  and  then  made  his  preparation  to  re¬ 
turn.  As  soon  as  the  galleys  and  necessary  transports  were  ready,  he 
sailed  from  Laodicea  in  Syria  with  the  intention  of  returning  to  his 
own  land  after  a  visit  to  the  emperor  of  Constantinople,  but  he  left 
behind  him  a  memory  in  no  wise  blessed.®^ 

About  this  same  time,  Frederick,  emperor  of  the  Romans,  after 
twenty  years  of  schism  was  reconciled  to  Pope  Alexander  at  Venice. 

He  reached  his  homeland  in  the  fall  of  1178. 


436  BALDWIN  IV,  THE  LEPER 

The  walls  of  the  holy  city  of  Jerusalem  had  partly  fallen  because 
of  their  great  age.  Accordingly^  about  this  time  the  princes,  both  secu¬ 
lar  and  ecclesiastical,  joined  together  and  decided  that  a  fixed  sum  of 
money  should  be  paid  annually  until,  by  the  help  of  the  Lord,  the 
work  of  repairing  the  walls  should  be  finished.  And  thus  might  be 
fulfilled  the  saying,  ^^Do  good  in  thy  good  pleasure  unto  Zion:  build 
thou  the  walls  of  Jerusalem.” 

26.  A  genef'al  synod  at  Home  is  froclcnmed.  The  king  builds  a 
fortress  beyond  the  river  Jordan  under  unfavorable  auspices 
and  commits  ity  when  comfletedy  to  the  care  of  the  Templars, 

In  the  year  of  our  Lord  1178,  which  was  the  fifth  year  of  the  reign 
of  King  Baldwin  IV,  in  the  month  of  October, certain  men  who  had 
been  summoned  left  our  East  to  attend  a  general  synod  at  Rome 
which  had  been  proclaimed  the  previous  year  throughout  the  entire 
Latin  world.  The  delegates  invited  were:  myself,^®  William,  arch¬ 
bishop  of  Tyrej  Heraclius,  archbishop  of  Caesarea  5  Albert,  bishop 
of  Bethlehem  5  Ralph,  bishop  of  Sebastej  Joscius,  bishop  of  Acrej 
Romanus,  bishop  of  Tripoli;  Peter,  prior  of  the  canons  of  the  Holy 
Sepulchre;  and  Raynald,  abbot  of  Mt.  Sion.  Joscius  not  only  attended 
the  synod  with  us,  but  also  went  as  envoy  to  Henry,  duke  of  Bur¬ 
gundy,  charged  with  the  mission  of  inviting  him  to  come  to  the  king¬ 
dom.  For  we  had  unanimously  agreed  that  he  should  be  given  the 
king’s  sister  in  marriage  under  the  same  conditions  which  had  been 
made  at  the  time  of  her  previous  marriage  to  the  marquis.  The  duke 
received  this  offer  at  the  hand  of  Bishop  Joscius  graciously  and  is  said 
to  have  sworn  by  his  own  hand  that  he  would  come.  However,  for 
reasons  still  unknown  to  us,  he  later  disregarded  his  oath  and  refused 
to  fulfil  the  solemn  promise  by  which  he  had  bound  himself. 

During  the  same  month  in  which  we  started  on  our  journey  to  at- 

Ps.  51:  18. 

The  statement  is  again  precise  in  terms  of  the  regnal  year  reckoned  from  the 
day  of  accession. 

This  list  is  of  interest  not  only  in  that  it  places  William  at  the  head  of  the  dele¬ 
gation,  but  also  because  of  the  omission  of  several  prelates,  notably  the  patriarch 
Amalrich  and  the  archbishop  of  Nazareth,  both  of  whom  were  too  old  and  feeble  to 
attempt  the  journey.  Peter,  prior  of  the  canons  of  the  Holy  Sepulchre,  went  as  personal 
representative  of  the  patriarch,  though  William  does  not  mention  the  fact  (see  J.  D. 
Mansi,  Sacrorum  conciliorum  nova  et  amflissima  collectioy  Vol.  XXII  fassim). 


BALDWIN  IV,  THE  LEPER  437 

tend  the  synod,  the  king,  with  the  entire  strength  of  the  realm,  began 
to  build  a  fortress  beyond  the  Jordan  in  the  place  commonly  called 
Jacob’s  ford.^^ 

Old  traditions  say  that  this  is  the  place  where  Jacob,  as  he  was  re¬ 
turning  from  Mesopotamia,  divided  his  people  into  two  bands  and 
sent  messengers  to  his  brother,  saying,  ^W^ith  my  staff  I  crossed  this 
river  and  now  I  am  returning  with  two  bands.”  It  lies  in  the  region 
of  Cades  Nephtalim  between  Nephtalim  and  Dan,  the  latter  of  which 
is  known  both  as  Banyas  and  as  Caesarea  Philippi.  These  form  part 
of  Phoenicia  and  are  suffragan  cities  of  Tyre.  The  place  is  ten  miles 
from  Banyas.  There,  upon  a  hill  of  moderate  height,  they  laid  foun¬ 
dations  of  suitable  depth  and  within  six  months  had  erected  a  fortifi¬ 
cation  of  solid  masonry  in  the  form  of  a  square,  of  marvellous  thick¬ 
ness  and  adequate  height. 

While  they  were  engaged  in  building  operations  there,  it  hap¬ 
pened  that  bandits  emerged  from  the  land  of  Damascus  and  so  beset 
the  highways  that  none  could  go  to  and  from  the  army  without  peril, 
neither  could  travellers  pass  along  any  of  the  ways.  These  bandits 
came  from  a  place  in  the  mountains  near  Acre  called  Bacades  or,  in 
the  vulgar  tongue,  Bucael.  This  Is  most  delightfully  situated  in  the 
land  of  Zebulon,  and,  although  on  the  top  of  a  mountain,  it  is  well 
watered  and  planted  with  thick  groves  of  fruit  trees.  Its  inhabitants 
are  insolent  men,  fierce  fighters  and  men  very  proud  of  their  great 
numbers,  through  which  they  have  made  all  the  surrounding  fields 
and  villages  tributary  to  them.  To  evildoers  fleeing  from  due  punish¬ 
ment,  to  brigands  and  highwaymen,  they  offer  a  safe  refuge  among 
them,  in  consideration  of  which  they  receive  a  share  of  the  booty  and 
spoils  taken  by  violence.  Because  of  their  intolerable  arrogance,  these 
people  had  become  hated  and  abhorred  by  all  around  them,  both 
Christians  and  Saracens,  and  frequent  attempts  had  been  made  to 
exterminate  them  utterly,  but  without  success.  As  a  result,  they  be¬ 
came  bolder  every  day.  The  king  finally  found  himself  unable  longer 
to  endure  their  insufferable  arrogance  and  the  thefts  and  murders 
perpetrated  by  them.  He  suddenly  seized  the  place  by  force  of  arms 
and  put  to  death  all  whom  he  could  apprehend.  The  majority  es¬ 
caped,  however,  for,  having  learned  of  the  king’s  intention,  they  had 

October,  1178.  Ge.  32:  10. 


438  BALDWIN  IV,  THE  LEPER 

fled  with  their  wives  and  little  ones  to  the  land  of  Damascus.  From 
here  they  kept  up  their  ancient  habits  and  made  frequent,  though 
stealthy,  sallies  into  our  territory. 

At  this  time,  with  associates  of  the  same  type,  they  had  invaded  our 
territories,  as  has  been  said.  The  knowledge  that  men  of  this  stamp 
were  rendering  the  public  highways  so  dangerous  roused  the  Chris¬ 
tians  to  wrath;  accordingly  they  laid  ambushes  in  strategic  places  and 
bent  all  their  energies  to  outwitting  the  rascals.  It  happened  one  night 
that  these  highwaymen,  after  making  a  raid,  were  coming  down  from 
the  mountains  of  Zebulon,  intending  to  return  to  the  place  whence 
they  had  set  out.  But,  falling  into  the  ambushes  laid  by  the  Christians, 
they  gathered  the  fruit  of  their  ways;  nine  of  their  number  were 
captured  and  more  than  seventy  killed.  This  happened  on  March 
21.®^ 

At  this  same  time,  on  March  5,  a  synod  of  three  hundred  bishops 
convened  at  Rome  in  the  basilica  of  Constantine  called  the  Lateran. 
This  was  in  the  twentieth  year  of  the  pontificate  of  Alexander,®^  and 
the  twelfth  of  the  indiction. 

If  anyone  desires  to  know  the  statutes  enacted  and  the  names  of 
the  bishops,  their  number  and  titles,  he  may  read  the  writing  which, 
at  the  earnest  request  of  the  holy  fathers  who  took  part  in  this  synod, 
we  have  carefully  compiled.  We  have  directed  that  this  be  placed 
in  the  archives  of  the  holy  church  at  Tyre  among  the  other  books 
which  we  have  collected  for  that  same  church,  over  which  now  for 
six  years  we  have  presided.®^ 

27.  The  king  invades  hostile  territory  and  suffers  an  enormous 
loss,  Humfhrey y  the  king^s  constahUy  meets  death  there. 

When  the  fortress  had  been  constructed  and  was  complete  in  all 
parts,  news  reached  the  king  that  the  enemy  in  search  of  pasturage 

March  21,  1 1 79. 

Alexander  III  had  been  elected  pope  late  in  1159.  The  Third  Lateran  council, 
which  he  had  called,  convened  officially  March  5,  1179,  though  the  clergy,  like  the 
delegation  from  Jerusalem,  had  been  gathering  at  Rome  for  some  time  before,  while 
a  few  arrived  after  the  council  convened.  It  was  quite  the  largest  and  most  important 
church  gathering  that  had  been  held  in  the  West  for  centuries. 

The  time  of  this  writing  is  thus  after  June  8,  1181.  His  library  is  evidently  a 
matter  of  pride.  No  catalogue  of  its  contents  has  been  preserved,  but  it  is  reasonable 
to  assume  that  it  included  all  the  books  to  which  he  referred  frequently. 


BALDWIN  IV,  THE  LEPER  439 

had  incautiously  led  their  flocks  and  herds  into  the  forest  near  Banyas. 
They  were  without  fighting  men  on  whom  they  might  count  to  repel 
any  attack  made  by  us.  Accordingly  our  people,  thinking  they  could 
easily  be  vanquished  if,  as  had  been  reported,  they  were  undefended 
and  without  military  protection,  stealthily  made  their  way  thither. 
In  order  to  fall  upon  the  Turks  suddenly  and  without  warning  before 
they  were  aware  of  the  enemy’s  vicinity,  the  Christians  made  the  en¬ 
tire  march  by  night.  The  morning  found  them  at  their  destination. 
While  some  of  the  troops  were  hui'rying  about  in  one  direction  and 
another,  looking  for  booty,  and  others  were  following  rather  slowly 
at  some  distance  behind,  the  company  with  which  the  king  was  riding- 
very  carelessly  became  entangled  in  a  certain  narrow  place  among  the 
rocks  where  some  of  the  enemy  were  lurking.  For,  having  learned 
that  we  were  coming,  they  had  decided  to  hide,  hoping  in  this  way 
to  avoid  our  attack  and  provide  for  their  own  safety.  But  when  they 
saw  the  Christians  rush  upon  them  without  due  caution,  necessity 
forced  them,  although  reluctant  and  still  despairing  of  their  lives,  to 
become  brave.  Realizing  that  our  men  were  in  a  difficult  position, 
they  suddenly  leaped  forth  and  boldly  attacked  them.  Up  to  this  time 
their  only  desire  had  been  to  avoid  the  adversary  by  hiding  j  now,  how¬ 
ever,  letting  fly  a  shower  of  arrows  from  afar,  they  killed  our  horses 
and  then  pressed  hard  upon  our  forces. 

The  lord  constable,  on  perceiving  that  the  enemy  had  so  unex¬ 
pectedly  emerged,  threw  himself  impetuously  upon  them.  As  usual 
he  fought  vigorously  and  faithfully  strove  with  all  his  might  to  pro¬ 
tect  the  king  in  this  dangerous  crisis,  that  the  enemy  might  not  rush 
upon  him  to  his  peril.  While  he  was  thus  engaged,  the  enemy  again 
and  again  rained  furious  blows  upon  him  which  inflicted  fatal  wounds. 
From  this  critical  situation  he  was  with  difficulty  rescued  by  his  men 
and  carried  off  on  horseback. 

Several  distinguished  men,  well  worthy  of  pious  remembrance,  fell 
in  that  eng-agement.  Among  this  number  were  Abraham  of  Nazareth, 
a  youth  of  fine  appearance,  whose  noble  character,  high  birth,  and 
great  wealth  gave  good  promise  for  the  future,  and  Godechaux  de 
Turout,  who  also  left  a  good  reputation  behind  him.  Several  others 
of  lesser  rank  also  fell  at  that  place. 

Such  was  the  situation  of  affairs  when  the  king,  thus  rescued  from 


440 


BALDWIN  IV,  THE  LEPER 

so  great  danger  by  the  efforts  of  his  followers,  returned  to  the  camp 
from  which  he  had  set  out  earlier  and  recalled  the  disorganized  troops 
who  had  scattered  hither  and  yon. 

The  condition  of  Humphrey,  the  royal  constable,  became  more 
critical  j  accordingly  he  was  borne  on  April  1 1  to  the  new  fortress 
which  was  still  under  construction.  There  he  lingered  for  about  ten 
days,  prolonging  his  life  under  stress  of  great  pain.  He  made  his  last 
testament  wisely  and  with  forethought.  On  April  22  the  exemplary 
life  of  this  man,  who  will  be  forever  mourned  by  his  country,  came  to 
an  end.  He  was  buried  with  due  ceremony  at  his  noble  and  famous 
castle  Toron,  in  the  church  of  the  Blessed  Mother  of  God,  the  Im¬ 
maculate  Virgin. 

Immediately  after  Humphrey’s  death,  on  the  twenty-seventh  of 
the  same  month  of  May,®^  Saladin  began  to  besiege  the  recently  built 
fortress.  Without  intermission  he  sent  forth  dense  showers  of  arrows 
and  harassed  the  besieged  within  its  walls  with  repeated  assaults.  But 
suddenly  an  arrow  sent  by  one  of  the  besieged  whose  name  is  said  to 
have  been  Rainerius  of  Marum  [Renier  de  Maron  a  Mareuil] 
chanced  to  deal  a  fatal  wound  to  one  of  the  richest  of  Saladin’s  amirs. 
The  death  of  this  noble  threw  the  infidels  into  such  utter  confusion 
that  they  abandoned  their  project,  raised  the  siege,  and  departed. 

28.  Saladin  invades  the  land  of  Sidon,  The  king  assembles  the 
military  strength  of  the  realm  and  goes  out  against  him. 

Saladin  had  already  invaded  the  land  of  Sidon  by  force  of  arms  twice 
or  more  and  without  any  opposition  had  freely  plundered,  burned, 
and  slaughtered.  In  the  following  month  he  decided  to  make  another 
invasion.  Accordingly  he  located  his  camp  between  the  city  of  Banyas 
and  the  river  Dan  and  sent  out  skirmishers  in  large  numbers  to  drive 
off  booty  and  set  fires.  He  himself,  ready  to  aid  in  emergencies,  re¬ 
mained  in  the  camp  and  there  awaited  their  return  and  the  result  of 
their  aggressions.  Meanwhile  the  news  that  Saladin  was  laying  waste 
our  lands  in  this  fashion  reached  the  king.  Taking  with  him  the  Cross 

of  the  Lord,  he  hastened  to  the  city  of  Tiberias  with  all  the  forces  he 

* 

This  misstatement  of  ‘‘same’*  month  is  more  excusable,  since  he  dated  the  previous 
event  in  terms  of  the  Kalends  of  May.  Humphrey  of  Toron,  who  had  been  made  con¬ 
stable  by  Baldwin  III  in  1151,  had  been  a  source  of  strength  to  three  successive  kings. 
He  was  not  only  a  courageous  fighter,  but  also  a  wise  military  leader.  His  death  oc¬ 
curred  May  27,  1179. 


441 


BALDWIN  IV,  THE  LEPER 

could  muster  from  every  source.  From  there  he  went  on  through  the 
town  of  Sephet  and  the  ancient  city  of  Naason  and  arrived  with  his 
forces  at  Tor  on. 

Here  he  received  accurate  information  from  the  messengers  who 
were  constantly  going  and  coming  that  Saladin  with  his  army  was  still 
in  the  same  position.  He  had  sent  his  light-armed  cavalry  on  ahead, 
however,  to  lay  waste  the  fields  of  Sidonj  and  there  in  hostile  fash¬ 
ion  they  were  killing,  burning,  and  plundering.  After  consultation, 
therefore,  it  was  unanimously  determined  to  advance  against  the  foe. 
In  accordance  with  this  plan,  the  Christians  directed  the  army  from 
Toron  toward  Banyas  and  came  to  a  village  called  Mesaphar.  This 
was  located  on  the  top  of  a  mountain,  and  from  it  could  be  seen  the 
entire  region  below  as  far  as  the  base  of  the  Lebanon  range.  The 
enemy’s  camp  was  also  visible  in  the  distance,  and  the  conflagrations 
and  ravages  committed  by  them  as  they  scoured  the  country  hither 
and  yon  were  evident  to  all. 

The  infantry  troops,  wearied  to  exhaustion  by  the  long  march, 
could  not  keep  up  with  the  pace  of  the  knights  as  they  rode  swiftly 
down  the  mountainside.  Accompanied  by  only  a  few  of  the  more  ac¬ 
tive  foot  soldiers,  therefore,  the  cavalry  descended  to  a  place  com¬ 
monly  known  as  Merguim  in  the  plain  directly  below  the  mountain. 
There  they  halted  for  several  hours  to  deliberate  over  their  further 
course. 

In  the  meanwhile,  Saladin  became  somewhat  alarmed  at  the  unex¬ 
pected  arrival  of  the  king.  He  was  anxious  about  his  advance  guard, 
who  seemed  to  be  shut  off  from  himself  and  the  army,  and  feared 
also  that  his  camp  might  be  attacked.  He  therefore  ordered  the  bag¬ 
gage,  impedimenta,  and  all  the  equipment  to  be  placed  between  the 
wall  and  the  forewall  of  the  neighboring  city  where  it  could  easily 
be  found  whatever  the  result  of  the  battle  might  be.  Thus  prepared, 
but  very  doubtful  of  the  result,  he  awaited  the  outcome  of  events. 

Meanwhile  the  skirmishers,  who  had  gone  out  on  a  plundering  ex¬ 
pedition,  learned  with  great  alarm  of  our  approach  and,  laying  aside 
all  other  considerations,  determined  to  reach  their  own  lines  if  pos¬ 
sible.  But  after  crossing  the  river  between  the  land  of  Sidon  and  the 
plain  where,  as  I  have  mentioned,  our  army  was  located,  they  encoun¬ 
tered  our  forces.  A  skirmish  at  close  quarters  immediately  ensued, 
wherein  the  Christians,  by  the  help  of  God,  were  victorious.  After 


442 


BALDWIN  IV,  THE  LEPER 

many  had  been  killed  and  still  more  thrown  to  the  ground,  the  enemy 
turned  in  flight  and  endeavored  to  gain  Saladin^s  camp. 

29.  A  battle  is  j ought.  The  Christians  are  dejeatedy  and  many  of 
them  are  taken  fris oners. 

While  things  were  in  this  state  Eudes,  the  master  of  the  Knights 
Templars,  accompanied  by  the  count  of  Tripoli  and  some  others  who 
were  following  them,  ascended  a  hill  lying  opposite.  On  their  left 
was  the  river  and  on  the  right  the  great  plain  and  the  camp  of  the 
enemy. 

When  Saladin  learned  of  the  desperate  plight  of  his  men,  exposed 
as  they  were  to  danger  and  even  to  death,  he  prepared  to  go  to  their 
assistance.  He  had  reached  this  resolution  when  he  caught  sight  of 
some  of  his  defeated  soldiers  in  full  flight.  He  rode  to  meet  them 
and,  on  learning  the  situation,  cheered  them  with  encouraging  words 
and  sent  them  back  to  the  ranks.  Then  suddenly  he  fell  upon  the 
Christians  who  were  in  reckless  pursuit  of  the  fugitives. 

In  the  meantime  our  infantry,  enriched  by  the  spoils  of  the  slain, 
had  encamped  along  the  river  bank  and,  in  the  belief  that  a  complete 
victory  had  been  won,  were  quietly  resting.  The  cavalry,  however, 
realized  that  the  enemy  whom  they  had  thought  vanquished  were 
rushing  upon  them  with  renewed  vigor.  In  confused  ranks,  without 
time  or  opportunity  to  reconstruct  their  lines  and  draw  up  their  forces 
in  battle  array  according  to  military  rules,  they  fought  bravely  and 
for  a  time  resisted  and  stoutly  sustained  the  enemy’s  attacks.  Their 
strength,  however,  was  unequal  to  that  of  the  foe,  and,  scattered  and 
disorganized  as  they  were,  they  could  not  aid  one  another.  Conse¬ 
quently,  they  finally  turned  and  fled  in  a  disgraceful  rout.  They  might 
easily  have  avoided  the  pursuing  enemy  and  saved  themselves  by 
turning  in  another  direction,  but,  because  of  our  sins,  they  adopted  a 
poorer  plan  and  plunged  into  a  narrow  defile  beset  with  steep  cliffs. 
Here  it  was  impossible,  except  at  peril  of  death,  either  to  advance  or 
to  retreat  through  the  enemy’s  lines.  Some  crossed  the  river;  most 
of  these,  in  the  hope  of  saving  their  lives,  retreated  to  the  nearest 
stronghold,  which  was  called  Belfort,  while  others,  after  making  the 
crossing,  followed  along  the  farther  bank  to  Sidon  and  thus  avoided 
the  furious  tide  of  battle.  On  the  way  they  encountered  Renaud  of 
Sidon  and  his  men,  who  were  hastening  to  the  army;  but  on  learning 


BALDWIN  IV,  THE  LEPER  443 

of  this  disaster,  Renaud  heeded  their  warning  and  returned  to  Sidon. 
This  act  is  believed  to  have  been  responsible  for  manifold  disasters 
that  day.  For  if  he  had  continued  his  march  to  the  fortress,  he  could 
probably  have  saved  many  from  the  enemy  with  the  help  of  the 
townsfolk  and  the  country  people  who  knew  the  locality.  As  it  was, 
these  fugitives  hid  that  night  in  caves  among  the  rocks.  The  next 
morning  the  enemy,  scouring  every  nook  and  corner,  discovered  them 
and  threw  them  into  prison.  The  king,  however,  by  the  aid  of  his 
royal  soldiers  escaped  without  injury.  The  count  of  Tripoli  also 
reached  Tyre  with  a  few  companions.^^ 

Among  the  Christians  who  were  captured  at  that  time  were  Eudes 
de  Saint-Amand,  the  master  of  the  Knights  Templars,  a  wicked  man, 
haughty  and  arrogant,  in  whose  nostrils  dwelt  the  spirit  of  fury,®® 
one  who  neither  feared  God  nor  revered  man.  Many  people  laid  at 
his  door  the  loss  and  never-dying  shame  of  this  disaster.  It  is  said  that 
within  the  year  he  died  a  captive  in  a  squalid  prison,  mourned  by 
no  one. 

Baldwin  of  Ramlah,  a  noble  and  powerful  man,  was  also  captured 
there,  as  was  likewise  Hugh  of  Tiberias,  the  stepson  of  the  count  of 
Tripoli,  a  young  man  of  fine  natural  promise,  greatly  beloved  by  all. 
Many  others  whose  names  I  do  not  know  were  also  taken  prisoners 
there. 

30.  Saladtn  besieges  the  fortress  recently  built.  He  takes  It  by 
storm  and  destroys  It,  Henry y  count  of  Troyes,  and  Peter, 
brother  of  Louis,  king  of  the  Franks,  arrives  In  ^yrla. 

Such  was  the  condition  of  affairs  in  the  kingdom  at  this  time.  Our 
fortunes  were  at  the  lowest  ebb  when  Henry,  the  illustrious  count  of 
Troyes  and  son  of  Count  Theobald  the  Elder,  from  whom  we  had 
parted  at  the  city  of  Brindisi  in  Apulia  as  we  were  returning  from  the 
synod,  landed  at  Acre  with  a  numerous  following  of  nobles.  As  has 
been  mentioned,  many  nobles  had  come  in  the  same  crossing,  among 
them  Peter  de  Courtenay,  brother  of  Louis,  king  of  the  Franks,  and 
Philip,  [bishop]  elect  of  Beauvais,  son  of  Count  Robert  and  brother 
of  King  Louis.  The  hearts  of  our  people,  greatly  depressed  by  the 
late  disasters,  were  revived  by  their  coming,  which  emboldened  them 

This  battle  is  dated  June  lo,  1179  (see  Stevenson,  Crusaders,  p.  221). 

Job  27:  3. 


444 


BALDWIN  IV,  THE  LEPER 

to  hope  that  under  the  protection  of  so  many  great  nobles  they  might 
be  able  to  avert  misfortunes  in  the  future  and  perhaps  avenge  those 
of  the  past.  But,  since  the  Lord  was  against  them,  this  hope  was  vain  j 
they  were  unable  to  overcome  the  results  of  past  evils  and  fell  into 
even  worse  troubles.  For  Saladin,  our  most  redoubtable  enemy,  had 
been  raised  to  such  a  pitch  of  arrogance  by  his  many  successes  and 
good  fortune  that  suddenly,  before  we  had  a  chance  to  regain  our 
breath,  he  laid  siege  to  our  stronghold  which  had  been  completed  the 
April  previous. 

On  its  completion,  this  oft-mentioned  fortress  was  given  into  the 
charge  of  the  brothers  of  the  Knights  Templars,  who  laid  claim  to 
all  that  region  for  themselves  by  concession  of  the  kings. 

On  learning  that  Saladin  had  invested  the  place,  the  king  called 
out  the  full  strength  of  the  realm  and  all  the  military  forces.  He  also 
summoned  Count  Henry  and  the  other  nobles  who  had  recently  ar¬ 
rived  and  hastened  to  Tiberias.  There  he  convoked  all  the  leading 
men  of  the  realm  with  the  intention  of  going  to  the  aid  of  the  be¬ 
sieged  and  forcing  the  enemy  to  raise  the  siege. 

But  while  he  was  waiting  there,  having  deferred  preparations  for 
a  day,  a  report  arrived  which  proved  to  be  true  that  the  enemy  had 
taken  the  place  and  razed  it  to  the  ground. All  the  men  of  the  gar¬ 
rison  which  had  been  left  there  to  guard  it  had  either  been  slain  or 
captured.  Thus  an  even  greater  catastrophe  was  added  to  their  former 
misfortunes,  so  that  of  them  it  might  truly  be  said,  ‘^The  Lord  their 
God  has  departed  from  them.^’  Truly  ^^thy  judgments  are  a  great 
deep”j  ^^how  terrible  art  thou  in  thy  works.” 

He  who,  during  the  year  just  past,  had  bestowed  such  great  gifts 
upon  His  faithful  children  now  suffered  them  to  be  clothed  with 
great  fear  and  confusion.  And  who  knoweth  the  mind  of  the  Lord? 
And  who  is  the  sharer  of  His  counsels?  Wherefore  is  it  then,  O  Lord? 
Hast  Thou  withdrawn  Thy  favor  because  of  the  great  multitude  and 
the  many  nobles  present,  lest  they  ascribe  to  themselves  that  which  is 
given  not  by  merit  but  by  grace?  Or  because  they  did  not  make  suf¬ 
ficiently  rich  returns  to  Thee,  their  benefactor,  for  the  favors  erst¬ 
while  conferred  by  grace?  Or  because  ^^whom  the  Lord  loveth  he 
chasteneth,  and  scourgeth  every  son  whom  he  receiveth.” 

The  castle  was  taken  by  storm  August  to,  1170. 

®®Ps.  36:65  66:3, 


He.  12:6. 


445 


BALDWIN  IV,  THE  LEPER 

Thou  hast  covered  our  faces  with  shame  that  we  may  seek  Thy 
holy  name,  which  is  blessed  forever.  We  know  and  confess,  O  Lord, 
that  Thou  dost  not  change.  For  Thou  hast  said,  am  the  Lord,  I 
change  not.”  Nevertheless  whatever  the  caiise  may  be,  we  know 
that  Thou  art  just,  O  Lord,  and  Thy  judgments  are  righteous. 

At  this  time  the  negotiations  which  had  been  made  the  year  before 
with  reference  to  the  duke  of  Burgundy  were  renewed  through  Count 
Henry,  his  uncle.  It  was  hoped  that  he  would  arrive  by  the  next  cross¬ 
ing,  but,  as  was  afterward  quite  apparent,  for  some  unknown  reasons 
he  still  declined  to  come. 

Mai.  3  :  6. 


HERE  ENDS  THE  TWENTY-FIRST  BOOK 


THE  TWENTY-SECOND  BOOK  BEGINS 


CONFLICT  OF  INTERESTS 

I,  The  king  marries  his  sister y  the  widow  of  the  marquis y  to 
a  young  man  named  Guy  de  Lusignan.  He  concludes  a  truce 
with  Saladin  on  equal  termSy  an  unfrecedented  act. 

At  this  same  time  also,  Bohemond,  prince  of  Antioch,  and  Ray¬ 
mond,  count  of  Tripoli,  arrived  in  the  kingdom  with  a  cavalry  escort. 
This  caused  the  king  much  alarm  j  for  he  feared  that  they  might  try  ' 
to  bring  about  a  revolution,  in  which  case,  after  dethroning  him,  they 
might  try  to  seize  the  realm  themselves.  The  king’s  malady  was  now 
troubling  him  more  than  ever,  and  from  day  to  day  the  symptoms  of 
leprosy  became  more  and  more  apparent. 

His  sister,  who  had  been  the  wife  of  the  marquis  of  Montferrat, 
was  still  a  widow  and  was  awaiting  the  coming  of  the  duke,  as  has 
been  explained.  But  the  king  knew  these  two  nobles  well  and,  al¬ 
though  both  were  his  kinsmen,  he  distrusted  their  motives  in  coming. 
When  he  learned  that  they  had  arrived,  he  hastened  the  nuptials  of 
his  sister.  He  might  have  found  in  the  kingdom  nobles  of  far  greater 
importance,  wisdom,  and  even  wealth,  both  foreigners  and  natives, 
an  alliance  with  any  one  of  whom  would  have  been  of  much  greater 
advantage  to  the  kingdom.  But  without  waiting  to  consider  that  ^^too 
much  haste  spoils  everything,”  ^  the  king,  for  reasons  of  his  own,  sud¬ 
denly  married  his  sister  to  a  young  man  of  fairly  good  rank,  Guy  de 
Lusignan,  son  of  Hugh  the  Brown,  of  the  diocese  of  Poitiers.  Con¬ 
trary  to  the  usual  custom  the  marriage  was  celebrated  during  the  week 
of  Easter. 

The  nobles  just  mentioned  perceived  that  their  coming  was  re¬ 
garded  with  suspicion  by  the  king  and  his  barons  j  accordingly  they 
returned  home  as  soon  as  they  had  completed  the  customary  devo¬ 
tions.  They  remained  for  a  few  days  at  Tiberias,  however,  and  while 
they  were  there,  Saladin,  unaware  of  their  presence,  made  an  attack 
on  the  city.  No  harm  resulted  to  the  citizens,  however,  and  he  again 
withdrew  into  the  country  around  Banyas.  There  he  remained  with 

^  Statius  Theb,  X.  704. 


CONFLICT  OF  INTERESTS 


447 

his  armies,  waiting,  as  was  afterwards  learned,  for  the  arrival  of  a 
fleet  of  fifty  galleys  which  he  had  ordered  to  be  prepared  during  the 
course  of  the  winter  just  past.  This  delay  caused  the  king  some  un¬ 
easiness,  and  he  therefore  sent  messengers  to  Saladin  to  discuss  a  truce. 

Saladin  willingly  agreed  to  the  suggestion,  although  not,  it  is 
claimed,  because  he  distrusted  his  own  strength  or  had  any  reason  to 
fear  our  forces,  which  he  had  so  often  defeated  during  the  past  year. 
But  for  five  successive  years  extreme  dryness  and  a  dearth  of  rain  in 
the  region  round  Damascus  had  caused  a  scarcity  of  food  of  every 
description  for  both  man  and  beast. 

A  truce  on  both  land  and  sea,  for  foreigners  and  natives  alike,  was 
accordingly  arranged  and  confirmed  by  an  exchange  of  oaths  between 
the  two  parties.  The  conditions  were  somewhat  humiliating  to  us,  for 
the  truce  was  concluded  on  equal  terms,  with  no  reservations  of  im¬ 
portance  on  our  part,  a  thing  which  is  said  never  to  have  happened 
before. 


2.  Saladin  invades  the  land  of  Trifoli  and  destroys  the  crofs 
and  other  Christian  fosses sions  in  that  locality. 

The  same  year,  during  the  summer  immediately  following,  Saladin, 
after  arranging  for  the  safety  of  the  provinces  of  Damascus  and 
Bostrum,  led  all  his  cavalry  forces  to  the  land  of  Tripoli.  There  he 
established  a  camp  and  sent  out  his  squadrons  over  the  surrounding 
country.  The  count  had  retired  with  his  forces  to  the  city  of  Arka  and 
was  there  awaiting  an  opportunity  to  engage  the  enemy  without  too 
much  risk.  The  knights  of  the  Temple,  who  lived  in  the  same  vicinity, 
also  remained  shut  up  in  their  strongholds  3  they  expected  almost 
hourly  to  be  besieged  and  did  not  wish  to  risk  an  encounter  with  the 
Turks.  The  brothers  of  the  Hospital  had  likewise  retired  in  alarm  to 
their  fortified  castle  of  Krak.  They  felt  that  if,  in  the  midst  of  such 
confusion,  they  could  defend  the  fortress  just  named  from  injury  by 
the  enemy,  their  duty  had  been  done.  The  Turkish  army  occupied  a 
position  between  these  brethren  and  the  forces  of  the  count;  conse¬ 
quently  the  Christians  could  not  assist  one  another,  nor  could  they 
send  messengers  from  one  army  to  the  other  to  ascertain  the  con¬ 
ditions  In  each. 

During  this  time  Saladin  ranged  here  and  there  over  the  plain, 
especially  over  the  cultivated  fields,  and  without  opposition  traversed 


448  CONFLICT  OF  INTERESTS 

the  entire  locality.  He  burned  all  the  crops,  those  that  had  been 
gathered  into  the  granaries,  those  still  stacked  in  the  fields,  and  the 
growing  grain  as  well.  He  drove  off  cattle  as  booty  and  laid  waste  the 
whole  country  in  every  direction. 

3.  An  Egy'ptian  fleet  arrives  at  the  island  of  A r ados.  The  count 
of  Trifoli  makes  a  truce  with  Saladin, 

This  was  the  situation  in  the  land  of  Tripoli  when,  about  the  begin¬ 
ning  of  June,  Saladin’s  naval  force  suddenly  appeared  in  the  vicinity 
of  Beirut.  But  when  the  commanders  of  that  force  learned  for  a  fact 
that  Saladin  had  concluded  a  treaty  with  the  king,  they  respected  the 
terms  of  the  peace  which  he  had  declared  and  feared  to  violate  any 
provisions  of  that  treaty  in  the  territories  of  Beirut  or  indeed  within 
the  boundaries  of  the  entire  realm. ^  Learning  that  their  lord  was 
with  his  army  in  the  land  of  Tripoli,  they  repaired  thither  and  seized 
Arados,  an  island  opposite  the  city  of  Tortosa,  some  three  miles  away. 
There  in  the  harbor  they  found  a  convenient  anchorage  for  their 
galleys. 

The  first  person  to  dwell  on  this  island  and  establish  thereon  a 

p 

fortified  city  is  said  to  have  been  Aradius,  son  of  Canaan  and  grand¬ 
son  [sic]  of  Noah,  whence  is  derived  the  name  Arados.  Near  by  on 
the  east,  is  a  once  splendid  city  called  Antarados,  so  named,  as  we 
have  said,  because  it  lies  opposite  Arados.  This  name,  however,  has 
now  been  corrupted  to  Tortosa.  Here  the  apostle  Peter,  when  travel¬ 
ling  through  Phoenicia,  is  said  to  have  founded  a  small  church  in 
honor  of  the  Mother  of  God.  This  edifice  is  still  visited  'by  large 
numbers  of  people,  and  here,  through  the  intercession  of  the  Im¬ 
maculate  Virgin,  many  benefits  are  reported  to  have  been  granted 
from  on  high  in  answer  to  the  prayers  of  the  faithful  in  time  of  need. 
Both  these  cities  are  suffragans  of  the  metropolis  of  Tyre,  as  is  also 
another  place  near  by  known  as  Maraclea,  which  is  regarded  as  belong¬ 
ing  to  Phoenicia. 

The  landing  of  these  forces  at  the  island  of  Arados  sent  a  thrill 
of  terror  through  the  whole  region.  While  awaiting  the  commands  of 

-  It  should  be  noted  that  William  here  expresses  no  surprise  at  the  fact  that  the  truce 
made  by  the  king  does  not  apply  to  Tripoli  even  though  Raymond  of  Tripoli  had 
asserted  his  claims  to  the  regency  as  the  most  important  vassal  of  the  kingdom  (see 
Book  XXI,  chap.  3). 


CONFLICT  OF  INTERESTS  449 

« 

their  master,  the  troops  set  fire  to  a  house  above  the  harbor  of  Tortosa 
and  sought  to  injure  the  citizens  as  much  as  possible.  Their  efforts 
proved  futile,  however.  Meanwhile,  Saladin  had  devastated  the 
region  to  his  satisfaction,  and  he  now  ordered  the  fleet  to  return.  He 
then  rallied  his  troops  and  also  retired  to  his  own  land.  A  few  days 
later  he  concluded  a  treaty  of  peace  with  the  count  and  withdrew  to  a 
more  remote  part  of  the  land  of  Damascus. 

4.  The  archhishof  of  Tyre  returns  from  Constantinople.  Touts y 
king  of  the  Franks y  dies. 

During  this  time,  for  seven  successive  months,  we  had  been  sojourn¬ 
ing  with  Manuel,  the  great  emperor  of  Constantinople,  of  illustrious 
memory,  a  stay  which  had  resulted  in  great  advantages  both  to  our¬ 
selves  and  to  the  church.  On  the  fourth  day  after  the  feast  of  Easter, 
after  many  earnest  entreaties,  we  obtained  permission  to  return  to  our 
own  land.^ 

As  we  departed,  the  emperor  commended  to  our  care  his  envoys, 
noble  and  magnificent  men.  Then  we  set  sail  in  four  galleys  most 
generously  furnished  with  his  usual  imperial  munificence.  Our  course 
lay  past  the  islands  of  Tenedos,  Mitylene,  Chios,  Samos,  Delos, 
Claros,  Rhodes,  and  Cyprus,  with  the  provinces  of  Phrygia,  Asia 
Minor,  Lycia,  Lycaonia,  Pamphylia,  Isauria,  and  Cilicia  on  our  left. 
At  last,  on  May  12,  by  the  grace  of  God,  we  arrived  safe  in  health 
and  prosperity  at  the  mouth  of  the  river  Orontes  and  the  Port  of  St. 
Simeon. 

A  matter  which  should  be  of  no  slight  interest  to  the  present 
history  ought  not,  we  believe,  to  be  passed  over  here.  While  we 
were  staying  in  the  imperial  city,  as  already  mentioned,  partly  be¬ 
cause  the  winter  season  was  unfavorable  for  sailing,  but  also  at  the 
express  command  of  the  most  happy  emperor,  that  monarch,  with 
paternal  foresight  and  perchance  with  some  foreboding  of  his  own 
early  departure  from  this  world,  celebrated  the  nuptials  of  a  son  and 
a  daughter.  On  his  son  Alexius,  who  bears  the  name  of  his  paternal 
grandfather,^  he  solemnly  bestowed  Agnes,  the  daughter  of  Louis, 

®  William  thus  obtained  leave  to  depart  April  23,  1180.  His  arrival  at  Constantinople 
may  therefore  be  dated  in  late  September  or  early  October,  1179. 

^  This  Alexius,  named  after  the  emperor  of  the  period  of  the  First  Crusade,  was  the 
son  of  Maria  of  Antioch,  the  second  wife  of  Manuel. 


I 


450  CONFLICT  OF  INTERESTS 

the  illustrious  king  of  the  Franks.  Alexius  was  not  yet  of  age,  in  fact 
hardly  thirteen  years  old,  while  Agnes  was  scarcely  eight  years  old. 
The  imperial  insignia  were  conferred  on  the  two  in  that  part  of  the 
palace  of  Constantine  the  Elder  called  the  Trullus.  It  was  here  that 
the  sixth  holy  general  council  is  said  to  have  met,  in  the  time  of  Con¬ 
stantine,  son  of  Constantine,  son  of  Heraclius. 

The  emperor^s  daughter  was  given  in  marriage  to  a  young  man 
named  Renier,  son  of  William  the  Elder,  marquis  of  Montferrat  and 
brother  of  the  William  to  whom  we  had  given  the  sister  of  our  king. 
The  emperor  had  caused  this  young  man,  then  about  seventeen  years 
old,  to  be  summoned  by  the  Imperial  envoys,  and  he  had  reached  the 
royal  city  about  fifteen  days  before  our  own  arrival  there.  He  re¬ 
mained  for  a  while  in  the  city  and  also  visited  the  army  with  the  lord 
emperor.  On  their  return  thence  about  the  time  of  Epiphany,  in  the 
month  of  February,  the  emperor  called  his  court  together  with  im¬ 
perial  magnificence  in  the  new  palace  called  Blachernae.  There,  by 
the  hand  of  Theodosius,  patriarch  of  Constantinople,  he  celebrated 
the  marriage  of  his  daughter  Maria  and  Renier,  to  whom  he  gave  the 
name  of  his  own  father,  John,  and  the  title  of  Caesar.  Maria  was 
the  daughter  of  the  emperor  by  his  first  wife,  the  Empress  Irene  of 
pious  memory,  who  had  come  as  his  consort  from  the  kingdom  of  the 
Teutons.®  By  his  second  marriage  with  Maria,  his  only  offspring  was 
Alexius,  the  present  emperor  of  Constantinople. 

Because  of  the  Immense  amount  of  material,  any  attempt  to  describe 
in  detail  all  the  wonders  of  those  days  would  be  utterly  futile,  even  If 
a  special  treatise  were  devoted  to  it.  We  may  mention  the  games  of 
the  circus  which  the  inhabitants  of  Constantinople  call  hippodromes, 
and  the  glorious  spectacles  of  varied  nature  shown  to  the  people  with 
great  pomp  during  the  days  of  the  celebration  j  the  imperial  magnifi¬ 
cence  of  the  vestments  and  the  royal  robes  adorned  with  a  profusion 
of  precious  stones  and  pearls  of  great  weight  j  the  vast  amount  of 
massive  gold  and  silver  furniture  in  the  palace,  of  untold  value. 
Words  would  fail  to  speak  in  fitting  terms  of  the  valuable  draperies 
adorning  the  royal  abode  j  to  mention  in  detail  the  numerous  servants 

®  This  was  Bertha  of  Sulzbach,  whose  name  had  been  changed  to  Irene.  She  had 
borne  no  sons,  a  fact  which  led  to  some  estrangement  on  the  part  of  Manuel,  who 
feared  that  the  marriage  lay  under  a  curse.  She  devoted  most  of  her  time  during  her 
last  years  to  pious  works  (see  C.  Diehl,  Figures  byzantineSy  2d  Series,  pp.  170—91). 


CONFLICT  OF  INTERESTS 


451 

and  members  of  the  court,  the  magnificence  of  the  nuptial  splendour, 
and  the  generous  gifts  which  the  emperor  lavished  on  both  his  own 
people  and  on  strangers.  But  to  return  to  the  narrative. 

At  Antioch  we  carried  out  the  commands  of  his  imperial  majesty 
with  the  prince  and  the  lord  patriarch  of  that  land,  and  at  Beirut  we 
found  the  king,  who  was  on  his  way  to  Tyre  by  land.  Continuing  our 
voyage,  we  returned  to  the  church  at  Tyre  by  the  grace  of  God  on 
July  6,  a  year  and  ten  months  from  the  time  of  our  departure  for  the 
synod. 

On  September  18,  in  the  seventh  year  of  King  Baldwin  IV,  Louis, 
most  pious  and  Christian  king  of  the  Franks,  a  prince  of  many  virtues 
and  immortal  memory,  laid  aside  the  burden  of  the  flesh,  and  his 
spirit  fled  to  the  skies  to  enter  upon  its  eternal  reward  with  the  elect 
princes.  He  left  an  only  son  and  heir,  Philip,  by  his  queen  Alix, 
daughter  of  the  elder  Theobald  and  sister  of  Count  Henry  of  Troyes, 
of  Theobald,  count  of  Chartres,  of  Stephen,  count  of  Sancerre,  and 
of  William,  archbishop  of  Rheims.  He  died  in  the  fiftieth  year  of  his 
reign  and  the  sixtieth  of  his  life.® 

On  October  6  of  the  following  month,  Amalrich  of  precious 
memory,  patriarch  of  Jerusalem,  an  extremely  simple  man  of  practi¬ 
cally  no  importance,  died  after  twenty  years  in  that  office.  Within  ten 
days  thereafter,  Heraclius,  archbishop  of  Caesarea,  was  chosen  to  fill 
his  place.*^ 

5.  The  king  gives  his  younger  sister  in  marriage  to  Hum¬ 
phrey  III.  The  emperor  of  Constantinople  dies. 

That  same  month  the  king  betrothed  his  sister,  then  hardly  eight 
years  old,  to  a  young  man  named  Humphrey.®  This  Humphrey  III 

®  Louis  VII  had  become  king  upon  the  death  of  his  father  in  1137  and  had  therefore 
ruled  over  forty  but  not  ^^fifty”  years  when  he  died  in  1180. 

^  This  is  a  singularly  dispassionate  recital  of  a  fact  that  probably  constituted  the 
greatest  disappointment  of  William^s  life.  The  only  evidence  of  feeling  is  the  negative 
one  that  he  fails  to  characterize  his  successful  rival  in  any  way.  Ernoul  describes  this 
election  at  great  length.  According  to  Ernoul,  William  was  the  choice  of  the  clergy, 
but  it  was  customary  for  the  clergy  to  submit  two  names  to  the  king  for  his  final 
choice.  Agnes  exerted  all  of  her  powerful  influence  in  behalf  of  Heraclius,  the  other 
candidate  named,  and  had  her  way  (see  L.  de  Mas  Latrie,  ed.,  Chronique  d^Ernoul 
et  de  Bernard  le  Tresorier^  pp.  82—86). 

®  Isabelle  was  the  daughter  of  Amaury’s  second  marriage,  that  with  the  Greek 
Princess  Maria,  and  was  therefore  a  half  sister  of  Baldwin  IV.  Her  numerous  mar- 


452 


CONFLICT  OF  INTERESTS 

was  the  son  of  Humphrey  II  and  Stephanie,  daughter  of  Philip  of 
Nablus.  The  father  of  Humphrey  II  was  the  elder  Humphrey  of 
Toron,  the  king’s  constable,  to  whom  frequent  reference  has  been 
made.  Philip  of  Nablus,  the  maternal  grandfather  of  Humphrey  III, 
had  been  lord  of  Arabia  Secunda,  which  is  Petra,  now  commonly 
called  Kerak,  and  also  of  Syria  Sobal,  known  now  as  Montreal,  both 
of  which  lie  beyond  the  Jordan.  He  later  embraced  the  religious  life 
and  became  the  master  of  the  Knights  Templars.® 

The  negotiations  in  respect  to  this  alliance  were  undertaken  with 
great  ardor  by  Prince  Renaud,  the  third  husband  of  the  mother  of 
young  Humphrey,  who  had  now  reached  man’s  estate  j  and  on  the 
completion  of  the  same,  the  betrothal  of  Humphrey  and  the  king’s 
sister  was  celebrated  at  Jerusalem. 

On  the  death  of  his  paternal  grandfather,  Humphrey  had  received 
by  hereditary  right  certain  domains  in  the  territory  of  Tyre:  namely, 
Toron,  Chastel  Neuf,  and  the  city  of  Banyas  with  their  appurtenances. 
He  made  an  exchange  of  this  patrimony  with  the  king  under  definite 
conditions,  the  text  of  which,  dictated  by  us  as  pertained  to  our  official 
duty,  was  deposited  in  the  royal  archives.^® 

On  the  third  day  of  the  same  month,  Manuel,  the  illustrious 
emperor  of  Constantinople,  of  immortal  memory,  the  most  munificent 
of  all  the  princes  of  the  land,  laid  aside  the  burden  of  the  flesh  and 
rendered  his  soul  to  heaven.  His  memory  will  ever  be  held  in  bene¬ 
diction  by  all  the  assembly  of  the  saints  because  of  his  alms  and  liberal 
benefactions.  He  is  said  to  have  died  in  the  fortieth  year  of  his  rule 
and,  as  nearly  as  we  have  been  able  to  ascertain,  in  the  sixty-first  of 
his  life.ii 

About  this  same  time  also,  Bohemond,  prince  of  Antioch,  left  his 


riages  formed  the  center  of  politics  of  the  later  kingdom  of  Jerusalem  (see  J.  L.  La 

IV^OntCj  ^ Z  z  o 0^^ z  2  ^  Z y  P*  47 

e(  fassini) . 

®  Philip  of  Nablus,  master  of  the  Templars,  has  been  frequently  mentioned  in  these 
pages.  For  the  genealogy  of  Humphrey  of  Toron,  see  La  Monte,  Feudal  Monarchyy 
p.  3  5  fassim. 

This  document  has  not  been  preserved.  Presumably  it  was  drawn  up  in  September, 
1180,  and  affords  clear  evidence  that  William  was  still  discharging  the  formal  duties 
of  chancellor  even  though  the  court  was  dominated  by  a  group  hostile  to  him. 

The  death  of  Manuel  occurred  September  24,  1 180.  William’s  penchant  for  round 
numbers  has  led  him  to  assign  an  additional  three  years  to  Manuel’s  reign.  This  mis¬ 
take  may  have  resulted  from  his  failure  to  establish  the  year  of  John’s  death,  which 
had  occurred  in  1143  (Book  XV,  chap.  23  j  see  F.  Chalandon,  Les  Comneney  II,  606). 


CONFLICT  OF  INTERESTS 


453 

legitimate  wife,  Theodora,  a  niece  of  the  emperor,  and  in  defiance  of 
the  rules  of  the  church  dared  to  marry  a  certain  Sibyl,  who  had  the 
reputation  of  practicing  evil  arts.^- 

Joscelin,  the  king’s  uncle  and  likewise  his  seneschal,  was  at  this 
time  in  Constantinople,  whither  he  had  been  sent  by  Baldwin  on 
certain  affairs  of  the  realm.  Baldwin  of  Ramlah  was  also  staying  there 
to  implore  the  emperor’s  aid  in  the  matter  of  paying  his  ransom.  Dur¬ 
ing  their  sojourn  in  the  imperial  city,  Manuel,  emperor  of  precious 
memory  now  being  dead,  it  was  discovered  on  March  i  that  certain 
great  and  illustrious  nobles  had  conspired  to  bring  about  a  revolution 
against  Emperor  Alexius,  the  son  of  Manuel  who  was,  by  the  wish 
of  his  father,  still  under  the  guardianship  of  his  mother.  These  men 
were  arrested  on  the  charge  of  treason  and  were  by  the  emperor’s 
orders  bound  and  thrown  into  prison,  although  some  of  the  guilty  ones 
were  his  blood  relations. 

Among  the  leaders  of  this  conspiracy  were  Manuel,  son  of  the  elder 
Andronicus,  who  was  mentioned  above  j  Alexius,  the  frotosebastosy 
son  of  Theodora  Calusina,  the  emperor’s  niece  j  the  brother  of  the 
logothetey  who  held  the  office  of  cmacUnusi  and  some  twelve  other 
distinguished  men  of  high  rank.  The  emperor’s  sister,  the  Lady 
Maria,  was  also  an  accessory  to  the  plot.  During  the  night  she  ffed 
with  her  husband,  the  son  of  the  marquis  mentioned  above, to  the 
church  of  Santa  Sophia,  where,  in  suspense  as  to  her  fate,  she  cast  her¬ 
self  on  the  protection  of  the  church.  From  that  refuge,  whither 
weapons  and  armed  men  had  been  assembled,  she  and  her  husband, 
with  her  partisans  and  those  implicated  in  the  same  plot,  attempted 
to  take  measures  against  her  brother,  the  emperor.  Even  the  patriarch 
of  the  city  favored  her.  The  party  of  the  emperor,  however,  which 
relied  especially  on  the  aid  of  the  Latins,  kept  increasing  in  strength, 
and  finally,  with  shattered  forces  and  in  despair  of  life  itself,  she 
humbly  begged  for  mercy  through  mediators.  The  emperor  granted 
her  request  and  restored  her  to  favor.^^ 

The  belief  in  magic,  sorcery,  and  soothsaying  was  widespread  in  the  East  as  well 
as  in  the  West.  Emperor  Manuel  was  required  on  his  deathbed  to  sign  a  formal  docu¬ 
ment  to  dismiss  his  astrologers  and  disavow  the  practice  as  contrary  to  the  teachings 
of  the  church  (see  Chalandon,  Les  Comnene^  II,  606). 

Chapter  4.  The  logothete  and  canaclinus  were  somewhat  lesser  officials  in  the 
imperial  administration.  Their  duties  w^ere  chiefly  secretarial,  with  some  concern  for 
imperial  expenditures  as  well. 

This  abortive  revolution  was  but  the  S3’^mptom  of  the  more  serious  troubles  which 
were  soon  to  appear  (see  chaps.  10—13). 


454 


CONFLICT  OF  INTERESTS 


6.  Excommunication  is  'pronounced  against  the  prince  of 
Antioch  because  of  the  mistress  whom  he  had  taken  although 
his  wife  was  still  living. 


At  this  time  the  situation  of  the  Latin  people  in  the  Orient,  espe¬ 
cially  in  the  principality  of  Antioch,  was  greatly  disturbed  because 
Bohemond,  the  prince  of  Antioch,  had  put  away  his  legitimate  wife 
and  taken  his  mistress  as  a  second  wife.  More  than  once  he  had  been 
warned  to  leave  the  wicked  state  of  adultery  in  which  he  was  so 
openly  living  and  to  take  back  his  legitimate  wife.  But,  ^Vhen  the 
wicked  cometh,  then  cometh  also  contempt,”  so  the  prince  turned  a 
deaf  ear  to  those  ^^charming  never  so  wisely”  and  refused  to  listen. 
Consequently,  as  he  obstinately  persevered  in  his  sin,  he  drew  upon 
himself  the  just  sentence  of  excommunication.  To  this,  however,  he 
paid  but  slight  attention.  On  the  contrary,  he  continued  on  his  wicked 
course  with  redoubled  energy.  He  treated  the  patriarch,  the  bishops, 
and  other  prelates  of  the  church  in  that  land  as  enemies  and  laid 
violent  hands  upon  them.  He  violated  the  precincts  of  sacred  places, 
both  churches  and  monasteries,  carried  off  their  sacred  objects,  and, 
in  a  wicked  spirit  of  presumptuous  daring,  disturbed  their  possessions. 
It  is  said  that  he  actually  besieged  the  patriarch  together  with  the 
clergy  who  had  fled  to  him  for  refuge  in  a  fortress  belonging  to  the 
church.  This  place  was  well  equipped  with  arms  and  soldiers  and  pro¬ 
visioned  with  food,  and  he  is  reported  to  have  made  frequent  assaults 
upon  it  as  if  it  were  a  possession  of  the  enemy. 

At  this,  certain  great  men  of  this  land  found  themselves  unable  to 
endure  his  mad  conduct  longer.  Aware  that  their  duty  was  to  God 
rather  than  to  man,  they  withdrew  from  him  both  in  body  and  in 
spirit,  in  utter  abhorrence  of  his  wicked  deeds.  Among  these  was  a 
powerful  nobleman,  Renaud  Masoier,  He  retired  to  one  of  his  own 
fortresses,  a  strong  and  impregnable  place,  and  invited  those  who  had 
the  good  of  the  cause  at  heart  and  the  fear  of  the  Lord  before  their 
eyes  to  join  him  there.  To  these  nobles  who  had  been  driven  from 
their  own  domains  and  to  others  of  any  condition  who  had  fled  for 
the  same  reason,  he  offered  a  safe  asylum  there. 

As  the  result  of  Bohemond^s  conduct,  the  entire  land  faced  an  ex¬ 
tremely  difficult  situation.  Wise  men  of  long  experience  saw  that 
unless  divine  mercy  speedily  came  to  our  aid,  a  way  would  unquestion- 


Pr.  18:3 


Ps.  57: 


CONFLICT  OF  INTERESTS 


455 


ably  be  opened  by  which  the  enemy  would  accomplish  our  ruin  and 
the  cause  of  Christianity  be  injured  forever.  The  whole  province 
would  again  fall  into  the  power  of  the  Turks,  from  whom,  with  God’s 
help,  it  had  been  rescued  through  the  work  of  faithful  leaders  and  at 
the  expense  of  untold  hardships  endured  by  the  people  of  Christ. 
For  unchanging  is  the  word  of  truth  and  worthy  of  all  acceptance  that 
^^every  kingdom  divided  against  itself  is  brought  to  desolation  j  and 
every  city  or  house  divided  against  itself  shall  not  stand.” 

With  their  usual  sense  of  responsibility,  the  king  of  Jerusalem  and 
the  lord  patriarch  met  with  the  other  prelates  of  the  church  and  the 
lay  princes  to  confer  earnestly  as  to  what  course  should  be  pursued  in 
such  a  critical  emergency.  Although  the  reprehensible  conduct  of  the 
rash  and  dissolute  prince  seemed  to  call  for  strong  measures,  yet  they 
hesitated  to  use  force,  lest,  in  his  efforts  to  resist,  he  might  call  the 
enemy’s  forces  to  his  assistance.  Such  an  action  would  open  to  the 
Turks  the  country  from  which  thereafter  the  most  earnest  efforts 
would  not  avail  to  eject  them.  It  was  plain  also  that  the  present  was 
no  time  for  entreaties  and  wholesome  admonition  3  hence  they  did  not 
venture  to  send  wise  men  gifted  in  the  art  of  persuasion  to  one  who 
was  rushing  madly  along  evil  courses,  wholly  engrossed  in  evil  doings 
for  that  would  be  like  “telling  a  tale  to  a  deaf  ass”  and  “throwing 
words  to  the  wind.” 

They  determined  to  endure  this  evil,  therefore,  lest  they  should 
fall  upon  worse  things.  Meanwhile  they  continued  to  look  for  aid 
from  Him  who  is  wont  to  rescue  even  those  cast  down  in  the  depths 
of  the  sea,  the  Lord  who  “giveth  snow  like  wool,”  who  “scattereth 
the  hoarfrost  like  ashes.”  Their  hope  was  that  the  prince,  warned 
by  a  divine  visitation,  might  be  restored  to  his  right  mind  and,  clothed 
from  on  high  with  all  the  virtues  of  the  greatest  leaders,  might  be 
led  to  strive  for  the  fruit  of  a  better  life. 

7.  The  fatrlarch  of  Jerusalem  is  sent  to  Antioch  to  try  to  find 
a  remedy  for  these  dangerous  conditions »  Pofe  Alexander 
dies. 

It  soon  became  evident  to  all  that  the  evil  was  on  the  increase  and 
that  there  was  no  hope  of  any  immediate  remedy.  Not  only  was  the 
prince  himself  held  in  the  bonds  of  anathema,  but,  as  a  result  of  the 

Mat.  12:25.  Horace  £■/>.  II.  i.  199. 

Ovid  Am.  i,  vi.  42,  and  Her.  ii.  25.  Ps.  147:  16. 


456  CONFLICT  OF  INTERESTS 

plundering  and  burning  of  the  possessions  of  the  venerable  places, 
the  entire  land  had  been  placed  under  an  interdict.  Except  for  the 
baptism  of  children,  none  of  the  sacraments  of  the  church  were  now 
administered  to  the  people,  and  the  Christians  realized  with  alarm 
that  present  conditions  could  not  continue  long  without  peril  to  all. 

By  common  consent,  therefore,  it  was  decided  that  the  lord  pa¬ 
triarch  should  go  to  Antioch  and  endeavor,  if  possible,  by  the  grace 
of  God,  to  find  some  remedy,  either  temporary  or  permanent,  which 
might  relieve  these  great  evils.  Renaud  de  Chatillon,  formerly  prince 
of  Antioch  and  the  stepfather  of  the  younger  Bohemond,  Brother 
Arnold  of  Toroge,  master  of  the  knights  of  the  Temple,  and  Brother 
Roger  des  Moulins,  master  of  the  house  of  the  Hospital,  accompanied 
the  patriarch.  This  step  was  taken  because  it  was  feared  that  if  we 
gave  no  sign  of  compassion  for  the  wretched  plight  of  our  neighbors 
and  did  not  seek  to  remedy  the  situation,  the  pope  and  the  princes 
across  seas  might  accuse  us  of  negligence  or  even  of  evil  intent. 

The  patriarch  was  attended  also  by  some  of  the  prelates  of  the 
church,  wise  and  discreet  men,  among  whom  were  Monachus,  arch¬ 
bishop-elect  of  Caesarea j  Albert,  bishop  of  Bethlehem;  Raynald, 
abbot  of  Mt.  Sion ;  and  Peter,  prior  of  the  church  of  the  Holy  Sepul¬ 
chre.  With  the  other  companions  of  his  journey,  he  set  out  for 
Antioch,  taking  with  him  also  the  count  of  Tripoli,  an  intimate  and 
dearly  beloved  friend  of  the  prince,  whose  words,  it  was  hoped,  when 
added  to  our  own  might  bring  about  the  achievement  of  their  purpose. 

On  arriving  at  Laodicea,  the  envoys  conferred  with  the  patriarch 
and  the  prince  individually  and  set  a  day  when  both  should  come  to 
Antioch.  Here,  after  the  matter  had  been  thoroughly  discussed  from 
every  viewpoint,  a  temporary  truce  was  concluded  under  the  follow¬ 
ing  terms.  It  was  agreed  that  when  all  the  lost  property  should  be 
restored  to  the  patriarch,  the  bishops,  and  the  holy  places,  the  inter¬ 
dict  should  then  cease  and  the  privilege  of  the  sacraments  of  the 
church  be  restored  to  the  people.  As  to  the  prince  himself,  he  in  his 
own  person  must  patiently  suffer  the  sentence  laid  upon  him  by  the 
bishops,  or,  if  he  should  seek  complete  absolution,  he  must  dismiss  his 
concubine  and  take  back  his  legitimate  wife. 

When  this  arrangement  had  been  made,  the  legates  returned  to 
their  own  land,  in  the  belief  that  they  had  quieted  to  some  extent  at 
least  the  fires  of  lawlessness  raging  in  the  principality  of  Antioch. 

The  prince,  however,  obstinately  persisted  in  his  shameless  course 


CONFLICT  OF  INTERESTS  457 

i 

and,  in  addition,  entered  upon  a  policy  which  was  attended  with  great 
danger  to  the  realm.  He  drove  out  of  the  city — and,  in  fact,  from  his 
entire  domains — the  best  of  his  faithful  nobles,  men  of  great  eminence, 
apparently  for  the  sole  reason  that  they  were  said  to  disapprove  of 
his  conduct.  Among  those  whom  he  exiled  were  his  constable  and 
chamberlain,  Giscard  de  Lille  [Guichard  de  Lisle],  Bertrand,  son  of 
Count  Gislebert,^^  and  Garinus  Gainart.  These  nobles,  since  they  were 
forced  to  leave  Antioch,  repaired  to  Rupinus  [Rupen] ,  a  noble  chief 
of  the  Armenians. He  received  them  all  most  honorably,  gave  to 
each  splendid  gifts,  and  made  ample  provision  for  their  support. 

On  August  27  of  that  same  year,  in  the  twenty-third  year  of  his 
pontificate.  Pope  Alexander  III  died  and  was  buried  in  the  church 
of  the  Lateran.  He  was  succeeded  by  Lucius  III,  formerly  Hubald, 
bishop  of  Ostia.  The  new  pope,  an  aged  man  of  little  learning,  was  a 
native  of  Tuscany  from  the  vicinity  of  Lucca. 

About  the  same  time,  also,  on  the  Ides  of  September,  our  venerable 
brother  in  Christ,  Raymond,  bishop  of  the  church  at  Beirut,  of  blessed 
memory  in  the  Lord,  departed  from  this  life  to  enjoy,  through  the 
grace  of  God,  the  reward  of  eternal  life.  Later  an  honorable  and  well- 
lettered  man.  Master  Odo,  archdeacon  of  our  church,  was  chosen  in 
his  place,  and  upon  him,  during  the  feast  days  of  December,  by  the 
will  of  God,  we  conferred  the  rank  of  priesthood  and  the  pontifical 
oifice. 

8.  The  son  oj  Nureddin  dies.  His  inheritance  is  left  to  Thebeth, 
his  kinsman. 

About  this  time  occurred  the  death  of  Melechsalah  [Malik  Salah], 
the  son  of  Nureddin,  a  youth  still  in  early  manhood.  Of  all  the  patri¬ 
mony  received  from  his  father  there  remained  to  him  only  Aleppo 
and  a  few  strongholds.  In  his  last  will,  made  as  he  was  dying,  he  is 
said  to  have  bequeathed  Aleppo  and  his  entire  patrimony  to  a  certain 
Thebeth,  lord  of  Mosul,  who  was  the  son  of  his  father’s  brother 
Hezedin.  After  Malik  Salah’s  death,  his  nobles  sent  messengers  to 
Thebeth,  who  was  a  great  and  distinguished  Turkish  satrap,  and  bade 
him  not  to  delay  coming  to  them  as  speedily  as  possible. 

Their  expulsion  afforded  an  interesting  test  of  feudal  strength. 

Rupen  III,  1175—1185.  Alexander  III  died  August  30,  1181. 

There  is  some  confusion  in  this  statement  of  relationships.  Hezedin  probably  repre¬ 
sents  Izz  al-Din,  who  was  the  son  of  Qutb  al-Din,  Nureddin’s  brother.  Perhaps  The- 


458  CONFLICT  OF  INTERESTS 

As  soon  as  he  received  the  message,  Thebeth  hastened  thither  and 
took  possession  of  his  ancestral  property  and  of  all  that  was  his  by 
hereditary  right.  For  he  feared  that  Saladin,  who  had  already  de¬ 
spoiled  his  cousin  of  most  of  his  possessions,  might  come  again  from 
Egypt  and,  despite  the  will  of  the  inhabitants,  seize  this  city  by  force, 
especially  since  some  of  the  more  important  nobles  secretly  favored 
him. 

Saladin,  however,  after  concluding  with  us  a  temporary  peace  for 
the  period  of  two  years,  had  returned  to  Egypt  to  attend  to  his  own 
affairs  in  that  kingdom.  He  had  heard  with  much  uneasiness  that  the 
fleet  of  the  king  of  Sicily  with  a  mighty  equipment  and  innumerable 
forces,  had  put  to  sea  with  the  intention  of  proceeding  against  Egypt. 
His  fear  in  this  respect,  however,  was  needless,  for  the  course  of  the 
fleet  was  directed  westward  to  the  Balearic  Isles.  These  islands,  one 
of  which  is  commonly  called  Majorca  and  the  other  Minorca,  lie  near 
Hither  Spain.  The  voyage  thither  proved  disastrous.  Driven  by  un¬ 
favorable  winds,  practically  the  entire  fleet  was  wrecked  in  the  vicinity 
of  the  coast  cities  Saone  [Savona],  Albenga,  and  Ventimiglia,  where 
the  tumultuous  waves  dashed  the  ships  upon  the  shore. 

At  this  time,  while  the  kingdom  was  enjoying  a  temporary  state  of 
peace,  as  has  been  related,  a  race  of  Syrians  in  the  province  of  Phoe¬ 
nicia,  near  the  Lebanon  range,  who  occupied  territory  near  the  city  of 
Jubail,  underwent  a  wonderful  change  of  heart.  For  almost  fifty 
years  these  people  had  followed  the  heretical  doctrines  of  a  certain 
Maro,  from  whom  they  took  the  name  of  Maronites.  They  had  sepa¬ 
rated  from  the  church  of  the  faithful  and  had  adopted  a  special  liturgy 
of  their  own.  Now,  however,  by  divine  leading,  they  were  restored 
to  their  right  minds  and  abandoned  their  heresy.  They  repaired  to 
Aimery,  the  patriarch  of  Antioch,  the  third  of  the  Latin  patriarchs  to 
preside  over  that  church,  renounced  the  error  by  which  they  had  been 
so  long  enslaved,  and  returned  to  the  unity  of  the  catholic  church. 
They  adopted  the  orthodox  faith  and  prepared  to  embrace  and  ob¬ 
serve  with  all  reverence  the  traditions  of  the  Roman  church. 

These  people  were  by  no  means  few  in  numbers  j  in  fact,  they  were 

beth  is  intended  for  Qutb  al-Din,  in  which  case  William  has  revei'sed  the  relationship 
of  father  and  son.  It  was  Izz-al-Din  who  did  take  Aleppo  as  his  inheritance  at  this 
time  and  shortly  afterward  exchanged  it  with  his  brother  Imad  al-Din  (see  Beha 

cd-Din,  The  Life  of  Saladin^  pp.  80—81).  W^illiam  doubtless  received  this  information 
from  oral  report. 


CONFLICT  OF  INTERESTS 


459 

generally  estimated  at  more  than  forty  thousand.  They  lived,  as  has 
been  said,  in  the  bishoprics  of  Jubail,  Botron,  and  Tripoli,  on  the 
slopes  of  the  Lebanon  mountains.  They  were  a  stalwart  race,  valiant 
fighters,  and  of  great  service  to  the  Christians  in  the  difficult  engage¬ 
ments  which  they  so  frequently  had  with  the  enemy.  Their  conversion 
to  the  true  faith  was,  therefore,  a  source  of  great  joy  to  us. 

The  heresy  of  Maro  and  his  followers  is  and  was  that  in  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  there  exists,  and  did  exist  from  the  beginning,  one  will 
and  one  energy  only,  as  may  be  learned  from  the  sixth  council,  which, 
as  is  well  known,  was  assembled  against  them  and  in  which  they 
suffered  sentence  of  condemnation.  To  this  article,  condemned  by  the 
orthodox  church,  they  added  many  other  pernicious  doctrines  after 
they  separated  from  the  number  of  the  faithful.  Now,  however,  as 
has  been  stated,  they  repented  of  all  these  heresies  and  returned  to 
the  catholic  church,  under  the  leadership  of  their  patriarch  and  several 
of  their  bishops.  These  leaders  who  had  hitherto  led  their  people  in 
the  ways  of  iniquity,  now  displayed  equal  zeal  in  piously  guiding 
them  as  they  returned  to  the  truth. 

9.  A  dangerous  hostility  which  soon  develops  Into  ofen  enmity 
sf rings  uf  between  the  count  of  Trlfoll  and  the  king. 

At  this  time,  thanks  to  the  temporary  peace  which  had  been  con¬ 
cluded  between  the  king  and  Saladin,  the  kingdom  was  enjoying  a 
certain  degree  of  tranquillity,  as  has  already  been  said.  Nevertheless, 
there  were  not  lacking  restless  spirits,  sons  of  Belial  and  foster  sons 
of  iniquity,  who  were  ever  on  the  alert  to  create  discord  in  the  king¬ 
dom  and  to  bring  about  civil  troubles. 

For  two  successive  years  a  multiplicity  of  affairs  had  detained  the 
count  of  Tripoli  in  his  own  county  of  Tripoli,  and  for  that  reason,  he 
had  been  prevented  from  visiting  the  kingdom.^®  Now,  however,  the 
responsibility  which  he  felt  for  the  city  of  Tiberias,  his  wife’s  patri¬ 
mony,  led  him  to  go  thither,  and  he  made  all  his  preparations  for  the 
journey.  He  had  proceeded  as  far  as  Jubail  when  the  aforesaid  wicked 
men,  by  their  malicious  insinuations,  induced  the  too  credulous  king 
to  believe  that  the  count  was  coming  to  the  kingdom  with  the  wicked 

This  union  of  Maronites  with  Latins  has  continued  down  to  the  present  day.  See 
article  by  M.  Spinka,  ‘TfFect  of  Crusades  upon  Eastern  Christianity,”  Environmental 
Factors  in  Christian  History, 

His  last  visit  had  been  at  Easter  time,  1180  (see  chap.  1), 


46o  conflict  of  INTERESTS 

k 

s 

design  of  secretly  working  to  supplant  him.  He  readily  lent  an  ear  to 
their  seductive  words  and  at  once  sent  a  peremptory  message  refusing 
the  count  permission  to  enter  the  realm. 

At  this  injury,  so  little  deserved,  the  count,  confused  and  justly 
indignant,  very  unwillingly  refrained  from  advancing  farther  and 
returned  to  Tripoli  after  a  useless  expenditure  of  effort  and  money. 

It  was  the  intention  of  these  troublemakers,  unrestrained  by  the 
presence  of  the  count,  an  indefatigable  and  thoroughly  upright  man, 
to  handle  the  affairs  of  the  kingdom  themselves  just  as  they  wished 
and  to  turn  the  infirmity  of  the  king  to  their  own  advantage.  Among 
those  who  shamelessly  influenced  the  king  to  this  course  of  action 
were  his  mother,  a  most  grasping  woman,  utterly  detestable  to  God; 
her  brother,  the  king^s  seneschal;  and  a  few  wicked  men,  their 
partisans.-*^ 

When  the  principal  barons,  men  of  much  experience  and  foresight, 
learned  of  this  action,  they  were  greatly  alarmed,  for  they  feared  that, 
deprived  of  the  protection  of  the  illustrious  count,  the  kingdom  would 
speedily  fall  from  its  high  estate  and,  according  to  the  word  of  the 
Lord,  being  ^^divided  against  itself  shall  not  stand.”  This  was  more 
especially  the  case  because  the  king,  whose  illness  was  daily  increasing, 
was  becoming  more  and  more  incapacitated  and  less  and  less  fit  to 
attend  to  the  business  of  the  realm;  in  fact,  he  was  scarcely  able  to 
hold  himself  up  and  was  almost  totally  paralyzed. 

The  more  important  barons,  seeing  the  danger  which  would 
certainly  result  to  the  realm  as  the  consequence  of  the  above  act,  bent 
all  their  efforts  toward  recalling  the  count  and  softening  his  anger. 
Finally,  after  much  negotiation  and  various  proposals,  the  king,  in 
spite  of  his  unwillingness,  was  forced  to  permit  them  to  bring  the 
count  back  into  the  kingdom.  The  illustrious  man  wisely  overlooked 
the  insults  that  had  been  offered  him,  and  peace  between  the  king  and 
himself  was  fully  reestablished.-^ 

27  Th  is  is  William^s  first  direct  outburst  against  this  pair,  who  were  probably  also 
responsible  for  his  own  loss  of  the  patriarchate.  Such  expression  of  unrestrained  emotion 
is  unusual  in  our  author  and  implies  that  he  wrote  it  either  in  1182,  when  he  was  still 
in  the  first  flush  of  indignation  about  the  matter,  or  in  1184  after  the  death  of  Agnes, 
which  La  Monte  dates  late  in  1183  or  early  in  1184  (see  J,  L.  La  Monte,  ^‘The  Rise 
and  Decline  of  a  Frankish  Seigneury  in  Syria  in  the  Time  of  the  Crusades,”  Revue  his- 
torique  du  Sud-Est  eurofeen^  XV  [1938],  313). 

2®  Mat,  1 2 :  25. 

2®  Perhaps  this  reconciliation  was  accomplished  as  early  as  April  27,  1182.  There  is 
extant  at  Jerusalem  an  intensely  interesting  document  of  that  date  in  which  Baldwin  IV 


CONFLICT  OF  INTERESTS 


461 


10.  An  ufrising  occurs  at  C onstantino'ple  in  which  the  wicked 
Andronicus  frevails.  As  a  result  the  Latin  race  is  greatly 
disturbed. 

While  these  events  were  taking  place  in  our  part  of  the  Orient, 
an  important  change  occurred  in  the  empire  of  Constantinople.  This 
resulted  most  unfortunately  for  the  entire  Latin  race  and  brought 
upon  them  unheard  of  affronts  and  enormous  loss.  For  the  evils  long 
since  conceived  by  false  and  perfidious  Greece  travailed  and  ^^brought 
forth  falsehood.”  For  on  the  death  of  Manuel,  that  most  happy 
emperor  of  illustrious  memory,  his  son  Alexius,  a  boy  scarcely  thirteen 
years  old,  succeeded  to  the  throne,  both  by  his  father’s  will  and  by 
hereditary  right.  He  was  under  his  mother’s  guardianship,  however, 
and  the  affairs  of  the  empire  were  administered  by  Alexius,  the  fro^ 
tosebastosy  son  of  the  elder  brother  of  the  dead  emperor.  The  principal 
nobles  and  the  people  of  that  city  accordingly  felt  that  an  opportunity 
had  come  to  carry  into  effect  the  evil  designs  which  they  had  formed 
against  our  people. 

During  the  reign  of  Manuel,  beloved  of  God,  the  Latins  had  found 
great  favor  with  him — a  reward  well  deserved  because  of  their  loyalty 
and  valor.  The  emperor,  a  great-souled  man  of  incomparable  energy, 
relied  so  implicitly  on  their  fidelity  and  ability  that  he  passed  over 
the  Greeks  as  soft  and  effeminate  and  intrusted  important  affairs  to  the 
Latins  alone.  Since  he  held  them  in  such  high  esteem  and  showed 
toward  them  such  lavish  generosity,  men  of  the  Latin  race  from  all 
over  the  world,  nobles  and  men  of  lesser  degree  as  well,  regarded  him 
as  their  great  benefactor  and  eagerly  flocked  to  his  court.  As  the  result 
of  this  eager  deference,  his  affection  toward  the  Latins  increased  more 
and  more,  and  he  was  constantly  improving  their  status. 

The  Greek  nobles,  especially  the  near  kindred  of  the  emperor,  and 
the  rest  of  the  people  as  well,  naturally  conceived  an  insatiable  hatred 
toward  us,  and  this  was  increased  by  the  difference  between  our  sacra- 


makes  a  grant  of  certain  tithes  at  Toron  to  William,  archbishop  of  Tyre.  The  docu¬ 
ment  is  witnessed  by  Raymond  of  Tripoli  as  well  as  by  other  great  nobles  and  is 
sealed  by  William  himself  as  chancellor.  The  transaction,  a  generous  favor  to  Wil¬ 
liam,  may  imply  not  only  that  cordiality  was  reestablished  between  Raymond  and  the 
king,  but  also  that  William  was  an  important  factor  in  that  happy  solution  (R. 
Rohricht,  Regesta  regnl  Hierosolymitaniy  no.  615). 

Ps.  7:14. 


462  CONFLICT  OF  INTERESTS 

merits  and  those  of  their  church,  which  furnished  an  additional 
incentive  to  their  jealousy.  For  they,  having  separated  insolently  from 
the  church  of  Rome,  in  their  boundless  arrogance  looked  upon  every¬ 
one  who  did  not  follow  their  foolish  traditions  as  a  heretic.  It  was 
they  themselves,  on  the  contrary,  who  deserved  the  name  of  heretics, 
because  they  had  either  created  or  followed  new  and  pernicious  beliefs 
contrary  to  the  Roman  church  and  the  faith  of  the  apostles  Peter  and 
Paul  against  which  ^^the  gates  of  hell  shall  not  prevail.^^ 

For  these  and  other  reasons  they  had  for  a  long  time  cherished  this 
hatred  in  their  hearts  and  were  ever  seeking  an  opportunity,  at  least 
after  the  death  of  the  emperor,  to  destroy  utterly  the  hated  race  of 
the  Latins,  both  in  the  city  and  throughout  the  entire  empire,  that  in 
this  way  they  might  satisfy  their  inexorable  animosity.^^ 


II.  The  causes  0]  the  ufrtslng  and  dissension  are  given. 

When  the  Emperor  Manuel  was  removed  from  the  affairs  of  this 
world  and  while  Alexius,  the  frotosebastosy  had  the  administration 
of  the  realm,  there  seemed  to  be  no  favorable  opportunity  to  carry  out 
these  evil  designs.  Alexius  himself  followed  the  example  of  the 
emperor,  availed  himself  of  the  advice  and  assistance  of  the  Latins, 
and  as  far  as  possible  made  them  his  friends.  In  one  respect,  however, 
he  was  hated  by  Latins  and  Greeks  alike.  Although,  like  all  Greeks, 
he  was  extremely  effeminate  and  completely  given  over  to  the  lustful 
sins  of  the  flesh,  yet  he  was  avaricious  and  sparing  of  the  imperial 
treasure,  as  if  he  had  earned  it  himself  by  the  sweat  of  his  brow.  It 
was  rumored  also  that  he  carried  on  a  criminal  liaison  with  the  em¬ 
press,  although  while  her  husband  was  lying  on  his  deathbed  she  had 
professed  the  religious  life.^^ 

His  attitude,  moreover,  was  one  of  extreme  haughtiness  3  he  re¬ 
garded  no  one  as  superior  to  himself  but  managed  everything  accord¬ 
ing  to  his  own  wishes  without  consulting  the  other  lords.  He  seemed 

Mat.  16:  18. 

This  analysis  of  the  feelings  of  the  Greeks  is  the  result  of  William’s  expert  knowl¬ 
edge  of  the  conditions.  His  recognition  of  the  importance  of  the  religious  differences 
as  a  factor  in  the  revolution  is  of  special  interest.  This  is  confirmed  from  Greek  sources 
(see  A.  Vasiliev,  History  of  the  Byzantine  Emfirey  II,  77). 

This  charge  of  illicit  relations  with  the  empress,  who  was  now  nominally  regent, 

was  generally  accepted  by  the  Greek  historians  (see  Diehl,  Figures  hyzantineSy  zd 
Series,  p.  195). 


CONFLICT  OF  INTERESTS 


463 

to  care  nothing  for  the  rest,  although  they  were  magnificent  men  of 
rank  quite  equal  to  his  own.  Hence,  moved  by  extreme  hatred  against 
Alexius  for  the  reasons  just  given,  the  princes  of  the  palace  took  active 
measures  against  him.  They  summoned  Andronicus  the  Elder,  a 
cousin  of  the  late  emperor,  from  Pontus,  where  he  was  ruling,  that 
he  might  assist  them  In  their  wicked  plot  to  drive  Alexius,  the  fro- 
tosehastosy  from  the  control  of  affairs  in  the  realm. 

This  Andronicus,  a  cousin  of  the  late  emperor,  was  a  false  and 
wicked  man,  ever  disloyal  to  the  empire  and  ever  active  in  sowing  the 
seeds  of  conspiracies.  In  the  time  of  the  emperor  he  had  suffered 
chains  and  imprisonment  because  of  his  many  crimes.  Ignomlniously 
treated,  as  his  merits  richly  deserved,  he  became  an  exile  and  a  fugi¬ 
tive  and  wandered  over  the  entire  East.  Yet  even  In  his  exile  he  had 
been  guilty  of  many  disgraceful  acts,  worthy  of  universal  condem¬ 
nation.  Quite  recently,  however,  about  three  months  before  Manuel’s 
death,  the  emperor  had  restored  him  to  favor  once  more.  In  order 
to  prevent  him  from  stirring  up  trouble  in  the  city,  according  to  his 
custom,  and  fomenting  revolutions  in  the  hope  of  gaining  the  king¬ 
dom,  he  was  sent  to  Pontus  under  pretext  of  the  office  of  governor.^^ 

This  then  was  the  man  whom  the  near  kindred  of  the  emperor 
and  of  the  frotosebastos  as  well,  those  in  whom  he  had  especial  con¬ 
fidence,  had  secretly  summoned.  Through  their  envoys  they  invited 
him  to  arm  against  the  man  who  had  shamefully  thrown  his  sons  and 
other  illustrious  men  into  chains.  For,  as  has  been  said,  the  froto¬ 
sebastos  had  Imprisoned  certain  distinguished  men  who  had  been 
caught  in  a  conspiracy  and  thereby  had  roused  still  more  enmity 
against  himself. 

Thus  summoned,  Andronicus  came  to  the  city  bringing  with  him 
large  forces  of  barbarian  troops.  He  encamped  along  the  Hellespont 
in  full  sight  of  the  city  and  took  possession  of  all  Bithynia.  Certain 
powerful  nobles  who  had  been  sent  against  him  to  resist  his  attempts 
traitorously  deserted  to  his  side.  First  and  most  important  among 
these  were  Andronicus  Angelus,  commander  of  the  troops  which  had 
been  dispatched  against  him,  and  Alexius  Megalducas,  commander 
in  chief  of  the  fleet,  both  kinsmen  of  the  emperor.  The  desertion  of 
those  who  had  gone  over  to  Andronicus  thus  openly  weakened  the 
cause  of  our  people  greatly  as  did  also  the  fact  that  many  other  no- 

See  Book  XX,  note  4. 


464  CONFLICT  OF  INTERESTS 

table  men  and  a  great  many  citizens  as  well  showed  their  partisanship 
for  Andronicus  no  longer  secretly  but  in  public.  They  longed  to  see 
him  enter  the  city  and  in  every  possible  way  helped  to  hasten  the 
time  of  his  crossing. 

12.  Andronicus  kills  the  nobles  and  seizes  the  falace  and  the  city. 

He  offresses  the  feofle  by  the  violence  of  his  rule. 

The  conspiracy  continued  to  gain  strength  5  the  frotosebastos  was 
seized,  blinded,  and  horribly  mutilated.  This  change  of  affairs  spread 
consternation  among  the  Latins,  for  they  feared  that  the  citizens 
would  make  a  sudden  attack  upon  them;  in  fact  they^had  already 
received  warning  of  such  intention  from  certain  people  who  had 
private  knowledge  of  the  conspiracy.  Those  who  were  able  to  do  so, 
therefore,  fled  from  the  wiles  of  the  Greeks  and  the  death  which 
threatened  them.  Some  embarked  on  forty-four  galleys  which  chanced 
to  be  in  the  harbor,  and  others  placed  all  their  effects  on  some  of  the 
many  other  ships  there. 

The  aged  and  infirm,  however,  with  those  who  were  unable  to  flee, 
were  left  in  their  homes,  and  on  them  fell  the  wicked  rage  which  the 
others  had  escaped.  For  Andronicus,  who  had  secretly  caused  ships 
to  be  prepared,  led  his  entire  force  into  the  city.  As  soon  as  they 
entered  the  gates  these  troops,  aided  by  the  citizens,  rushed  to  that 
quarter  of  the  city  occupied  by  the  Latins  and  put  to  the  sword  the 
little  remnant  who  had  been  either  unwilling  or  unable  to  flee  with 
the  others.  Although  but  few  of  these  were  able  to  fight,  yet  they 
resisted  for  a  long  time  and  made  the  enemy’s  victory  a  bloody  one. 

Regardless  of  treaties  and  the  many  services  which  our  people  had 
rendered  to  the  empire,  the  Greeks  seized  all  those  who  appeared 
capable  of  resistance,  set  fire  to  their  houses,  and  speedily  reduced  the 
entire  quarter  to  ashes.  Women  and  children,  the  aged  and  the  sick, 
all  alike  perished  in  the  flames.  To  vent  their  rage  upon  secular  build¬ 
ings  alone,  however,  was  far  from  satisfying  their  unholy  wickedness; 
they  also  set  fire  to  churches  and  venerated  places  of  every  description 
and  burned,  together  with  the  sacred  edifices,  those  who  had  fled 
thither  for  refuge.  No  distinction  was  made  between  clergy  and  lay¬ 
men,  except  that  greater  fury  was  displayed  toward  those  who  wore 
the  honorable  habits  of  high  office  or  religion.  Monks  and  priests  were 


CONFLICT  OF  INTERESTS  465 

the  especial  victims  of  their  madness  and  wefe  put  to  death  under 
excruciating  torture. 

Among  these  latter  was  a  venerable  man  named  John,  a  subdeacon 
of  the  holy  Roman  church,  whom  the  pope  had  sent  to  Constantinople 
on  business  relating  to  the  church.  They  seized  him  and,  cutting  off 
his  head,  fastened  it  to  the  tail  of  a  filthy  dog  as  an  insult  to  the 
church.  In  the  midst  of  such  frightful  sacrilege,  worse  than  parricide, 
not  even  the  dead,  whom  impiety  itself  generally  spares,  were  suffered 
to  rest  undisturbed.  Corpses  were  torn  from  the  tombs  and  dragged 
through  the  streets  and  squares  as  if  the  insensate  bodies  were  capable 
of  feeling  the  indignities  offered  them.^® 

The  vandals  then  repaired  to  the  hospital  of  St.  John,  as  it  is  called, 
where  they  put  to  the  sword  all  the  sick  they  found.  Those  whose 
pious  duty  it  should  have  been  to  relieve  the  oppressed,  namely  the 
monks  and  priests,  called  in  footpads  and  brigands  to  carry  on  the 
slaughter  under  promise  of  reward.  Accompanied  by  these  miscreants, 
they  sought  out  the  most  secluded  retreats  and  the  inmost  apartments 
of  homes,  that  none  who  were  hiding  there  might  escape  death.  When 
such  were  discovered,  they  were  dragged  out  with  violence  and 
handed  over  to  the  executioners,  who,  that  they  might  not  work  with¬ 
out  pay,  were  given  the  price  of  blood  for  the  murder  of  these 
wretched  victims. 

Even  those  who  seemed  to  show  more  consideration  sold  into  per¬ 
petual  slavery  among  the  Turks  and  other  infidels  the  fugitives  who 
had  resorted  to  them  and  to  whom  they  had  given  hope  of  safety. 
It  is  said  that  more  than  four  thousand  Latins  of  various  age,  sex, 
and  condition  were  delivered  thus  to  barbarous  nations  for  a  price. 

In  such  fashion  did  the  perfidious  Greek  nation,  a  brood  of  vipers, 
like  a  serpent  in  the  bosom  or  a  mouse  in  the  wardrobe  evilly  requite 
their  guests — those  who  had  not  deserved  such  treatment  and  were 
far  from  anticipating  anything  of  the  kind^  those  to  whom  they  had 
given  their  daughters,  nieces,  and  sisters  as  wives  and  who,  by  long 
living  together,  had  become  their  friends. 

The  mutilation  of  the  Roman  cardinal  underlines  the  importance  of  the  religious 
element  in  the  antipathy  of  Greeks  toward  Latins.  It  was  not  the  political  or  economic 
importance  of  the  Latins  but  rather  the  success  of  the  Latins  in  gaining  Manuel’s  ap¬ 
proval  of  a  possible  union  of  the  Greek  and  Latin  churches  under  Roman  headship 
which  gave  the  uprising  this  fanatical  edge.  The  remains  of  the  cardinal’s  body  were 
later  gathered  up  and  accorded  a  decent  burial  (see  E.  Gibbon :  Decline  and  Fall  of  the 
Roman  Empire ^  ed.  J.  B.  Bury,  VI,  373). 


466 


CONFLICT  OF  INTERESTS 


13.  The  Latins  who  had  escafed  in  ships  ravage  in  hostile  fashion 
the  islands  and  other  places  along  the  shore. 

This  horrible  outrage,  unprecedented  throughout  the  ages,  did  not 
go  entirely  unpunished,  it  is  said.  The  Latins  who  had  fled  in  the 
galleys,  as  has  been  related,  and  the  large  numbers  who  followed  them 
a  little  later  with  a  good-sized  fleet  had  assembled  in  the  vicinity  of 
Constantinople  to  await  the  outcome  of  events.  Here  they  received 
definite  information  that  those  who  had  excited  the  first  tumult  in 
the  city  had  burned  the  entire  Latin  quarter  and  that  their  wives  and 
children  with  all  the  members  of  their  households  had  perished  either 
by  fire  or  by  the  sword.  This  news  roused  righteous  wrath  and  resent¬ 
ment  in  the  hearts  of  all  and  inspired  them  with  a  fervent  desire  to 
avenge  the  blood  of  their  friends.  Accordingly  they  sailed  along  the 
shores  of  the  Hellespont,  from  the  mouth  of  the  Black  sea,  which  is 
thirty  miles  from  Constantinople,  to  the  entrance  of  the  Mediterra¬ 
nean  sea,  a  distance  of  two  hundred  miles,  took  by  force  all  the  cities 
and  fortresses  along  both  shores,  and  put  all  the  inhabitants  to  the 
sword.  They  made  their  way  also  into  all  the  monasteries  along  both 
shores  and  on  the  small  islands  scattered  throughout  that  sea.  Here, 
in  retaliation  for  the  blood  of  their  brethren,  they  slew  all  those 
pseudo-monks  and  sacrilegious  priests  and  burned  the  monasteries 
together  with  the  refugees  who  had  fled  thither.  From  these  places 
they  are  said  to  have  carried  off  an  immense  amount  of  gold  and 
silver,  with  jewels  and  silken  stuffs  in  large  quantities,  and  therewith 
repaid  themselves  many  times  for  the  loss  of  their  property  and  the 
destruction  of  their  goods.  For,  in  addition  to  the  vast  wealth  of  the 
monasteries  and  the  countless  treasures  which  had  been  accumulating 
there  for  a  long  time,  the  citizens  of  Constantinople  had  deposited  In 
these  holy  places  for  safekeeping  immense  quantities  of  gold  and  other 
treasures. 

Laden  with  all  these  spoils,  the  Latins  then  left  the  straits  of  that 
sea  and  sailed  into  the  Mediterranean  between  the  ancient  coastal  cities, 
Sestos  and  Abydos. 

As  they  sailed  along  the  shores  of  Thessaly,  they  searched  all  the 
cities  and  towns  of  the  lands  near  the  sea  with  the  minutest  care,  gave 
everything  over  to  pillage  and  fire,  and  massacred  countless  numbers. 
Near  Chrysopolis,  a  city  of  Macedonia,  they  are  said  to  have  found  ten 


CONFLICT  OF  INTERESTS  467 

other  galleys,  and  in  various  places  a  great  many  more.  With  these 
they  formed  an  exceedingly  large  fleet  which  proved  a  most  formi¬ 
dable  engine  of  destruction  to  the  Greeks. 

Some  of  the  Latins,  however,  shrank  from  these  deeds  of  slaughter 
and  rapine  this  latter  group  embarked  on  some  of  the  many  ships 
in  the  harbor  and,  with  their  wives  and  children  and  all  that  remained 
of  their  effects,  left  the  army  and  came  to  us  in  Syria. 

Meanwhile,  Andronicus  was  in  possession  of  the  city,  according  to 
his  wishes,  and  since  there  was  no  one  to  object  he  had  the  emperor 
solemnly  crowned  on  the  holy  day  of  Pentecost,  together  with  his 
destined  wife,  the  daughter  of  the  king  of  the  Franks,  and  showed 
him  all  reverence.  The  mother  of  the  emperor,  together  with  his 
sister  and  her  husband,  who  were  still  within  the  palace  precincts,  he 
as  yet  treated  with  kindness.  Andronicus  personally  directed  all  the 
affairs  of  the  empire,  however,  both  in  the  city  and  without,  and 
arranged  everything  according  to  his  own  pleasure. 

It  is  to  be  feared  that  he  rnade  this  show  of  courtesy  toward  these 
persons  in  order  to  hide  his  treacherous  purpose,  until  he  should  have 
held  the  throne  for  a  time  and  gradually  subjected  everything  to 
his  own  power,  when  he  could  show  openly  his  real  intentions  in 
regard  to  them.^'^ 

This  happened  in  the  month  of  April,  in  the  year  of  the  Incarnation 
of  the  Lord  1182. 

14-  Saladin  revokes  the  treaty  which  he  had  made  with  the  king. 

The  latter  marches  out  beyond  the  Jordan  to  encounter 
him.  The  Turks  assault  the  village  of  Buria  and  carry  the 
feofle  away  into  caftivity. 

While  these  events  were  transpiring  in  Greece,  a  certain  ship  with 
fifteen  hundred  pilgrims  on  board,  driven  by  adverse  winds,  was 

The  effect  of  these  massacres  upon  the  commercial  city  states  of  Italy,  especially 
Venice,  which  suffered  most  heavily,  has  usually  been  overlooked.  The  Fourth  Crusade 
has  too  often  been  represented  as  a  purely  business  enterprise  of  the  Venetians.  The  sons 
and  daughters  and  more  distant  relatives  of  the  Venetians  who  lost  thir  lives  in  this 
massacre  of  1182  would  not  have  agreed  with  that  opinion.  It  is  gratifying  to  know 
that  some  of  the  Latins  did  not  approve  of  the  severity  of  the  revenge,  even  in  retalia¬ 
tion.  William  doubtless  obtained  his  information  from  these  refugees. 

He  disposed  of  them  before  the  end  of  the  year  1183,  first  having  Maria  of 
Antioch  strangled  and  in  the  same  year  having  her  son  Alexius  treated  similarly.  Also 
at  this  time  he  formally  married  the  young  French  empress,  Agnes,  who  was  about 
twelve  years  old  at  the  time  (Vasiliev,  History  of  the  Byzantine  Emfirej  II,  76). 


CONFLICT  OF  INTERESTS 


468 

wrecked  at  Damietta  in  the  kingdom  of  Egypt.  However,  the  ship¬ 
wrecked  people  felt  confident  that  they  would  be  saved,  for  it  was 
known  that  Saladin  had  made  a  truce  and  temporary  peace  with  the 
Christians,  on  both  land  and  sea. 

But  the  fate  that  befell  them  was  far  different  from  that  required 
by  the  law  of  treaties.  For  Saladin,  overcome  by  his  desire  for  spoils, 
was  reluctant  to  allow  so  many  Christians  to  depart  freely  from  his 
land,  as  he  was  bound  to  do  by  the  terms  of  the  agreement.  He 
accordingly  threw  them  all  into  prison  and  ordered  their  goods  to  be 
confiscated  for  his  own  use.  He  then  sent  a  messenger  to  the  king  and, 
in  direct  defiance  of  the  terms  of  the  treaty,  made  demands  upon  him 
with  which  it  was  practically  impossible  to  comply.  He  added  as  an 
ultimatum  that,  unless  all  these  demands  were  met  in  accordance 
with  his  wishes,  he  would  retain  the  aforesaid  ship  as  compensation 
for  himself  and  would,  moreover,  abrogate  the  pact  which  had  been 
concluded  between  them.^® 

The  messenger  was  unable  to  obtain  the  satisfaction  of  Saladin’s 
demands,  since  he  tried  to  invent  barefaced  excuses  under  pretext  of 
which  the  ship  might  be  retained  rather  than  to  present  just  causes 
of  complaint.  Thereupon  the  prince  at  once  broke  the  treaty  and, 
giving  way  to  his  long-cherished  animosity,  began  to  plan  how  he 
might  harass  the  kingdom  in  his  usual  manner.  He  mustered  both 
cavalry  and  infantry  forces  and  increased  the  size  of  his  army  by 
large  numbers  of  men  who  in  former  years  had  left  Damascus  and  the 
neighboring  countries  and  had  gone  to  Egypt  to  avoid  the  stress  of 
famine.  With  this  force  he  determined  to  return  to  Damascus,  where 
as  from  a  nearer  base  he  could  cause  us  greater  trouble. 

While  on  the  march  to  Damascus,  he  intended  also  to  injure  as 
much  as  possible  that  part  of  our  possessions  which  lay  beyond  the 
Jordan.  Here  the  crops  were  already  white  for  the  harvest,  and  by 
burning  these  or  by  seizing  one  or  more  of  our  strongholds  in  that 
locality  he  could  do  the  Christians  much  damage. 

His  special  purpose  in  acting  thus  is  said  to  have  been  the  desire  to 
retaliate  on  Prince  Renaud,  the  lord  of  that  land.  For  the  prince, 
contrary  to  agreement,  was  reported  to  have  seized  certain  Arabs  dur- 

William  is  slow  to  bring  in  the  charge  which  Muslim  writers  make  that  Renaud 
de  Chatillon  was  first  to  break  the  truce.  This  is  stated  somewhat  later  in  this  chapter. 
Each  side  accused  the  other  of  the  violation  of  the  truce  (see  W.  B.  Stevenson,  T/ie 
Crusaders  in  the  Easty  pp.  224—25). 


CONFLICT  OF  INTERESTS  469 

ing  the  period  of  the  truce  and  to  have  refused  to  release  them  on 
demand. 

Through  his  scouts,  the  king  learned  of  Saladin’s  advance  and  also 
of  his  designs.  He  at  once  held  a  general  council  at  Jerusalem  where 
the  terms  of  the  Turkish  prince  were  carefully  considered.  Then,  act¬ 
ing  on  the  advice  of  certain  of  his  counsellors,  he  led  all  his  forces 
across  the  valley  of  Sylvester,  wherein  is  the  Dead  sea,  and  arrived 
at  the  spot  where  he  proposed  to  meet  Saladin  on  his  march  and 
prevent  him  from  devastating  that  land. 

Saladin’s  march  across  the  desert  had  been  accomplished  under 
great  difficulties  in  barely  twenty  days,  and  he  was  now  established 
with  his  forces  upon  habitable  land  in  our  territory,  at  a  distance  of 
about  ten  miles  from  the  Christian  stronghold  of  Montreal.  Here  he 
was  waiting  to  receive  definite  information  about  the  condition  of  the 
locality  and  of  the  whereabouts  of  the  king  and  his  army, 

Baldwin  had  placed  his  camp  near  an  ancient  city  called  Petra  of 
the  Desert,  in  Arabia  Secunda,  about  thirty-six  miles  from  Saladin^s 
camp.  He  had  with  him  the  entire  strength  of  the  army.  The  count 
of  Tripoli  also  remained  with  the  forces,  although  much  against  his 
will,  for  it  was  contrary  to  his  advice  that  the  king  had  marched 
thither  and  thus  left  the  other  parts  of  his  realm  unprotected  and 
utterly  stripped  of  soldiers.  Certain  of  the  barons,  out  of  regard  for 
Prince  Renaud  rather  than  for  the  general  welfare,  had  influenced  the 
king  to  this  course,  without  giving  due  attention  to  what  might  happen 
in  the  kingdom  thus  left  without  defenders. 

How  far  from  wise  this  action  was  subsequent  events  soon  showed. 
For  the  rulers  in  the  vicinity  of  Damascus,  Bostrum,  Baalbec,  and 
Hims,  perceiving  that  the  flower  of  the  realm  was  absent  and  the 
whole  region  destitute  of  troops,  secretly  and  silently  mustered  their 
forces.  They  crossed  the  Jordan  near  the  sea  of  Galilee,  that  is,  near 
Tiberias,  and  furtively  entered  our  land.  After  overrunning  a  part  of 
Galilee,  they  came  to  a  place  at  the  foot  of  Mt.  Tabor  called  Buria, 
near  the  ancient  city  of  Nain.  The  people  of  those  parts  were  as  yet 
unaware  that  the  truce  had  been  broken.  Accordingly,  in  complete 
reliance  upon  it,  they  did  not  take  measures  to  protect  themselves. 
As  a  result  the  enemy  fell  upon  them  stealthily  by  night  and  com¬ 
pletely  surrounded  the  place  so  that  the  besieged  could  not  escape 
to  the  mountains  which  rose  above  them. 


470  CONFLICT  OF  INTERESTS 

When  day  dawned,  the  inhabitants  saw  that  they  were  surrounded 
on  all  sides  by  the  enemy  and  hastily  retreated  to  a  tower  above  the 
village.  The  Turks  immediately  encircled  this  tower  and  put  forth 
mighty  efforts  to  undermine  it.  Within  the  space  of  four  hours  they 
were  successful,  and  the  building  fell  to  the  ground.  Before  the  final 
catastrophe,  however,  when  cracks  began  to  appear  and  its  downfall 
seemed  imminent,  the  refugees  who  had  fled  to  it  for  protection 
surrendered. 

The  infidels  thereupon  gathered  up  all  the  plunder  from  Buria  and 
other  places  near  by  and,  without  opposition,  led  away  with  them  as 
prisoners  about  five  hundred  souls.  Many  dead  who  had  fallen  in  the 
fight  were  left  on  the  field.  For  since  the  locality  was  very  productive 
and  the  time  of  harvest  was  at  hand,  large  numbers  of  people  had 
come  thither  from  neighboring  places  to  help  harvest  the  crop.  All 
of  these,  as  we  have  said,  were  carried  off  by  the  enemy  without 
resistance.  Then  the  Turks  again  crossed  the  Jordan  and  returned, 
safe  and  sound,  to  their  own  land. 

15.  Saladin  liketvhe  seizes  by  force  one  of  our  strongholds y  a 
well-fortified  cave^  in  the  land  of  Sawad» 

During  this  time,  while  the  king  and  the  Christian  army  were  still 
occupied  in  Syria  Sobal,  a  very  serious  disaster  occurred  which  exposed 
us  to  new  peril  and  which  will  ever  be  regretted  by  our  people.  Be¬ 
yond  the  Jordan  in  the  land  of  Sawad,  sixteen  miles  from  Tiberias, 
the  Christians  possessed  a  very  strongly  fortified  place.  It  was  thought 
to  be  impregnable  and  was  of  great  service  to  our  people.  This 
district  was  nearer  to  the  enemy’s  domains  than  to  our  realm,  and  in 
consequence  they  could  easily  work  their  will  over  it  and  command 
the  inhabitants  as  they  would.  Yet,  because  of  the  protection  afforded 
by  this  fortress,  the  custom  had  prevailed  for  many  years  and  was 
still  in  practice  at  this  time  of  dividing  the  powers  equally  between 
the  Christians  and  the  infidels ;  the  taxes  and  tribute  were  also  equally 
divided  between  them.^^ 

The  fortress  just  referred  to  was  situated  in  a  cave  on  the  slope  of 
a  certain  mountain  under  an  immense  overhanging  cliff.  On  the  upper 
side  there  was  no  approach  whatever,  while  on  the  other  there  was 

The  ability  of  the  Latin  crusaders  and  their  Muslim  neighbors  to  live  peaceably 
together  is  usually  lost  to  sight  in  the  narrative  of  warfare.  Yet  here  is  a  clear  instance 
of  such  cooperation  that  had  been  going  on  for  years. 


CONFLICT  OF  INTERESTS 


471 

only  a  narrow  footpath  by  which  a  man,  if  free  from  all  encumbrance, 
might  with  difficulty  find  his  way.  The  care  of  this  place  had  been 
committed  to  Fulk  of  Tiberias,  a  loyal  and  vigilant  nobleman  of 
great  wealth. 

The  leaders  of  the  Turkish  forces  had  taken  Buria  and  made 
prisoners  of  our  people  there,  as  has  been  related  above  j  now  they 
appeared  suddenly  before  this  place  and  within  five  days  had  taken 
it  by  storm. 

There  is  a  difference  of  opinion  about  the  capture  of  this  fortress. 
Some  say  that  the  garrison  in  the  citadel  surrendered  it  in  considera¬ 
tion  of  a  sum  of  money.  Others  assert  that  the  enemy  forced  an 
entrance  into  the  cave  from  the  side  by  mining,  a  feat  which  could 
easily  be  accomplished  since  the  rock  was  of  cretaceous  nature.  They 
burrowed  into  the  first  story  and  seized  it  5  then,  after  taking  that, 
they  compelled  the  surrender  of  those  in  the  middle  and  top  stories 
(for  the  place  is  said  to  have  had  three  stories). 

It  was  later  ascertained,  however,  that  the  foe  gained  possession 
of  the  cave  through  the  treachery  of  the  officers  in  charge.  For,  al¬ 
though  the  rest  wished  to  make  resistance,  those  in  authority  forbade 
any  defense  to  be  made,  and  after  surrendering  they  themselves  de¬ 
serted  to  the  enemy. 

The  commanders  in  charge  were,  it  is  said,  Syrians,  a  race  which  is 
regarded  by  us  as  weak  and  effeminate.^ ^  The  greatest  blame,  there¬ 
fore,  rested  upon  Fulk  of  Tiberias,  who  was  responsible  for  placing 
men  of  such  caliber  in  charge  of  so  important  a  place.  Such  was  the 
report  which  spread  far  and  wide  through  the  realm  and  which  finally 
reached  the  ears  of  the  Christians  beyond  the  Jordan  who  were  try¬ 
ing  to  prevent  Saladin  from  crossing  into  Syria  on  his  way  from  Egypt 
to  Damascus. 

This  news  overwhelmed  the  hearts  of  all  with  consternation.  Espe¬ 
cially  was  this  true  of  the  count  of  Tripoli,  on  whom  rested  the  re¬ 
sponsibility  and  care  of  this  fortress. 

And  so  it  happened  that  those  who  had  so  carelessly  left  the  king¬ 
dom  and  were  conducting  themselves  still  more  unwisely  in  this  place 
were  unable  to  accomplish  anything  acceptable  to  God  or  of  benefit 
to  the  realm.  They  should  have  met  Saladin  at  the  frontiers  of  our 
kingdom  and  prevented  his  entering  the  land  3  but,  rashly  enough, 

This  passage  is  usually  cited  to  prove  that  William,  though  born  in  Palestine,  was 
not  a  Syrian. 


472  CONFLICT  OF  INTERESTS 

they  permitted  him  to  advance  as  far  as  the  place  called  Gerba,  where 
he  found  a  great  abundance  of  the  water  so  desperately  needed  by  his 
thirsty  army.  From  Gerba  he  sent  a  part  of  his  forces  to  the  vicinity 
of  our  fortress  called  Montreal,  where  they  cut  down  vineyards  and 
inflicted  other  losses  upon  the  people  living  there.  But,  if  the 
Christians  had  hurried  to  that  place  he  would  unquestionably  have 
been  forced  to  retire  to  Egypt,  for  he  was  leading  an  immense  crowd 
of  unwarlike  people  who  had  already  discovered  that  the  water  in 
their  skins  and  the  bread  in  their  chests  was  beginning  to  fail.  All  this 
multitude  must  have  perished  of  famine  in  the  desert,  for  to  advance 
was  impossible  and  to  engage  our  forces  would  be  attended  with  great 
danger.^  ^ 

O 

On  learning  that  the  prince  had  already  reached  the  place  just 
named,  the  Christians  again  decided  to  attack  him,  this  time  at  the 
waters  called  Ras  el  Rassit.  If  this  plan  had  been  carried  out,  Saladin 
would  have  been  obliged  to  attempt  a  march  through  the  farther 
desert,  a  feat  which  could  not  have  been  accomplished  without  great 
loss  of  men  and  pack  animals. 

Since  they  neglected  to  do  this,  however,  he  reached  the  waters 
without  difliculty,  and  then  entered  his  own  land  without  opposition 
and  arrived  in  entire  safety  at  Damascus. 

On  learning  of  his  departure,  the  Christians  also  returned  to  their 
own  land  over  the  same  route  by  which  they  had  come.  But  it  was  to  be 
feared  that  from  Damascus,  whither  he  had  departed  with  all  his 
following,  Saladin  might  be  devising  some  trickery  which  would  bring 
danger  upon  the  realm.  All  the  people  of  the  country  were  accord¬ 
ingly  ordered  to  concentrate  at  the  fountain  of  Sephorie,  between 
Sephorie  and  Nazareth.  The  king,  the  patriarch,  and  all  the  princes, 
both  secular  and  ecclesiastical,  with  the  Cross  of  the  Lord,  attended 
them,  and  there  from  day  to  day  they  awaited  the  approach  of  the 
enemy. 

1 6.  Saladin  invades  our  land  with  an  armed  force.  At  the  fortress 
of  Forbelet  a  battle  without  decisive  results  is  fought. 

During  this  time  Saladin  had  mustered  forces  from  all  over  his 
domains  to  reinforce  the  army  which  he  had  brought  with  him  from 

William  has  usually  not  felt  himself  sufficiently  informed  or  interested  in  military 
matters  to  criticize  strategy  and  tactics. 


CONFLICT  OF  INTERESTS 


473 

Egypt.  Determined  to  invade  our  land,  he  now  advanced  to  the  place 
which  is  called  in  their  tongue,  Raseline,  that  is,  the  Head  of  the 
Waters.  This  is  said  to  be  only  a  short  distance  from  our  land  and 
quite  near  the  city  of  Tiberias.  After  remaining  at  Raseline  for  a 
few  daySj  Saladin  suddenly  entered  our  land  and  encamped  between 
two  rivers  in  a  place  known  as  Cavan,  which  is  about  four  miles 
distant  from  Tiberias. 

Scouts  soon  reported  this  fact  to  our  leaders.  An  immediate  attack 
was  decided  upon,  and  the  forces  were  hastily  dispatched  to  Tiberias 
to  unite  with  the  contingent  that  had  been  sent  there  to  protect  that 
city  and  the  fortified  places  in  the  vicinity,  namely  Saphet  and 
Beauvoir. 

It  happened  that  the  count  of  Tripoli,  an  able  and  valiant  man  of 
great  experience  in  war,  was  at  this  time  lying  critically  ill  with  an 
attack  of  double  [sic]  tertiary  fever.  This  added  much  to  the  troubles 
of  the  Christians,  for  it  deprived  them  at  a  critical  time  of  the  help  of 
this  great  lord,  on  whose  counsel  and  prudence  they  placed  great 
reliance. 

Nevertheless,  they  called  in  additional  forces  from  the  neighboring 
places  and  marched  forth  against  the  foe  with  standards  raised.  As 
soon  as  Saladin  heard  that  they  were  advancing,  however,  he  crossed 
the  Jordan  with  his  armies  and  withdrew  into  the  environs  of 
Scythopolis. 

Scythopolis,  [once]  the  metropolis  of  Palestina  Tertia,  and  also 
known  as  Bethsan,  lies  in  a  plain  amid  well-watered  fields,  between 
the  mountains  of  Galboa  and  the  river  Jordan.  The  privileges  which 
it  once  enjoyed,  however,  have  now  been  transferred  to  the  church  at 
Nazareth  in  the  same  diocese.  For  Scythopolis  has  now  very  few  in¬ 
habitants  and  has  become  merely  a  small  town. 

Thither  the  enemy^s  battalions  marched  and  at  once  made  a  vig¬ 
orous  assault  on  a  small  fort  situated  on  marshy  land.  But  the  towns¬ 
people  offered  a  stout  resistance,  and  the  Turks  found  that  they  had 
no  prospect  of  success.  In  order  to  march  against  the  Christians, 
therefore,  they  directed  their  lines  toward  a  new  fortress,  now  called 
Beauvoir,  situated  in  the  hills  between  Scythopolis  and  Tiberias. 

The  Christians  followed  the  course  of  the  Jordan  until  they  ar¬ 
rived  at  the  place  just  mentioned,  when  they  left  the  valley  and  went 
up  into  the  mountains.  They  were  greatly  exhausted  by  the  intense 


CONFLICT  OF  INTERESTS 


474 

heat  which  became  almost  unendurable  as  they  advanced.  The  night 
was  passed  in  a  state  of  constant  vigilance,  for  they  suspected  that  the 
enemy  was  in  the  vicinity.  When  morning  came,  they  returned  to  the 
plain  which  lies  between  the  fortress  just  mentioned  and  a  village 
called  Forbelet.  Here  they  beheld  Saladin’s  forces  stretching  out  all 
around  in  numbers  far  greater  than  they  had  ever  before  experienced  j 
in  fact,  the  older  princes  of  the  kingdom  declared  that  at  no  time 
since  the  Latins  first  entered  Syria  had  they  beheld  such  a  mighty 
array  of  foes.  The  number  of  knights  equipped  for  battle  was  about 
twenty  thousand,  while  our  cavalry  was  estimated  at  barely  seven 
hundred.  Saladin  and  his  nobles  had  one  common  intent  and  purpose, 
namely  to  surround  our  army  completely,  so  that  not  a  man  might 
escape — for,  relying  on  their  great  numbers,  just  given,  they  despised 
our  small  force  and  were  confident  that  the  Christians  would  be  un¬ 
able  to  withstand  them. 

But  far  otherwise  did  it  seem  to  Him  who  easily  overcomes  a  great 
multitude  with  a  few.  Although  in  comparison  with  the  enemy’s  host, 
our  numbers  seemed  as  nothing,  yet,  upheld  by  the  God  of  mercy, 
the  Christians  drew  up  their  lines  according  to  the  rules  of  military 
science  and  with  their  usual  courage  advanced  upon  the  foe.  Firmly 
they  resisted  the  attacks  against  them  and,  although  to  their  own  ever¬ 
lasting  disgrace  many  Christians,  whose  names  we  refrain  from  giv- 
ing,  ignominiously  fled  from  the  heat  of  battle,  yet  in  that  conflict 
we  proved  superior  to  our  foes.  Baldwin  of  Ramlah  and  Balian  his 
brother  showed  magnificent  prowess  that  day  and  fought  with  vigor 
and  courage.  Hugh  the  Younger,  stepson  of  the  count  of  Tripoli, 
who  was  with  the  contingent  from  Tripoli,  also  deserves  that  his 
memory  be  held  in  benediction.  Although  younger  than  the  others, 
he  strove  with  valor  far  beyond  his  age  and,  with  the  troops  under 
his  command,  routed  and  put  to  flight  three  companies  of  Turks; 
then,  by  the  grace  of  God,  he  returned  uninjured  to  his  friends. 

In  that  battle  only  a  few  of  our  knights  fell,  about  to  be  received 
in  the  company  of  the  saints  above;  but  of  the  people  many  perished. 
The  loss  of  the  enemy  was  far  greater.  Some  of  their  principal  leaders 
also  fell,  a  catastrophe  which  caused  the  infidels  to  desert  the  field  of 
battle  in  consternation. 

The  fact  ought  not  to  be  passed  over  in  silence  that  the  heat  dur- 


CONFLICT  OF  INTERESTS 


475 

ing  those  days  was  so  much  greater  than  usual  that  fully  as  many  in 
both  armies  perished  from  sunstroke  as  by  the  sword. 

Concerning  the  number  of  the  enemy  slain  we  could  learn  nothing 
positive  j  for  to  conceal  their  losses  from  us,  they  carried  away  the 
bodies  of  those  who  had  fallen  in  battle  and  stealthily  buried  them 
the  next  night  in  camp,  lest  the  proof  of  their  death  might  inspire 
our  people  with  additional  courage.  We  ascertained,  however,  that 
from  the  two  causes  named  above  about  a  thousand  perished. 

Since  matters  had  not  turned  out  as  he  had  hoped  and  the  Chris¬ 
tians  had  proved  stronger  than  he  anticipated,  Saladin  now  retired 
discomfited.  He  recrossed  the  Jordan  and  returned  to  his  own  land, 
camping  a  second  time  in  the  place  from  which  he  had  set  out. 

The  Christians  also  recalled  their  troops  and  returned  to  the  foun¬ 
tain  of  Sephorie,  which  had  been  their  starting  point.  On  this  march 
Baldwin,  a  canon  of  the  Sepulchre  of  the  Lord  and  treasurer  of  that 
church,  who  was  bearing  the  Revivifying  Cross,  was  overcome  by  the 
intense  heat.  He  was  placed  in  a  litter  and  borne  to  the  foot  of  Mt. 
Tabor,  near  the  torrent  of  Cison,  where  he  expired. 

Another  brother,  Godfrey  of  Villeneuve,  a  canon  of  the  same 
church,  who  had  been  sent  on  that  expedition  as  an  aide  to  this  Bald¬ 
win,  also  perished.  Carried  away  by  his  zeal  for  secular  interests,  he 
was  struck  by  an  arrow  and  perished.  It  is  indeed  just,  according  to 
the  word  of  the  Lord,  that  “all  they  that  take  the  sword  shall  perish 
with  the  sword.” 

■ 

17.  Saladin  summons  a  fleet  from  Egypt  and  lays  siege  to  the 
city  of  Beirut, 

The  king  now  returned  with  his  forces  to  the  place  mentioned  above. 
Saladin,  exceedingly  wroth  that  his  campaign  had  proved  so  ineffec¬ 
tive,  now  for  a  second  time  mustered  his  forces  and  again  reviewed  in 
his  mind  all  manner  of  plans.  Anxiously  he  deliberated  with  his  coun¬ 
sellors  as  to  the  best  way  to  renew  aggressive  measures  against  the 
Christians.  He  came  to  the  conclusion  that  the  most  effective  means 
of  injury  was  to  attack  our  people  in  several  different  places  simul- 

Mat,  26:  52.  This  quotation  reflects  William^s  own  views  on  the  proper  relation 
of  churchmen  and  warriors.  These  events  occurred  in  July,  1182  (see  Stevenson, 
CrtisaderSy  pp.  228—29). 


476  CONFLICT  OF  INTERESTS 

taneously.  He  accordingly  sent  strict  Instructions  to  his  brother,  whom 
he  had  left  in  charge  of  his  affairs  in  Egypt,  to  assemble  a  fleet  from 
Alexandria  and  Egypt  and  dispatch  it  to  Syria  as  soon  as  possible.  He 
explained  that,  immediately  on  the  arrival  of  this  fleet,  he  intended 
to  blockade  Beirut  both  by  land  and  by  sea.  To  prevent  the  king  and 
his  people  from  hurrying  to  Its  relief,  he  directed  his  brother  to  as¬ 
semble  the  cavalry  forces  which  had  been  left  in  Egypt.  With  these 
troops  he  was  to  enter  our  land  on  the  south  and  lay  waste  all  the 
region  around  Gaza,  Ascalon,  and  Daron,  which  are  the  last  cities 
belonging  to  the  kingdom  on  this  side  the  land  of  Egypt. 

Saladin’s  purpose  in  giving  these  orders  was  that,  while  one  part 
of  the  Christian  forces  was  engaged  in  opposing  the  invaders  from 
Egypt  whereby  the  army  was  reduced  in  strength  and  numbers,  he 
himself  might  be  free  to  assault  the  besieged  city  with  greater  fury. 

His  plans  were  carried  out  according  to  the  orders  which  he  had 
given.  Within  a  few  days,  a  fleet  of  thirty  beaked  ships  arrived  as  he 
had  directed,  and  his  brother  conducted  to  the  vicinity  of  Daron  the 
forces  which  he  had  raised  from  all  over  Egypt. 

That  all  might  be  in  readiness  when  the  fleet  arrived,  Saladin  him¬ 
self  led  a  force  into  the  locality  commonly  known  as  the  valley  of 
Baccar.  Scouts  were  stationed  upon  the  hills  which  jut  out  into  the 
sea  between  the  region  just  mentioned  and  the  plain  of  Beirut  to 
notify  him  when  the  fleet  was  in  sight.  During  this  interval  he  gath¬ 
ered  additional  infantry  forces  from  the  adjacent  country  and  with 
great  care  made  all  the  preparations  which  he  thought  would  be  neces¬ 
sary  for  the  successful  operation  of  the  siege. 

Punctually,  about  August  i,  the  fleet  arrived  off  the  coast  near 
Beirut.  The  scouts  specially  detailed  for  the  purpose  gave  immediate 
notice  of  this  arrival,  and  Saladin  at  once  crossed  the  intervening  moun¬ 
tains  and  led  his  forces  down  into  the  plain.  Here  he  completely  in¬ 
vested  the  city  of  Beirut  according  to  the  plan  long  before  arranged. 

Conflicting  rumors  in  regard  to  Saladin’s  Intentions  now  began  to 
reach  our  forces  which  were  encamped  at  Sephorie.  Some  said  that  he 
intended  to  besiege  the  city  of  Beirut,  which  eventually  proved  to  be 
true 3  others  thought  that  his  whole  idea  was  to  obtain  Aleppo;  while 
still  others  asserted  that  it  was  his  purpose  to  engage  the  lord  of 
Mosul,  a  magnificent  and  powerful  Turkish  satrap,  who  was  reported 
to  be  besieging  some  of  Saladin’s  cities  in  the  vicinity  of  the  Euphrates. 


CONFLICT  OF  INTERESTS 


477 

But  while  these  desultory  reports  were  circulating  in  the  camp,  all 
uncertainty  was  ended  by  the  arrival  of  a  messenger  who  announced 
that  Beirut  was  most  certainly  in  a  state  of  siege.  At  the  same  time 
another  courier  came  from  the  south  with  trustworthy  information 
that  Saladin’s  brother  with  an  immense  force  had  invaded  our  land 
in  the  vicinity  of  Daron.  Thirty-six  of  the  light-armed  knights  who 
are  called  Turcopoles  had  been  slain  and  some  of  the  outlying  villages 
burned. 

On  receipt  of  this  news,  the  king,  after  consulting  with  his  barons, 
decided  to  attack  the  point  of  greatest  danger  first  by  relieving  the 
besieged  city  from  the  peril  which  confronted  itj  for  he  did  not  re¬ 
gard  his  forces  as  sufficiently  strong  to  repulse  both  enemies  from  his 
land  at  the  same  time. 

1 8.  T he  king  arrives  at  T yre  on  his  way  to  relieve  Beirut,  Saladin 
raises  the  siege. 

Accordingly  he  summoned  his  forces  and  at  the  head  of  the  entire 
army  proceeded  to  Tyre,  where  he  ordered  the  fleet  which  lay  at 
anchor  in  the  harbors  of  Acre  and  Tyre  to  be  made  ready.  Within 
seven  days,  sooner  than  all  expectation,  a  fleet  of  thirty-three  ships, 
well-armed  and  manned  with  valiant  men,  was  ready  for  action. 

While  the  Christians  were  making  these  preparations  with  zealous 
care,  Saladin  was  besieging  the  city  of  Beirut,  as  has  been  stated.  Both 
his  armies  were  exerting  themselves  to  the  utmost  to  cause  the  citizens 
all  possible  trouble.  The  legions,  drawn  up  around  the  city,  were  em¬ 
ployed  in  successive  relays  and  for  three  days  kept  up  such  a  con¬ 
tinual  pressure  that  no  respite  was  given  the  besieged  for  rest  or  for 
taking  the  necessary  nourishment. 

Saladin  had  brought  with  him  neither  hurling  engines  nor  any 
other  kind  of  machine  generally  employed  in  besieging  a  stronghold. 
Possibly  he  thought  that  by  a  sudden  attack  he  could  take  the  city 
without  the  help  of  such  instruments,  or,  since  he  was  momentarily 
expecting  the  arrival  of  the  Christian  army,  he  may  have  deprecated 
such  a  waste  of  effort  without  promise  of  result.  But  by  his  zealous 
and  careful  efforts  he  accomplished  all  that  was  possible  without  the 
aid  of  machines.  For,  as  has  been  explained,  he  had  placed  his  great 
host  in  successive  ranks  about  the  cityj  these  divisions  relieved  one 
another  by  turns  and  poured  forth  such  showers  of  arrows  upon  the 


CONFLICT  OF  INTERESTS 


478 

defenders,  who  were  fighting  upon  the  walls  and  in  the  towers,  that 
the  city  and  fortifications  were  covered  as  with  hail. 

But  this  was  not  the  only  method  by  which  Saladin’s  forces  tried 
to  prevent  the  inhabitants  from  defending  the  city.  They  also  intro¬ 
duced  by  force  sappers  brought  for  the  special  purpose  of  undermin¬ 
ing  the  wall.  It  was  hoped  that  by  breaking  down  the  barbicans  and 
walls  in  this  way,  openings  might  be  made  through  which  bodies  of 
armed  men  might  be  introduced  in  spite  of  the  efforts  of  the  besieged. 
That  the  miners  might  apply  themselves  to  their  work  without  hin¬ 
drance,  the  rest  of  the  soldiers  kept  continually  pouring  forth  show¬ 
ers  of  missiles  from  their  bows  and  ballistae.  So  persistently  was  this 
done  that  the  citizens  within  the  walls  were  in  imminent  danger  of 
death  and  scarcely  dared  to  raise  a  finger. 

Although  very  few  in  number,  the  defenders  responded  nobly  to 
the  orders  and  exhortations  of  the  governor  and  especially  of  the 
bishop.  The  great  valor  and  firmness  shown  by  the  latter  in  this 
emergency  is  worthy  of  high  praise.  All  the  tactics  of  the  enemy  were 
met  by  the  Christians  with  counteracting  measures  and  no  possible 
method  of  resistance  was  left  untried.  Darts  and  arrows  were  hurled 
against  the  archers  outside  with  a  skill  and  enthusiasm  equal  to  that 
of  the  assailants,  with  the  result  that  great  loss  was  inflicted  upon  the 
Turks  and  again  and  again  those  who  were  boldest  in  advancing  to 
the  charge  were  slain. 

The  miners  who  were  striving  to  undermine  the  walls  were  met 
with  skill  equal  to  their  own  so  that  many  of  those  who  were  zealously 
engaged  in  that  work  were  killed  or  lost  their  digging  tools. 

It  was  not  only  the  forces  which  had  arrived  by  land  who  wrought 
such  havoc  upon  the  besieged,  but  those  who  had  come  by  sea  also 
showed  equal  fury  and  courage  in  attacking.  Saladin  himself  had 
taken  up  a  position  on  a  hill  not  far  away  and  by  his  presence  and 
cheering  words  did  not  cease  to  encourage  his  men  to  the  combat.  In 
this  he  was  so  successful  that  one  of  his  chief  nobles,  named  Choelin, 
proposed  that  they  raise  the  ladders  to  the  walls  and  force  an  en¬ 
trance,  for  he  felt  that  it  was  disgraceful  that  so  small  a  force  should 
have  the  courage  or  the  power  to  resist  such  a  host.  He  was  zealously 
insisting  on  this  plan  and  by  word  and  example  urging  the  rest  to 
agree  to  it,  when  he  was  suddenly  hit  near  the  eye  by  an  arrow.  This 


CONFLICT  OF  INTERESTS 


479 

accident  forced  him,  as  well  as  the  others,  to  abandon  the  enterprise. 

For  three  successive  days  the  city  had  been  besieged  in  the  manner 
just  described.  But  at  length,  since  it  was  evident  that  there  was  no 
chance  of  success,  the  naval  forces  withdrew  to  the  galleys  by  Saladin’s 
command  and  at  nightfall  on  the  third  day  silently  and  furtively 
sailed  away. 

Saladin  recalled  his  land  forces  also  and  retired  a  short  distance 
from  the  city.  He  then  divided  the  cavalry  into  bands  and  ordered 
them  to  scour  the  plains  about  the  city  and  raze  to  the  ground  every 
tower  in  the  outlying  districts.  By  his  orders  also  all  the  many  or¬ 
chards  and  vineyards  in  the  vicinity  of  the  city  were  destroyed  by 
axes  and  hatchets. 

That  the  work  of  the  siege  might  proceed  more  freely  and  securely, 
he  caused  some  of  the  infantry  to  occupy  certain  narrow  and  difficult 
roads  between  Beirut  and  Sidon  over  which  our  army  must  pass  on 
their  way  to  the  relief  of  the  city.  He  also  had  barricades  of  stones 
without  mortar  built  to  the  very  shore  of  the  sea.  By  the  help  of  these 
two  devices,  he  hoped  to  hinder  our  legions  from  advancing.  In  the 
meantime,  he  would  be  able  without  restraint  to  continue  the  attack 
on  Beirut. 

It  was  reported  that  he  had  been  firmly  resolved  not  to  abandon 
the  siege  until  he  had  taken  the  city  by  force,  yet  now  he  changed  his 
mind  and  prepared  to  return  home.  The  reason  for  this  change  of 
purpose  is  reported  to  have  been  as  follows:  those  who  were  guarding 
the  passage  happened  to  intercept  a  courier  who  was  the  bearer  of 
encouraging  letters  from  some  of  the  faithful  to  the  people  of  Beirut. 
This  messenger  was  brought  before  Saladin  and  subjected  to  a  most 
severe  questioning.  From  the  confession  wrung  from  him  by  force 
and  also  from  the  contents  of  the  letter,  Saladin  learned  that  both  our 
armies  were  fully  prepared  and  would  without  doubt  arrive  within 
three  days.  He  therefore  changed  his  plans  and  raised  the  siege,  as 
has  been  related. 

Our  fleet  arrived  safely  at  its  destination,  but  finding  the  city  free, 
it  returned  without  much  loss  of  time  to  the  ports  from  which  it  had 
sailed.  The  king,  on  learning  that  the  enemy  had  abandoned  the 
siege  and  departed,  remained  for  a  few  days  at  Tyre  with  his  entire 
army.  He  then  again  assembled  his  forces  and  returned  to  Sephorie. 


480 


CONFLICT  OF  INTERESTS 


19.  Saladin  crosses  the  Euphrates  and  enters  Mesopotamia, 

SaladiNj  always  active  and  vigilant,  desired  with  his  whole  heart  to 
increase  the  glory  of  his  name  and  expand  the  limits  of  his  kingdom. 
Eager  to  achieve  still  greater  victories  and  scorning  the  strength  of 
the  Christians  as  nothing,  he  resolved  to  advance  toward  the  east.  It 
is  not  yet  entirely  plain  whether  or  not  he  proceeded  thither  on  his 
own  initiative,  inspired  by  the  greatness  of  soul  natural  to  him.  It  is 
possible  that  this  difficult  task  which  seemed  beyond  his  strength  was 
undertaken  at  the  request  of  the  princes  of  that  region.  However  this 
may  be,  he  again  assembled  a  great  force  of  horsemen,  caused  to  be 
prepared,  as  well  as  time  and  place  permitted,  all  the  necessary  equip¬ 
ment  and  baggage  for  undertaking  so  long  a  march,  and  led  his  forces 
toward  the  Euphrates. 

The  prevailing  opinion  among  the  Christians  was  that  he  was 
marching  toward  Aleppo  in  an  attempt  to  take  that  city.  For,  of  the 
entire  heritage  of  Nureddin,  Aleppo  alone  and  a  few  strongholds 
adjacent  to  it  had  not  yet  fallen  into  his  power.  After  the  death  of 
Nureddin’s  son,  it  was  held  by  the  brother  of  Qutb  al-Din,  lord  of 
Mosul,  by  the  favor  of  the  latter,  on  whom  it  had  devolved  by  heredi¬ 
tary  right  on  the  death  of  the  aforesaid  youth. It  was . generally  be¬ 
lieved,  therefore,  and  this  seemed  probable,  that  Saladin  was  march¬ 
ing  thither  to  take  possession  of  the  city.  But,  as  the  result  proved,  he 
had  conceived  far  loftier  ideas.  Leaving  Aleppo  behind  him,  he 
crossed  the  Euphrates  and  within  a  few  days  took  by  storm  Edessa 
and  Haran,  those  splendid  cities  of  Mesopotamia,  together  with  a 
great  many  other  cities  and  their  dependent  towns.  In  fact,  he  took, 
either  by  armed  force  or  by  bribes,  almost  the  entire  region  which 
had  formerly  been  under  the  power  of  the  prince  of  Mosul  just  men¬ 
tioned.  By  his  great  liberality  he  corrupted  the  magnates  of  the  land 
who  owed  loyal  allegiance  to  their  lordj  and,  after  receiving  their 
fortresses,  he  also  succeeded  in  winning  their  allegiance  to  himself. 
The  great  and  noble  prince  of  Mosul,  thus  entirely  deprived  of  the 
support  of  his  nobles,  was  said  to  be  unable  either  to  meet  or  to  resist 
Saladin.  It  was  a  matter  of  common  talk  that  Saladin  had  corrupted 
the  servants  and  friends  of  this  prince  and  had  caused  a  deadly  po¬ 
tion  to  be  given  him  which  came  near  proving  fatal.  Hence  it  was  be- 

See  note  24. 


CONFLICT  OF  INTERESTS 


481 

lieved  from  these  reports  that  Saladin  had  without  mishap  reached 
Mosul  with  his  forces.  Stories  of  varying  import  were  in  circulation 
among  us  in  regard  to  this,  some  to  the  effect  that  his  march  had  been 
successful  and  that  everything  was  turning  out  according  to  his  wishes, 
others,  on  the  contrary,  indicating  that  the  great  lords  of  that  land 
had  banded  together  to  check  his  insolent  attempts  and  that  his  army 
had  accordingly  met  with  harsh  treatment.^^ 

20.  The  king  lays  waste  the  territory  of  the  Damascenes  in  hos¬ 
tile  fashion. 

Thus  the  land  of  the  enemy  seemed  to  have  been  stripped  of  its 
defenders.  The  king  and  the  barons  of  our  realm  thought,  therefore, 
and  not  without  apparent  reason,  that  the  long-desired  opportunity  of 
injuring  the  enemy  had  arrived.  Their  wrath  against  Saladin  was 
greatly  increased  by  the  fact  that  in  his  superb  arrogance  he  had 
scorned  the  military  strength  of  the  kingdom  and,  without  entering 
into  either  truce  or  treaty  with  the  king,  had  departed  to  win  foreign 
kingdoms.  After  taking  counsel  together,  therefore,  they  mustered 
their  forces  and,  accompanied  by  the  patriarch  and  the  precious  Life- 
giving  Cross,  entered  the  land  of  the  infidel  to  lay  waste  the  region 
as  far  as  their  strength  permitted. 

They  passed  through  the  country  of  the  Traconites,  which  forms 
a  large  part  of  the  land  of  Bostrum,  and  entered  Syria  Minor,  of 
which  Damascus  is  the  capital.  Then,  directing  their  march  toward 
the  eastern  part  of  this  land,  they  forced  their  way  into  the  famous 
and  populous  city  of  Zoro,  not  far  from  Damascus.  From  there  they 
overran  the  land  and  destroyed  a  large  part  of  the  outlying  places 
which  are  commonly  known  as  casalia.  These  they  either  burned  or 
injured  in  every  possible  way.  The  inhabitants  of  this  district  had 
learned  betimes  of  our  approach  and,  with  their  wives  and  children, 
flocks  and  herds,  had  fled  to  localities  which  had  better  defenses.  Con¬ 
sequently,  the  Christians  brought  back  with  them  little  or  no  spoils  or 
treasure.  The  crops  and  other  necessaries  of  life  which  the  enemy  had 
been  unable  to  take  with  them  in  their  flight,  however,  they  either 
burned  or  damaged  in  some  other  way. 

This  campaigTi  into  the  northeast  of  Syria  extended  from  September,  1182,  to 
Aug’ust,  1183.  William  here  recalls  the  attitude  of  the  Latins  in  1182  before  the 
outcome  of  the  campaign  became  known  (see  Stevenson,  Crusaders^  pp.  229-30). 


CONFLICT  OF  INTERESTS 


482 

After  ravaging  everything  in  sight,  they  had  to  pass,  on  their  re¬ 
turn,  near  a  noble  city  of  those  parts  called  Bostrum,  commonly 
known  as  Bosseret,  Here  our  people  deliberated  on  the  advisability 
of  seizing  the  suburban  districts.  However,  as  this  could  not  be  done 
quickly  but  would  require  a  longer  stay  than  the  dearth  of  water  per¬ 
mitted,  they  decided  to  return,  lest  they  and  their  beasts  should  suffer 
from  thirst.  This  region  is  utterly  arid  and  dry,  entirely  without 
springs,  brooks,  or  rivers.  During  the  winter  months,  the  people  are 
in  the  habit  of  collecting  rain  water  in  reservoirs.  This  they  carefully 
preserve  for  necessary  uses  during  the  entire  year,  although  through 
the  heat  of  the  sun  and  the  slime  which  accumulates  on  top  it  becomes 
insipid.  To  prevent  the  army  as  it  passed  from  lingering  there,  the 
people,  forewarned  of  our  coming,  had  either  broken  these  cisterns 
so  that  the  water  ran  out,  or  had  contaminated  it  by  throwing  in  filth. 
The  time  of  year,  however,  did  not  permit  the  Christians  to  do  as 
much  damage  as  they  could  have  desired.  The  grain  and  other  crops, 
which  they  would  ordinarily  have  burned,  had  already  been  gathered 
into  the  granaries,  which  it  is  the  custom  in  that  region  to  build  in 
caverns  underground.  Since  these  were  covered  with  earth  and  very 
skilfully  hidden,  they  were  difficult  to  find.  Whatever  grain  still  re¬ 
mained  on  the  threshing  floors  had  been  stripped  of  its  hulls  and 
cleaned  of  straw,  and  therefore,  as  grain  alone  does  not  catch  fire,  it 
did  not  easily  burn.  Scarcely  any  damage  could  be  done  to  the  thresh¬ 
ing  floors  except  to  scatter  the  grain  and  to  carry  off  some  of  it  with 
them  as  feed  for  the  horses.  Many  of  the  soldiers,  however,  seeking 
ways  of  doing  damage,  mixed  hulls  and  straw  here  and  there  with 
the  grain  already  cleaned  so  that  it  might  more  readily  take  fire. 

The  small  force  of  troops  which  had  been  left  in  that  district  on 
Saladin’s  departure  was  not  strong  enough  to  risk  an  encounter  with 
the  Christians  or  to  oppose  them  at  close  quarters.  They  followed  in 
bands,  however,  at  a  distance  on  the  rear  of  the  departing  foe  and 
tried  to  do  some  damage.  But  even  in  this  way  they  were  unable  to 
offer  any  impediment  to  the  Christians  or  to  Injure  the  army,  either 
in  part  or  as  a  whole. 

21.  The  Christians  blockade  the  fortress  lately  held  by  Saladtn, 

They  take  it  by  siege  and  restore  it  to  the  Christian  faith. 

After  traversing  the  whole  region  and  doing  as  much  damage  as 
lay  in  their  power,  our  people  halted,  on  their  return,  in  that  part  of 


CONFLICT  OF  INTERESTS 


483 

the  same  province  which  is  called  Sawad.  This  is  the  district  where 
lies  that  castle  which,  as  has  already  been  related,  the  enemy  had 
taken  from  the  Christians  by  trickery  shortly  before  this  time,  while 
our  army  was  in  Syria  Sobal. 

Sawad  is  famous  for  its  products  of  wine,  grain,  and  olives,  and  also 
for  its  salubrious  climate  and  generally  delightful  situation.  Bildad, 
the  friend  of  Job,  who  took  the  surname  of  Shuhite  from  this  land, 
is  said  to  have  belonged  here. 

On  arriving  here  the  Christians  judged  that  it  would  be  desirable 
to  besiege  the  stronghold  and  thereupon  decided  to  undertake  it,  that 
the  evils  which  the  infidels  had  brought  upon  them  in  treacherously 
capturing  and  keeping  the  place  might,  if  Heaven  permitted,  recoil 
upon  themselves. 

Accordingly  a  camp  was  established  before  the  castle  just  named, 
and  vigorous  efforts  were  put  forth  to  force  those  within  to  surrender. 
The  fortress  was  extremely  well  defended.  Its  situation  was  such  that 
it  was  assailable  only  by  the  upper  part,  and  not  even  there  unless  the 
rocks  were  cut  through  to  the  dwelling  place  itself.  It  was  decided, 
therefore,  to  put  stonecutters  at  work  on  the  upper  portion.  All  the 
helpers  needed  and  also  guards  were  to  be  furnished,  that  they  might 
work  in  safety  and  without  danger  of  attack. 

The  cave  was  located  on  the  side  of  a  very  high  mountain.  Ap¬ 
proach  to  it  was  attended  with  the  greatest  difficulty  over  a  path 
arduous  even  for  a  single  foot  soldier  if  free  from  all  encumbrance. 
The  path  approaching  from  the  side  was  scarcely  a  foot  wide,  and 
below  yawned  a  deep  and  dreadful  precipice  which  extended  to  the 
bottom  of  the  valley. 

This  cave  had  three  stories,  one  above  the  other.  A  wooden  stair¬ 
case  with  narrow  openings  led  from  one  level  to  the  other. 

Since  this  was  the  only  method  by  which  it  could  be  attacked,  the 
Christians  tried  to  cut  into  the  cave  from  above,  as  we  have  said,  in 
the  hope  that  they  might  be  able  to  penetrate  in  this  way  into  the 
first  and  upper  level  of  the  citadel.  This  was  their  whole  aim  and  in¬ 
tention,  and  every  effort  was  put  forth  to  attain  that  end.  All  the 
workmen  needed  were  placed  in  position  and  helpers  provided  who, 
as  fast  as  the  fragments  of  rock  and  stone  were  cut  away,  threw  the 
refuse  down  into  the  valley  below.  In  order  that  the  work  might  pro¬ 
ceed  without  interruption,  shifts  were  arranged  during  both  night  and 
day  so  that  when  those  on  the  first  crew  were  weary,  their  places  were 


484  CONFLICT  OF  INTERESTS 

taken  by  fresh  workers  who  had  the  necessary  skill  and  ability  to 
carry  on  the  work.  The  labor  progressed  rapidly  because  of  the  num¬ 
ber  and  enthusiasm  of  the  workers  and  also  because  the  rock  itself 
was  easily  cut.  For  it  was  of  cretaceous  nature  and  readily  penetrated 
except  where  veins  of  very  hard  flint  obtruded  which  often  injured 
the  iron  tools  and  presented  a  hindrance  to  the  eager  workers.  The 
fragments  were  rolled  down  into  the  valley  below  to  clear  the  place, 
as  has  been  explained.  All  these  passed  in  full  view  of  those  shut  up 
within  the  cave  and  greatly  increased  their  fearj  for  hourly  they 
anticipated  the  time  when  the  work  would  be  finished  and  an  en¬ 
trance  achieved  by  force. 

Our  army  was  divided  into  two  sections :  one  part,  as  has  been  said, 
had  located  a  camp  on  the  top  of  the  hill  occupied  by  the  cave,  from 
which  position  they  could  more  easily  protect  those  engaged  in  the 
work  from  the  wiles  of  the  enemy.  The  other  part,  remained  in  the 
plain  below,  placed  there  for  the  special  task  of  preventing  any  going 
or  coming  on  the  part  of  the  besieged.  Occasionally  some  of  the  latter 
force  approached  the  lower  level  of  the  cave  along  the  narrow  path 
described  above  and  attempted  to  attack  those  inside.  These  efforts 
were,  however,  futile.  For  within,  well  supplied  with  food  and  weap-- 
ons,  was  a  force  of  about  seventy  strong  and  valiant  men.  These  ex¬ 
perienced  men  Saladin  had  chosen  as  he  was  about  to  depart,  and  to 
their  vigilant  care,  as  to  those  on  whose  fidelity  and  steadfastness  he 
had  especial  reason  to  rely,  he  had  entrusted  the  stronghold. 

The  work  had  now  reached  a  point  where  the  almost  incessant 
blows  of  the  hammer  permitted  the  garrison  in  the  cave  no  rest.  As 
the  strokes  redoubled,  the  whole  mass  seemed  to  shake  and  tremble, 
so  that  the  dread  lest  a  forcible  entrance  might  be  effected  gave  way 
to  apprehension  that  the  whole  cave,  shattered  by  the  repeated  blows, 
might  suddenly  collapse  and  crush  all  within.  It  was  useless  to  hope 
that  any  aid  would  arrive,  for  Saladin,  as  they  knew,  had  departed 
with  all  his  troops  to  far  distant  parts  whence  he  could  not  easily  re¬ 
turn.  Finally,  after  the  siege  had  lasted  for  three  weeks  or  a  little 
longer,  they  sent  an  embassy  to  the  king,  and,  through  the  interven¬ 
tion  of  the  count  of  Tripoli,  obtained  permission  to  depart  freely  to 
Bostrum.  The  condition  was  made  that  they  surrender  the  citadel  and 
give  up  the  arms  which  they  had  borne  and  all  their  equipment. 
Thereupon,  they  at  once  resigned  the  place  and  departed.  Thus, 


CONFLICT  OF  INTERESTS  485 

through  the  superabounding  grace  of  God,  we  were  freed  from  the 
dangerous  situation  which  heretofore  had  seemed  to  menace  us. 

Now  that  the  surrender  had  been  made,  the  king  and  the  other 
leaders  saw  to  it,  as  seemed  wise,  that  the  fortress  was  supplied  with 
arms  and  provisions.  It  was  then  entrusted  to  the  charge  of  faithful 
men  whose  loyalty  and  ability  was  unquestioned,  and  after  everything 
had  been  carefully  attended  to  the  forces  returned  to  their  own  land. 

This  happened  in  the  year  1182  of  the  Incarnation  of  the  Lord,  in 
the  month  of  October,  the  .  .  .  day  of  the  month."*^ 

22.  The  king  ag(nn  invades  the  land  of  the  Damascenes  with  his  forces. 

A  SHORT  time  afterward — that  is,  in  the  following  December — our 
leaders  observed  that  Saladin,  detained  by  more  important  matters 
in  the  country  near  Mosul,  had  not  yet  returned.  Loath  to  lose  the 
opportunity  which  his  absence  afforded,  they  again  assembled  and, 
after  consulting  together  for  the  good  of  the  kingdom,  unanimously 
decided  to  call  a  rendezvous  at  Caesarea  on  the  coast.  It  was  resolved 
with  one  accord  to  muster  the  forces  of  the  realm  and  to  provide 
everything  necessary  for  the  use  of  both  men  and  beasts  during  an¬ 
other  campaign  of  fifteen  days  into  the  enemy’s  land,  that  the  offered 
opportunity  might  not  be  neglected.  A  secret  raid  in  which  only 
knights  took  part  was  first  made  into  hostile  territory  near  Bostrum, 
as  had  been  arranged  in  advance.  From  this  they  returned  in  safety 
and  brought  back  much  plunder  in  the  form  of  flocks  and  herds  and 
also  many  slaves.  Since  this  raid  started  from  the  land  of  Tiberias 
and  returned  to  the  same  place,  it  was  under  the  command  of  the 
count  of  Tripoli. 

At  length,  on  the  fifteenth  day,  the  kirig  and  the  barons  of  the 
realm,  with  as  large  a  force  of  infantry  and  cavalry  as  the  kingdom 
could  afford  at  the  time,  and  accompanied  by  the  Cross  of  the  Lord, 
assembled  near  Tiberias  at  a  place  on  the  sea  of  Galilee  called  CasteU 
lum.  From  there  they  crossed  the  river  at  Jacob’s  ford  and  entered 
the  enemy’s  land.  With  Lebanon  on  the  left,  the  army  proceeded 
through  the  plain  as  far  as  a  place  called  Bettegene.  This  they  utterly 
destroyed  with  all  the  adjacent  hamlets,  and,  partly  by  burning  and 
partly  by  razing  to  the  ground,  they  completely  ruined  everything 
found  there.  Still  farther  along  they  came  to  Daria,  a  place  about 

The  day  of  the  month  is  missing’  in  the  text. 


486  CONFLICT  OF  INTERESTS 

four  or  five  miles  from  Damascus.  This  also  was  laid  waste  in  the 
same  manner,  together  with  the  outlying  villages. 

The  people  in  this  vicinity  had  fled,  some  to  the  Lebanon  moun¬ 
tains  and  some  to  Damascus.  Consequently,  scarcely  a  prisoner  was 
taken  in  all  that  region.  We  lost  some  of  our  men,  however,  because 
of  their  own  reckless  conduct  while  foraging.  Certain  Turkish  knights, 
trusting  to  the  speed  of  their  horses,  had  issued  forth  from  Damascus 
and  were  hovering  about  our  lines.  Sometimes  they  rode  a  little  ahead 
of  our  ranks,  and  again  they  followed.  Always  watching  for  an  op¬ 
portunity  to  do  us  harm,  these  knights  fell  suddenly  upon  the  in¬ 
cautious  foragers  just  mentioned  and  in  a  furious  onslaught  slew 
them  to  a  man.  The  Damascenes  also  emerged  from  their  city  and 
massed  themselves  about  the  orchards  which  surround  the  place  in 
large  numbers.  From  this  distance  they  kept  a  close  watch  on  our 
troops  but  did  not  venture  to  advance  nearer.  The  Christians  did  not 
dare  attack  them,  nor  did  they  attempt  anything  against  us,  but  when 
our  people  departed  they  too  withdrew  into  the  city. 

After  overrunning  that  part  of  the  country  and  causing  much  dam¬ 
age,  as  already  described,  the  Christian  army  returned  home  without 
encountering  difficulty  or  hindrance.  The  king  himself  hastened  to 
Tyre  and  there  celebrated  with  us  the  Nativity  of  the  Lord.^® 

23.  A  census  of  the  kingdom  is  taken  as  a  protection  against 
future  mishaps. 

During  all  this  time,  indefinite  rumors  in  regard  to  Saladin’s  activi¬ 
ties  had  been  circulating.  Some  reports  indicated  that  he  was  meeting 
with  much  success  in  Mesopotamia  in  the  vicinity  of  Mosul,  where  he 
had  subjugated  the  entire  region  to  his  power  j  others,  on  the  con¬ 
trary,  were  to  the  effect  that  all  the  princes  of  the  East  had  united  in 
an  effort  to  drive  him  from  the  land  by  force  of  arms  and  thus  re¬ 
cover  the  territory  which  he  had  won  from  them  by  intrigue  and 
bribes.  His  progress  caused  the  Christians  much  uneasiness;  they 
viewed  the  increase  of  his  power  with  great  alarm,  lest  with  large  re¬ 
inforcements  he  should  return  against  them. 

Accordingly,  in  the  following  February,^'^  a  general  assembly  of 

The  friendship  of  Baldwin  IV  for  William  continued  despite  the  hostility  of  the 
court  party.  William *s  decision  to  stop  writing-  must  have  been  made  before  this 
time,  December  25,  1182. 

February,  1183. 


CONFLICT  OF  INTERESTS 


487 

all  the  barons  of  the  realm  was  held  at  Jerusalem  to  confer  about  the 
situation.  There  was  great  dread  of  his  return,  as  has  been  mentioned, 
and  for  that  reason  it  was  resolved  to  use  every  possible  means  to  re¬ 
sist  him. 

After  much  deliberation  and  expression  of  varying  opinions,  it  was 
resolved  by  common  consent  that  a  census  of  all  the  lands  of  the 
realm  be  taken.  If  such  a  report  were  available,  it  would  be  possible 
in  an  emergency  to  obtain  foot  and  cavalry  forces  so  that  the  enemy, 
if  he  returned,  might  find  us  prepared  for  resistance.  The  king  and 
the  barons  were  reduced  to  such  a  desperate  state  of  need  that  the 
revenues  were  entirely  insufficient  to  provide  for  the  necessary  out¬ 
lay.  It  was  imperative,  therefore,  that  money  be  collected  from  the 
people  as  a  whole.  A  perusal  of  the  rescript  which  was  made  on  this 
matter  will  afford  an  accurate  understanding  of  the  method  by  which 
this  levy  was  made.  It  was  as  follows:  ^^This  is  the  method  of  collect¬ 
ing  the  tax  which,  by  the  common  consent  of  all  the  nobles,  both 
secular  and  ecclesiastical,  and  by  the  assent  of  the  people  of  the  king¬ 
dom  of  Jerusalem  in  the  face  of  the  present  stringent  necessities,  must 
be  levied  for  the  common  good  of  this  realm. 

“It  is  decreed  on  behalf  of  the  state  that  in  every  city  of  this  realm 
there  be  chosen  four  men  of  discretion  and  worthy  of  confidence,  who, 
after  taking  a  solemn  oath  that  they  will  act  in  good  faith  in  this 
present  matter,  shall  first  themselves  give,  and  then  compel  others  to 
do  the  same,  one  besant  for  every  hundred  besants  which  they  own, 
or  its  equivalent  either  on  things  in  their  possession  or  on  credits  ow¬ 
ing  to  them.  From  revenues  also  they  shall  give  two  besants  for  every 
hundred  besants.  They  must  so  act  in  compelling  others  that  each 
citizen,  whether  an  inhabitant  of  a  city  or  of  other  places  over  which 
he  rules,  shall  pay  toward  this  fund  according  to  that  which  they 
shall  judge  in  good  faith  that  his  substance  is  worth,  and  they  shall 
assess  this  separately  upon  each  according  to  his  ability  to  pay. 

“But  if  any  man,  on  being  told  how  much  he  must  give,  shall  de¬ 
clare  that  he  is  overcharged  and  taxed  beyond  his  means,  he  shall 
declare,  according  to  his  own  conscience,  the  value  of  his  furniture  as 
seems  just  to  him  and,  having  declared  under  oath  that  he  cannot 
give  more,  he  shall  go  away  in  peace,  according  to  the  terms  cited. 

“The  four  men  shall  be  held  by  their  oath  to  keep  secret  what  has 
been  offered  to  them  by  each  citizen,  whether  much  or  little,  and  they 


488  CONFLICT  OF  INTERESTS 

shall  be  bound  by  oath  not  to  disclose  the  wealth  or  poverty  of  any¬ 
one.  They  must  observe  these  regulations  in  respect  to  those  who  are 
worth  a  hundred  besants,  of  whatever  language,  people,  or  faith  these 
may  be,  without  regard  to  sexj  for,  whether  male  or  female,  all  alike 
shall  be  subject  to  this  ruling. 

^^If  the  four  men  thus  chosen  and  assigned  to  this  duty  shall  know 
for  a  certainty  that  the  property  of  anyone  is  not  worth  a  hundred 
besants,  they  shall  receive  from  him  hearth  money  j  that  is  to  say, 
one  besant  for  every  fireplace.  If  they  cannot  obtain  a  whole  besant, 
they  shall  take  a  half  5  and  if  they  cannot  get  a  half,  they  shall  take 
a  raboin,  according  to  what  shall  seem  right  to  them  in  good  faith. 
All  whose  goods  are  not  worth  a  hundred  besants,  of  whatever 
tongue,  people,  faith,  or  sex  they  may  be,  shall  be  subject  to  this  condi¬ 
tion. 

^‘It  is  likewise  decreed  that  every  church  and  every  monastery,  and 
all  the  barons,  as  many  as  there  are,  and  also  the  vassals,  as  also  all 
others  in  the  kingdom  who  have  revenues,  shall  give  two  besants  out 
of  every  hundred  besants  which  they  have  in  rents.  Wage  earners 
also  shall  give  one  besant  for  every  hundred. 

^^All  who  own  casalia  are  bound  by  oath  that  for  every  hearth  which 
they  have  in  villages  or  casathy  they  shall  give  in  good  faith  one 
besant  in  addition  to  that  enjoined  above  j  so  that,  if  a  casal  has  a 
hundred  fires,  the  peasants  must  be  made  to  pay  a  hundred  besants. 
Afterwards  it  shall  be  the  duty  of  the  lord  of  the  casal  to  divide 
among  the  peasants  of  that  place  in  suitable  portions  the  above  named 
number  of  besants,  so  that  each  one  may  be  made  to  pay  the  above 
tax  in  proportion  to  his  means.  Thus  the  rich  may  not  escape  lightly 
nor  the  poor  be  overburdened.  The  ratio  shall  be  the  same  whether 
the  casal  has  many  or  few  fires. 

^^The  money  thus  collected  from  every  city  from  Haifa  to  Jeru¬ 
salem  shall  be  carried  to  Jerusalem  by  those  who,  as  we  said  before, 
are  over  each  city  and  castle.  They  shall  pay  it  in  a  fixed  sum  and 
weight  to  those  who  are  in  charge  of  this  work  at  Jerusalem.  The 
latter,  in  the  presence  of  the  patriarch  or  his  deputy,  and  of  the  prior 
of  the  canons  of  the  Sepulchre  of  the  Lord,  and  of  the  castellan  of 
Jerusalem,  shall  place  this  money  sealed  and  separate,  just  as  they 
receive  it  from  each  city  or  other  place,  in  separate  sealed  sacks,  which 
shall  be  placed  in  a  chest  in  the  treasury  of  the  Holy  Cross.  This 


CONFLICT  OF  INTERESTS 


489 

chest  shall  have  three  locks  and  three  keys,  the  first  of  which  the 
patriarch  shall  keep,  the  second,  the  prior  of  the  canons  of  the  Sepul¬ 
chre  of  the  Lord,  and  the  third  shall  be  in  the  keeping  of  the  castellan 
and  the  four  citizens  mentioned  above,  who  were  appointed  to  collect 
the  money. 

^^Those  who  are  in  charge  of  the  cities  from  Haifa  to  Beirut  shall 
carry  the  money  collected  in  like  manner  to  the  city  of  Acre.  There, 
under  a  fixed  sum  and  weight,  just  as  it  is  brought  from  each  city  and 
stronghold,  it  shall  be  handed  over  to  those  four  in  each  city  who 
are  in  charge  of  collecting  the  money,  and  it  shall  be  put  into  separate 
saeks  inscribed  and  sealed.  These  sacks  shall  be  placed  in  a  chest  which 
shall  have  three  locks  and  three  keys,  of  which  the  archbishop  of 
Tyre  shall  have  the  first,  Joscelin,  the  king’s  seneschal,  the  second, 
and  the  citizens  named  above  who  are  in  charge  of  the  matter  shall 
keep  the  third.  Those  who  have  the  keys  shall  receive  the  above- 
named  money  in  the  presence  of  the  said  lords, 

^^The  money  thus  raised  must  not  be  expended  on  the  ordinary 
affairs  of  the  realm  but  only  for  the  defense  of  the  land  j  and,  as  long 
as  this  money  shall  last,  the  tax  commonly  called  taille  shall  cease  to 
be  exacted  from  both  churches  and  citizens. 

“This  levy  shall  be  made  only  once  and  shall  not  be  regarded  as 
a  precedent  for  the  future.” 

I 

24.  Saladin  besieges  ALeffo  and  acquires  It  under  a  certam  agree- 
ment.  The  frince  of  Antioch  arranges  an  exchange  of 
Tarsus  with  Rufen^  duke  of  Armenia. 

During  this  time,  Saladin,  a  man  of  tireless  energy  who  ever  acted 
the  role  of  a  vigorous  leader  in  everything,  had  seized  the  land  of 
Syria  in  Mesopotamia  and  taken  by  force  cities  of  great  renown. 
Among  others,  he  invested  and  captured  the  famous  metropolis  of 
Amida,  which,  because  of  its  large  population,  the  massive  walls 
which  surrounded  it,  and  the  very  nature  of  its  site,  seemed  practically 

This  tax,  levied  to  meet  a  major  emergency,  did  become  a  model  for  taxation  in 
the  West.  It  is  of  interest  to  note  that  the  assent  of  the  people  as  well  as  of  the  nobles, 
both  secular  and  ecclesiastical,  is  specified  in  the  opening  of  the  document.  It  would 
have  been  even  more  interesting  to  learn  just  how  the  “assent  of  the  people”  was 
voiced.  The  document  represents  the  most  systematic  and  comprehensive  scheme  of 
taxation  thus  far  devised  by  feudal  authorities  and  as  such  impressed  both  Henry  II 
and  Philip  II  as  a  model  for  the  “Saladin  tithe”  and  later  taxation.  It  is  highly  prob¬ 
able  that  William  himself  drafted  this  document. 


CONFLICT  OF  INTERESTS 


490 

impregnable.  After  its  capture  he  gave  it,  according  to  agreement,  to 
a  Turkish  noble,  Nureddin,  son  of  Carassalem  [Kara-Arslan] ,  whose 
loyal  aid  had  enabled  him  to  prolong  his  stay  in  those  parts  and  com¬ 
plete  the  subjugation  of  that  region. 

In  the  following  spring  he  recalled  his  forces,  placed  the  entire  dis¬ 
trict  under  the  safekeeping  of  some  of  his  loyal  adherents,  and  cross¬ 
ing  the  Euphrates,  returned  to  Coelesyria.  Here  he  stationed  his  army 
around  Aleppo  and  used  every  possible  method  of  harassing  the  city. 

The  governor  of  Aleppo  was  well  aware  that  his  brother,  the  lord 
of  Mosul,  a  much  stronger  and  more  powerful  lord  than  himself, 
had  not  been  able  to  keep  this  same  Saladin  out  of  his  domain  j  in 
spite  of  all  efforts  to  the  contrary,  the  great  prince  had  subdued  all 
the  provinces  beyond  the  Euphrates  river.  Fearing  that  a  similar  fate 
might  overtake  himself,  he  secretly  sent  envoys  to  the  prince  without 
the  knowledge  of  the  people  of  Aleppo,  to  treat  for  terms  of  peace. 
If  Saladin  would  restore  Semar  to  him  and  certain  other  fortresses 
whose  names  I  do  not  recall,  he  in  return  would  surrender  Aleppo. 

Saladin  received  the  embassy  with  great  joy 3  from  the  very  be¬ 
ginning  of  his  rule  his  most  earnest  desire  had  been,  by  some  means 
or  other,  to  obtain  Aleppo,  which  he  regarded  as  the  bulwark  of  the 
whole  kingdom.  He  therefore  graciously  agreed  to  accept  the  terms, 
handed  over  the  above-named  city  with  its  neighboring  fortresses,  and 
on  the  Nones  of  June  received  Aleppo.^^ 

Redoubled  fear  took  hold  of  our  people  on  hearing  this  news,  for 
the  result  most  dreaded  by  them  had  come  to  pass.  From  the  first  it 
had  been  apparent  to  the  Christians  that  if  Saladin  should  succeed  in 
adding  Aleppo  to  his  principality  our  territory  would  be  as  com¬ 
pletely  encompassed  by  his  power  and  strength  as  if  it  were  in  a  state 
of  siege.  They  accordingly  tried  to  strengthen  the  fortifications  of 
their  cities  and  towns  in  every  possible  way,  especially  those  places 
that  were  situated  near  the  enemy ^s  borders.  Above  all,  they  increased 
the  defenses  of  Beirut,  which  seemed  to  be  particularly  weak. 

The  prince  of  Antioch  was  greatly  alarmed  at  the  proximity  of  so 

powerful  an  enemy.  Realizing  that  a  most  redoubtable  foe  was  now 

* 

opposed  to  him,  he  repaired  to  the  king,  who  was  at  that  time  staying 
at  the  city  of  Acre.  He  took  with  him  only  a  small  escort,  that  he 

Bella  ed-Din  (Saladifiy  p.  89)  dates  the  siege  of  Aleppo  by  Saladin  as  May  21  to 
June  II,  1183,  and  the  surrender  on  that  final  day. 


CONFLICT  OF  INTERESTS  491 

might  not  leave  the  land  stripped  of  defenders,  and  had  as  his  com¬ 
panion  the  count  of  Tripoli.  There,  in  the  presence  of  the  princes  of 
the  realm,  he  asked  for  aid  against  Saladin  and  it  was  decided 
that  his  petition  be  heard  according  to  his  desire.  Some  three  hundred 
knights  of  the  realm  of  various  ranks  were  granted  him  in  fulfilment 
of  his  request.  They  followed  him  to  Antioch  prepared  to  fight  under 
his  command,  but  in  a  short  time  they  returned,  having  taken  leave 
of  the  prince.  He  had  concluded  a  temporary  truce  with  Saladin  and 
seemed  to  feel  somewhat  assured  of  tranquillity.  That  he  might  have 
less  anxiety  and  be  able  to  watch  more  carefully  over  the  land  of 
Antioch,  he  had,  in  exchange  for  a  large  sum  of  money,  transferred 
the  city  of  Tarsus,  the  capital  of  Cilicia,  which  he  had  received  from 
the  Greeks,  to  Rupen,  a  powerful  Armenian  satrap  who  possessed  the 
other  cities  of  that  land.  He  showed  much  wisdom  in  doing  this. 
Tarsus  was  far  distant,  separated  from  Antioch  by  the  lands  of  Rupen  3 
it  was  therefore  very  difficult  and  costly  for  the  prince  to  care  for  it 
— a  matter  which  was  quite  easy  for  Rupen. 

After  Saladin  had  arranged  all  matters  in  that  locality  to  his  satis¬ 
faction,  he  left  for  Damascus  with  his  legions.  This  movement  caused 
even  greater  fear  to  our  people,  especially  because  it  was  impossible  to 
obtain  any  definite  information  through  scouts  as  to  his  actual  inten¬ 
tion.  Some  thought  that  after  summoning  the  naval  forces  he  would 
endeavor  to  besiege  the  city  of  Beirut,  as  he  had  done  the  year  before  3 
others,  that  he  meant  to  attack  Toron  and  Chastel  Neuf,  two  strong¬ 
holds  in  the  mountains  above  Tyre  3  still  others  believed  that  he  pro¬ 
posed  to  devastate  the  lands  beyond  the  Jordan,  namely  Syria  Sobal, 
and  to  destroy  the  fortified  places  in  that  vicinity.  There  were  even 
some  who  tried  to  assert  that  Saladin,  wearied  with  long-continued 
campaigns  in  far  distant  lands,  now  that  there  was  an  interval  of  peace 
planned  to  go  down  into  Egypt  to  rehabilitate  his  weakened  army  and 
collect  the  necessary  funds  for  future  campaigns. 

These  various  conjectures,  all  so  ambiguous,  kept  the  king  and  the 
barons  in  a  perpetual  state  of  anxiety  and  suspense.  Finally,  all  the 
available  forces  of  the  realm  were  concentrated  at  the  fountain  of 
Sephorie,  where  the  armies  from  early  times  had  been  accustomed  to 
assemble,  and  there  the  outcome  of  events  was  awaited.  Messages 
were  sent  to  the  prince  of  Antioch  and  the  count  of  Tripoli,  who  after 
urgent  entreaty  added  their  strength  and  counsel  to  the  rest.  In  this 


492  CONFLICT  OF  INTERESTS 

manner  they  waited,  expecting  from  day  to  day  that  Saladin  would 
suddenly  invade  some  part  of  the  kingdom  with  unusually  strong 
forces. 

25.  The  king  is  stricken  with  serious  illness  at  N axareth,  Guy  de 
Lusignany  count  0  is  made  regent  of  the  realm. 

While  the  army  was  waiting  in  this  state  of  suspense  at  the  foun¬ 
tain  of  Sephorie,  the  king  was  suffering  from  a  severe  attack  of  fever 
at  Nazareth.  In  addition,  the  leprosy  which  had  begun  to  trouble 
him  at  the  beginning  of  his  reign — in  fact,  in  very  early  youth — ^be¬ 
came  much  worse  than  usual.  His  sight  failed  and  his  extremities  be¬ 
came  completely  deadened  so  that  his  hands  and  feet  refused  to  per¬ 
form  their  office.  Yet  up  to  this  time  he  had  declined  to  heed  the 
suggestion  offered  by  some  that  he  lay  aside  his  kingly  dignity  and 
give  up  the  administration  of  the  realm,  so  that,  with  a  suitable  provi¬ 
sion  for  his  needs  from  the  royal  revenues,  he  could  lead  a  tranquil 
life  in  retirement. 

Although  physically  weak  and  impotent,  yet  mentally  he  was  vigor¬ 
ous,  and,  far  beyond  his  strength,  he  strove  to  hide  his  illness  and  to 
support  the  cares  of  the  kingdom.  When  he  was  attacked  by  the  fever, 
however,  he  lost  hope  of  life.  He  summoned  his  nobles  before  him 
and,  in  the  presence  of  his  mother  and  the  patriarch,  he  appointed  as 
regent  of  the  realm  Guy  de  Lusignan,  count  of  Jaffa  and  Ascalon,  his 
sister’s  husband,  who  has  been  so  often  mentioned  in  the  preceding 
pages.  He  retained  the  royal  dignity,  however,  and  kept  for  his  own 
use  only  the  city  of  Jerusalem,  with  an  annual  revenue  of  ten  thou¬ 
sand  gold  pieces. 

To  Guy  he  committed  the  general  administration  of  all  the  rest  of 
the  kingdom  without  restrictions  and  commanded  his  faithful  sub¬ 
jects  and  all  the  barons  generally  that  they  acknowledge  themselves 
vassals  of  Guy  and  swear  fealty  to  him.  This  was  done.  First,  how¬ 
ever,  at  Baldwin’s  command  Guy  is  said  to  have  sworn  that,  as  long 
as  the  king  lived,  he  would  not  aspire  to  the  crown  and  would  not 
transfer  to  others  or  alienate  from  the  treasury  any  of  the  cities  and 
castles  at  that  time  in  the  possession  of  the  king.  It  is  believed  that 
this  was  enjoined  upon  Guy  with  the  most  careful  forethought  and 
purpose  and  that  he  was  obliged  to  bind  himself  by  an  oath  in  the 
presence  of  all  the  barons  that  he  would  faithfully  observe  that  stipu¬ 
lation.  For  he  had  promised  almost  all  the  most  important  lords  of 


CONFLICT  OF  INTERESTS 


493 

the  realm  individually  no  slight  portions  of  the  kingdom  in  order  to 
secure  their  votes  and  interest  in  obtaining  his  end.  It  was  even  ru¬ 
mored  that  he  had  taken  a  similar  oath  to  these  lords  that  he  would 
carry  out  his  promises.  This  can  not  be  stated  as  a  fact,  for  we  have 
no  definite  information  on  the  matter,  but  constant  rumors  to  this 
effect  were  in  circulation  among  the  people.^® 

There  were  those  who  were  displeased  at  this  change;  some  were 
inclined  to  object  to  it  because  of  their  own  personal  interests  and 
private  reasons;  others  pleaded  the  public  welfare  and,  apprehensive 
about  the  condition  of  the  realm,  declared  openly  that  the  count  was 
not  equal  to  the  burden  of  so  great  responsibility  and  was  not  com¬ 
petent  to  administer  the  affairs  of  the  realm.  Others,  however,  who 
hoped  that  Guy’s  promotion  might  improve  their  own  condition, 
maintained  that  it  was  well  done.  Among  the  people  there  was  much 
murmuring  and  diversity  of  opinion  for,  as  says  the  proverb,  “so 
many  men,  so  many  minds.” 

The  count  did  not  long  rejoice,  however,  in  this  eagerly  desired 
charge  which  was  now  committed  to  him  according  to  his  wish  and 
in  which  he  at  first  rather  indiscreetly  gloried. 

We  have  said  that  he  took  this  responsibility  upon  himself  unad¬ 
visedly,  for  this  reason:  he  did  not  sufficiently  consider  his  strength 
with  reference  to  the  task  laid  upon  him.  Unequal  to  the  burden  both 
in  force  and  wisdom,  he  assumed  an  insupportable  weight.  He  had 
not  learned  the  truth  of  that  parable  of  the  evangelist,  wherein  he 
advises  that  “one  who  intends  to  build  a  tower  first  sit  down  and  count 
the  cost,  whether  he  have  sufficient  to  finish  it  lest  he  fail  and  it  be 
said,  ^This  man  began  to  build,  and  was  not  able  to  finish.’  ” 

26.  Saladin  invades  oiir  land  with  mighty  forces  and  encamfs 
in  the  neighborhood  of  Scythofolis.  The  Christians  march 
out  against  him. 

This,  then,  was  the  state  of  affairs  in  the  kingdom,  and  meanwhile 
the  greater  part  of  the  army  was  assembled  at  Sephorie.  During  this 

William  is  here  describing  the  methods  of  party  politics  in  the  kingdom  at  this 
time.  The  king’s  mother,  Agnes  de  Courtenay,  and  the  patriarch  are  here  specified 
as  the  leaders  of  the  faction.  That  it  was  not  William’s  party  is  indicated  by  his  reliance 
upon  rumor  or  report. 

This  is  one  of  William’s  favorite  quotations,  as  it  was  also  of  the  law  schools  of 
the  West.  It  harks  back  to  Terence,  but  it  was  so  much  used  that  few  persons  probably 
knew  its  origin. 

Adapted  from  Lu.  14:  28-30. 


494  CONFLICT  OF  INTERESTS 

time  Saladin,  after  much  deliberation,  had  summoned  his  forces  from 
the  lands  beyond  the  Euphrates  and  with  all  the  cavalry  which  he 
could  gather  from  every  source  entered  the  frontiers  of  the  realm, 
followed  by  his  great  host  armed  to  the  teeth.  After  traversing  the 
land  of  Hauran,  along  the  sea  of  Tiberias,  he  suddenly  appeared 
with  his  legions  in  several  divisions  at  a  place  called  Cavan  in  the 
plain  of  the  Jordan.  From  there,  following  the  course  of  the  river, 
he  proceeded  toward  Scythopolis.  As  has  often  been  mentioned,  this 
place,  now  called  Bethsan,  was  once  the  capital  of  all  Galilee.  Many 
evidences  of  its  former  greatness  are  still  to  be  seen  in  the  ruins  of 
the  ancient  buildings  and  in  the  quantity  of  marble  which  exists  among 
them.  It  is  now  reduced  to  almost  nothing,  with  only  a  few  scattered 
inhabitants,  only  a  sparsely  settled  hamlet  situated  in  a  marshy  place. 

Although  the  people  dwelling  there  were  well  supplied  with  arms 
and  food  in  proportion  to  their  number  and  the  size  of  the  place,  yet 
they  felt  no  confidence  in  the  defenses  of  their  citadel.  Before  the 
hostile  army  arrived,  therefore,  they  abandoned  the  fortress,  leaving 
all  their  possessions  behind,  and  repaired  to  Tiberias.  So,  on  arriving 
at  Scythopolis,  the  enemy  found  it  deserted  and  were  able  to  work 
their  will  upon  it.  Accordingly  they  bore  off  with  them  all  the  arms 
and  food  and  everything  that  was  of  use  in  the  place.  From  Scytho¬ 
polis  they  set  out  in  separate  detachments.  One  of  these,  because  of 
the  convenient  water  supply,  encamped  by  a  spring  called  Tubania, 
which  rises  at  the  foot  of  Mt.  Galboa,  in  the  vicinity  of  a  once  famous 
city,  formerly  known  as  Jezrael  but  now  commonly  called  Little 
Gerin. 

The  Christians  were  still  encamped  near  the  fountain  of  Sephorie, 
so  often  mentioned  in  this  history,  anxiously  waiting  to  learn  from 
what  direction  the  hostile  forces  would  invade  our  land.  When  they 
found  that  the  Turks  were  already  in  possession  of  the  plains  of 
Bethsan  and  that  their  legions  in  many  divisions  had  now  invaded 
that  country,  they  seized  arms  with  one  accord.  Following  the  Life- 
giving  Cross  and  the  royal  standards,  they  crossed  the  mountains 
where  lies  Nazareth,  the  city  of  Our  Lord,  and  went  down  into  the 
great  plain,  the  ancient  name  of  which  was  Esdrelon.  Thence,  with 
troops  arranged  in  battle  formation,  fittingly  disposed  according  to 
the  rules  of  military  science,  they  directed  their  course  toward  the 
springs  of  Tubania,  where  Saladin  with  a  strong  force  of  picked 


CONFLICT  OF  INTERESTS 


495 

knights  distinguished  for  their  prowess  had  established  himself  near 
the  waters. 

The  intention  of  the  Christians  had  been  to  drive  out  the  foe  and 
obtain  the  advantage  of  the  water  for  their  own  use.  On  reaching 
there,  however,  they  felt  that  it  would  be  impossible  to  seize  the 
place  without  great  difficulty  and  hazardous  combats  with  the  enemy. 
But,  suddenly,  Saladin  broke  camp  and  most  unexpectedly  abandoned 
the  springs.  Following  the  course  of  the  stream,  he  again  encamped 
lower  down  opposite  Bethsan,  about  a  mile  distant  from  us.  Then,  be¬ 
fore  the  Christians  could  reach  the  place,  the  infidels,  breaking  off 
from  the  main  army  into  small  bands,  began  to  scour  and  ravage  the 
surrounding  country  in  enemy  fashion.  One  of  these  bands  had  at¬ 
tacked  Little  Gerin,  the  village  named  above,  and  utterly  destroyed 
everything  it  contained.  Few  or  none  of  the  inhabitants  were  found 
there,  however  j  forewarned  of  the  enemy’s  coming,  they  had  fled  to 
places  more  strongly  fortified. 

Other  bands  reached  a  place  generally  known  as  Forbeletj  this 
they  took  by  force  and  in  enemy  fashion  worked  havoc  with  every¬ 
thing  in  sight.  Others  followed  the  highways,  where  their  presence 
was  attended  with  great  peril  to  both  knights  and  foot  soldiers,  so 
that  those  who  were  hastening  from  various  directions  to  join  our 
army  arrived  there  at  the  peril  of  their  lives.  Some  of  these  same 
enemies  even  climbed  Mt.  Tabor,  a  feat  hitherto  unknown.  There 
they  treated  the  Greek  monastery  of  St.  Elias  according  to  their  own 
good  pleasure  and  even  tried  to  break  by  force  into  the  greater  cloister 
itself.  But  the  monks  with  all  their  household  and  the  people  from 
the  villages  near  by  retired  within  the  monastery,  which  was  de¬ 
fended  by  a  wall  with  towers.  Here  they  made  a  valiant  defense  and 
routed  from  all  parts  of  the  encircling  ramparts  the  foe  who  had 
scaled  the  mountain. 

Nothing  daunted,  however,  some  of  these  same  bands  climbed  the 
height  beyond  which  Nazareth  lies,  where  from  the  hills  towering 
above  they  could  look  down  upon  the  whole  city.  Their  appearance 
caused  great  terror  to  the  women  and  children  who,  together  with  the 
aged  men  and  the  sick,  had  been  left  there,  and  it  is  said  that  many, 
while  struggling  to  flee  for  refuge  to  the  greater  church,  were  suf¬ 
focated  in  the  crowd.  The  majority  of  the  citizens  able  to  bear  arms 
were  either  following  the  campaign  with  the  general  expedition  or 


496  CONFLICT  OF  INTERESTS 

had  departed  with  their  households  to  the  cities  on  the  coast,  espe¬ 
cially  to  Acre, 

27.  A  terrible  j amine  breaks  out  in  the  army.  Both  the  Christians 
and  the  Turks  finally  defart  without  having  engaged  in 
battle. 

These  detached  bands  from  the  army  of  Saladin,  ranging  far  and 
wide  over  the  whole  district,  caused  serious  danger  to  those  who 
wished  to  reach  our  army.  Through  fear  of  them,  no  one  dared  ap¬ 
proach  the  Christian  camp  either  to  trade  or  to  bring  assistance.  As  a 
result,  famine  soon  broke  out  in  the  ranks.  For  in  order  to  march 
without  encumbrance  against  the  foe,  they  had  proceeded  thither 
without  baggage  or  impedimenta,  hoping  that  the  matter  would  be 
settled  within  two,  or  at  the  most  three,  days.  The  people  on  foot 
suffered  the  greatest  distress,  especially  those  from  the  coast  who 
had  been  called  at  a  moment’s  notice — namely  the  Pisans,  Genoese, 
Venetians,  and  Longobards.  These  had  left  their  ships  and  their 
preparations  for  sailing  (it  was  already  about  the  middle  of  October 
and  the  time  of  crossing  was  at  hand)  and,  together  with  the  pilgrims 
whom  they  had  contracted  to  take  back,  had  joined  our  forces.  They 
had  brought  no  food  whatsoever  and  were  scarcely  able  to  carry  their 
arms,  for  the  camp  was  about  twenty  miles  from  the  sea.  Messengers 
were  therefore  dispatched  to  the  neighboring  cities  to  request  those 
in  charge  to  send  provisions  speedily.  The  royal  orders  were  at  once 
zealously  and  carefully  obeyed,  and  all  the  food  that  could  be  col¬ 
lected  was  sent  to  the  camp  without  delay.  The  greater  part  of  these 
stores  reached  their  destination  safely  and  afforded  a  sufficient  supply 
for  the  temporary  emergency.  One  party,  however,  carrying  a  large 
amount  of  provisions,  through  lack  of  proper  precaution,  fell  into  the 
enemy’s  hands,  for  the  Turks  were  also  in  great  need.  Some  of  our 
knights  had  been  sent  out  to  act  as  escort  to  protect  the  parties  who 
were  bringing  supplies.  Those  whom  they  met  they  conducted  safely 
to  the  camp,  but  those  who  had  no  such  assistance,  falling  in  with 
hostile  rangers,  either  fell  by  the  sword  or  were  forced  to  serve  the 
enemy  ever  after. 

At  that  time,  if  our  sins  had  suffered  the  Lord  to  be  propitious 
toward  us,  the  power  of  the  Turks  might  easily  have  been  turned  to 
their  own  destruction  and  their  intolerable  arrogance  have  been  made 


CONFLICT  OF  INTERESTS 


497 

a  mockery.  For  nowhere  is  it  recorded  that  such  large  forces  of  both 
cavalry  and  infantry  were  ever  assembled  from  all  parts  of  the  East; 
nor  do  aged  men  remember  that  forces  so  well  equipped  were  ever 
united  into  one  body  from  a  single  kingdom.  The  Christians  had 
cavalry  to  the  number  of  thirteen  hundred,  and  their  force  of  well- 
equipped  foot  soldiers  was  said  to  exceed  fifteen  thousand.  Moreover, 
the  army  was  commanded  by  great  and  brilliant  leaders,  men  of  il¬ 
lustrious  race,  distinguished  for  prowess  in  battle:  Raymond,  count 
of  Tripoli  j  Henry,  duke  of  Louvain,  a  leader  of  high  rank  from  the 
kingdom  of  the  Teutons  5  and  Ralph  de  Mauleon,  a  warrior  of  great 
renown  from  Aquitaine.  In  addition,  there  were  the  following  barons 
of  the  realm:  Guy,  count  of  Jaffa j  Renaud  de  Chatillon,  lord  of  a 
domain  beyond  the  Jordan,  who  had  formerly  been  prince  of  Antioch  j 
Baldwin  of  Ramlah  and  Balian  of  Nablus,  his  brother  j  Renaud  of 
Sidonj  Walter  of  Caesarea  j  Joscelin,  seneschal  of  the  king.  In  view 
of  these  facts,  it  seemed  highly  probable  that  our  enemies  had  been 
very  imprudent  in  crossing  the  Jordan  and  occupying  our  lands.  In 
punishment  for  our  sins,  however,  contention  arose  among  the  nobles, 
as  the  result  of  which  matters  of  state  which  required  the  utmost  care 
are  said  to  have  been  carelessly  and  even  wickedly  handled.  Those 
who,  it  seemed,  would  have  been  best  able  to  handle  the  critical  situa¬ 
tion  [refused  to  act],^^  it  is  said,  through  hatred  of  the  count  of  Jaffa, 
to  whom,  two  days  before,  the  king  had  entrusted  the  welfare  of  the 
kingdom.  For  they  took  it  ill  that  at  so  critical  and  dangerous  a  time 
matters  of  the  highest  importance  had  been  placed  in  the  hands  of 
an  obscure  man,  wholly  incapable  and  indiscreet.  As  a  result  they  too 
patiently,  or  rather,  disgracefully,  allowed  the  enemy  to  remain  for 
eight  successive  days  encamped  in  the  vicinity  of  our  army  hardly 
more  than  a  mile  away — a  thing  which,  it  is  said,  had  never  happened 
before  in  the  kingdom.  During  this  time  the  Turks  ravaged  the  en¬ 
tire  region  with  impunity. 

Plain  people  who  were  with  the  army  and  who  had  no  part  in  the 
wickedness  of  the  Christian  leaders  wondered  why  it  was  that  when 
such  an  opportunity  offered  no  engagement  with  the  enemy  occurred, 
nor  was  anything  done  about  a  fight.  When  the  matter  was  openly 

There  is  an  omission  in  the  text  at  this  point,  the  probable  tenor  of  which  is  sug:- 
gested  within  the  brackets.  It  must  be  noted  that  William  is  here  criticizing  his  own 
friends.  Apparently  he  considers  the  needs  of  the  nation  as  transcending  the  interest 
of  faction,  even  his  own. 


498  CONFLICT  OF  INTERESTS 

discussed,  however,  the  excuse  offered  for  the  delay  was  that  Saladin, 
the  commander  of  the  infidel  forces,  was  intrenched  in  a  position  sur¬ 
rounded  by  rocks  and  that  it  would  be  impossible  for  our  troops  to 
approach  him  without  great  danger.  Moreover,  he  was  said  to  have 
placed  strong  bodies  of  troops  in  a  circle  round  about  who  had  orders 
to  fall  upon  our  forces  from  every  direction  if  we  should  attempt  to 
engage  his  army. 

Some  said  that  this  was,  in  fact,  the  truth  and  maintained  that  the 
leaders  were  justified  in  their  position.  Others,  on  the  contrary,  as¬ 
serted  that  it  was  only  an  excuse,  a  trick  deliberately  invented  to 
avoid  battle,  lest,  if  success  should  attend  our  arms,  it  might  be  as¬ 
cribed  to  the  count  under  whose  leadership  it  would  have  been  fought 
to  a  successful  outcome. 

We  have  stated  these  reasons  as  the  varying  sentiments  of  many 
people,  but  we  assert  nothing  positively,  for  we  have  not  fully  as¬ 
certained  the  truth  of  the  matter.  It  is  a  fact,  however,  that  for  seven 
or  eight  successive  days  the  enemy  remained  without  opposition  in 
our  territory  in  the  vicinity  of  the  Jordan  and  daily,  with  impunity, 
wrought  much  evil  upon  our  army. 

At  length,  on  the  eighth,  or  rather  on  the  ninth,  day  Saladin  re¬ 
called  his  forces  and  retired  unharmed  to  his  own  land.  The  Chris¬ 
tians,  not  as  yet  wholly  convinced  that  he  would  not  return,  went 
back  to  the  fountain  of  Sephorie. 

A  certain  event  worthy  of  record  happened  during  the  time  when 
our  army  was  waiting  at  the  spring  of  Tubania.  Up  to  that  time  it 
was  thought  that  this  spring  and  the  streams  flowing  from  it  con¬ 
tained  few  or  no  fish,  but  during  the  Christians’  sojourn  there  it  is 
said  to  have  furnished  a  supply  sufficient  for  the  whole  army. 

28.  Saladin  lays  siege  to  the  city  of  Petra  beyond  the  Jordan  and 
takes  it  by  force. 

Matters  turned  out  very  much  as  the  Christians  had  anticipated. 
Scarcely  a  month  had  rolled  by  when  Saladin,  having  recruited  his 
forces,  again  prepared  for  war.  Again  he  summoned  his  cohorts  and 
mustered  his  legions,  had  his  engines  moved,  and  made  ready  with 
utmost  care  all  the  usual  apparatus  employed  in  siege  operations. 
After  all  these  preparations  had  been  duly  made,  he  marched  through 
Basan  and  Gilead,  traversed  the  land  of  the  Ammonites  and  Moabites 


CONFLICT  OF  INTERESTS 


499 

beyond  the  Jordan,  and  prepared  to  lay  siege  to  the  city  formerly 
called  Petra  of  the  Desert,  but  now  known  as  Kerak. 

As  soon  as  he  learned  this  through  scouts,  Renaud  de  Chatillon, 
who  was  in  charge  of  these  regions  as  belonging  to  the  heritage  of  his 
wife,  proceeded  rapidly  thither  with  a  body  of  cavalry  which  seemed 
large  enough  to  assure  the  protection  of  the  place. 

He  had  other  interests  also  at  Kerak.  Humphrey  III,  son  of  Hum¬ 
phrey  II,  grandson  through  his  father  of  the  elder  Humphrey  of 
Toron,  the  king^s  constable,  and  stepson  of  that  Renaud  of  whom  we 
are  speaking,  was  at  this  time  about  to  marry  the  king’s  younger 
sister,  to  whom  he  had  been  betrothed  almost  four  years  previously. 

Soon  after  Renaud’s  arrival  at  Kerak,  when  the  nuptial  celebration 
was  barely  over — in  fact,  on  that  very  day,  it  is  said — Saladin  appeared 
before  the  place.  He  had  with  him  a  vast  army  and  all  the  para¬ 
phernalia  of  machines  and  hurling  engines  which  are  commonly  used 
in  harassing  a  city  under  siege.  The  camp  was  immediately  placed  in 
a  circle  around  the  fortress,  and  the  siege  began. 

Here,  upon  a  very  high  mountain  surrounded  by  deep  valleys,  the 
city  of  Petra  had  once  been  located.  For  a  long  time,  however,  it  had 
lain  in  ruins,  utterly  desolate.  Finally,  during  the  reign  of  Fulk,  the 
third  king  of  the  Latins  in  the  Orient,  one  Paganus,  surnamed  the 
butler,  lord  of  a  domain  lying  beyond  the  Jordan,  built  a  citadel  on 
this  site.  It  was  placed  upon  the  same  mountain  where  the  city  had 
once  lain,  but  on  a  less  precipitous  slope  which  ran  down  to  the  plain 
below.  The  successors  of  Paganus,  namely  Maurice,  his  nephew,  and 
Philip  of  Nablus,  had  added  a  moat  and  towers  to  render  the  place 
still  more  unassailable.  Clustering  on  the  outskirts  of  this  fortress,  on 
the  site  of  the  earlier  city,  was  now  a  village  whose  inhabitants  had 
placed  their  homes  there  as  a  comparatively  safe  location.  East  of 
them  lay  the  fortress,  the  best  of  protection,  while  on  the  other  sides 
rose  the  mountain  itself,  encompassed,  as  has  been  said,  by  deep  val¬ 
leys.  Thus,  if  the  village  had  even  a  moderately  low  wall,  the  in¬ 
habitants  need  not  fear  any  hostile  attack.  At  two  points  only  was 
there  any  possibility  of  reaching  the  top  of  the  mountain,  and  these 
could  be  easily  defended  by  a  few  men  even  against  large  hostile 
forces.  The  other  sides  were  supposed  to  be  impregnable. 

When  Prince  Renaud  perceived  that  the  enemy  had  arrived,  he 
proposed  rashly  enough,  as  it  seemed  to  those  experienced  in  matters 


500  CONFLICT  OF  INTERESTS 

of  this  kind,  to  try  to  defend  the  outer  place  and  the  village  next  to 
the  citadel.^^  He  therefore  forbade  the  people  who  wished  to  carry 
their  goods  into  the  fortress  and  to  provide  for  their  own  safety  there 
to  forsake  their  homes  or  presume  to  move  any  of  their  least  posses¬ 
sions. 

Meanwhile  the  knights  and  the  infantry  detachments  were  vigor¬ 
ously  engaged  in  trying  to  block  the  enemy’s  path  up  the  mountain, 
but  the  multitude  of  the  foe  proved  too  much  for  them.  Those  who 
were  trying  to  obstruct  the  passage  were  put  to  flight  j  Saladin’s  forces 
gained  possession  of  the  mountain  and  opened  a  path  by  the  sword. 
Thus  the  enemy  nearly  succeeded  in  forcing  their  way  into  the  citadel 
at  the  same  time  that  the  Christians  were  trying  to  retreat  thither.  Had 
it  not  been  for  the  remarkable  firmness  of  one  knight,  named  Iven, 
those  Turks  who  were  already  close  to  the  fortress  would  without 
difficulty  have  forced  a  free  entrance  for  their  comrades  over  the 
bridge  and  through  the  gate  next  to  it. 

So  through  the  rash  tactics  of  their  lord,  the  wretched  citizens 
suffered  the  loss  of  their  goods.  All  their  household  possessions,  all 
their  furniture  and  utensils  of  every  description,  were  seized  by  the 
enemy.  As  an  addition  to  their  troubles,  those  who  had  fled  to  the 
citadel  in  dread  of  Saladin’s  onslaughts,  had  rashly  and  inconsiderately 
thrown  down  the  bridge.  Since  this  afforded  the  only  passage  across 
the  moat,  the  one  way  by  which  those  inside  the  citadel  could  come 
or  go  was  destroyed. 

Great  crowds  of  helpless  people  of  every  description  and  of  both 
sexes  filled  the  castle  within,  a  burden  rather  than  a  help  to  the  be¬ 
sieged.  There  were  many  actors  and  performers  on  the  flute  and 
psaltery  and  other  people  who  had  flocked  thither  from  all  over  the 
country  for  the  festivities  attending  the  wedding.  The  anticipations 
of  all  these  were  sadly  thwarted,  for  where  they  had  expected  to  find 
gains  and  wedding  jollity  they  encountered  martial  combats  and  war¬ 
like  doings,  far  different  from  the  pursuits  to  which  they  were  ac¬ 
customed. 

Moreover,  many  Syrians  with  their  wives  and  children  had  come 
in  from  the  surrounding  country.  The  place  was  filled  with  them  so 

Here  again  William  criticizes  military  strategy,  this  time  of  Renaud  de  Chatillon, 
who  had  been  the  real  commander  in  the  victory  of  Baldwin  IV  over  Saladin  in  1177. 
This  may  reflect  partisan  opinion,  for  William’s  information  doubtless  came  from 
nobles  who  were  almost  as  much  opposed  to  Renaud  as  to  Guy. 


CONFLICT  OF  INTERESTS 


501 

that  those  who  wished  to  pass  back  and  forth  could  not  do  so  freely 
on  account  of  the  dense  crowds.  Thus  these  too  became  a  hindrance 
and  an  obstruction  to  the  more  active  men  and  to  those  who  were 
trying  to  defend  the  place.  The  fortress  was  well  stocked  with  pro¬ 
visions,  although  the  supply  of  weapons  was  not  as  large  as  seemed 
necessary  for  the  defense  of  the  place. 

29.  King  Bald'ivin  removes  the  count  of  Jafa  as  general  ad¬ 
ministrator  of  the  realm.  He  crowns  his  nefliew  with  the 
royal  diadem. 

Meanwhile  the  king  realized  that  in  the  conduct  of  affairs  at  the 
springs  of  Tubania,  as  described  above,  the  count  of  Jaffa,  to  whom, 
as  we  have  said,  he  had  committed  the  government  of  the  realm,  had 
shown  himself  far  from  wise  or  valiant.  Through  his  imprudence  and 
general  inefficiency,  the  condition  of  the  kingdom  had  fallen  into  an 
evil  state.  By  the  advice  of  wiser  counsellors,  therefore,  Baldwin  took 
back  into  his  own  hands  the  charge  of  affairs  which  he  had  entrusted 
to  the  count  of  Jaffa.  Other  causes  also  are  said  to  have  been  respon¬ 
sible  for  this  action.  The  fact  has  already  been  mentioned  that  when 
the  king  conferred  the  responsibility  of  the  realm  upon  Guy,  he  had 
retained  for  his  own  expenses  the  city  of  Jerusalem  with  a  revenue 
of  ten  thousand  gold  pieces,  payable  annually.  Later,  he  repented  of 
this  action  and  desired  to  exchange  Jerusalem  for  Tyre  on  the  same 
terms,  because  the  latter  was  the  best-fortified  city  in  the  entire  king¬ 
dom  and  seemed  better  adapted  to  his  needs.  Since  the  count  ap¬ 
peared  unwilling  to  entertain  this  request,  the  king  is  said  to  have 
experienced  an  entire  change  of  sentiment. 

It  was  indeed  just  that  one  who  was  reluctant  to  show  himself 
generous  in  a  small  matter  toward  the  man  who  had  given  him 
everything  should  be  deprived  of  the  supreme  control  of  affairs.  Not 
only  was  the  charge  of  the  realm  and  the  honor  of  administering  it 
taken  from  him,  but  he  was  entirely  cut  off  from  all  hope  of  succes¬ 
sion.  By  the  unanimous  advice  of  the  barons,  especially  of  Bohemond, 
prince  of  Antioch,  Raymond,  count  of  Tripoli,  Renaud  of  Sidon, 
Baldwin  of  Ramlah  and  Balian,  his  brother,  and  at  the  suggestion  and 
urgent  advice  of  the  king’s  mother,  Baldwin,  a  young  child  scarcely 
five  years  old,  received  the  royal  unction  and  was  solemnly  crowned 
in  the  church  of  the  Resurrection  of  the  Lord.  This  act  was  ratified  by 


CONFLICT  OF  INTERESTS 


502 

the  entire  people  and  agreed  to  by  the  clergy  present.  The  count  of 
Jaffa  was  also  present  but  did  not  dare  to  speak  against  it. 

Immediately,  without  delay,  all  the  barons  swore  allegiance  to  the 
boy  under  the  customary  formula  and  rendered  him  in  the  fullest 
measure  the  honor  and  deference  due  to  royal  majesty.  The  count 
of  Jaffa  alone  was  not  asked  to  do  him  homage.  This  fact  seemed  to 
those  of  long  experience,  as  doubtless  it  was,  convincing  proof  of  a 
deep-seated  animosity — or,  rather,  plain  hatred.  This  will  be  more 
clearly  shown  later. 

The  opinions  of  wise  men  over  this  great  change  were  many  and 
varied.  Some  said  that  the  elevation  of  this  boy  could  be  of  no  benefit 
to  the  realm  or  advantage  to  public  affairs  3  for,  since  both  kings  were 
hampered,  one  by  disease  and  the  other  by  youth,  it  was  wholly  use¬ 
less.  Far  better  would  it  be  if,  following  the  general  advice  of  the 
more  important  men  of  the  kingdom,  the  care  of  the  royal  business 
and  the  charge  of  affairs  of  state  were  committed  to  someone  strong 
in  war  and  wise  in  counsel.  Others  felt  that  even  if  the  action  taken  in 
respect  to  the  boy  be  judged  of  little  utility,  yet  it  might  prove  ad¬ 
vantageous  to  the  state  in  one  respect,  namely  that  it  removed  from 
the  count  all  hope  of  succession  to  the  crown.  Since  he  was,  according 
to  all  report,  entirely  incompetent  and  yet  filled  with  intense  longing 
to  rule,  he  might  become  the  source  of  disputes  in  the  future  and  the 
incentive  toward  dangerous  sedition  which  was  to  be  feared  after  the 
death  of  the  king.  This  it  was  hoped  would  now  be  completely 
eliminated. 

Yet  in  the  hearts  of  all  there  was  but  one  thought  and  one  desire: 
it  was  that  a  regent  might  be  appointed  to  administer  the  business  of 
the  state  and  especially  to  lead  the  armies  against  the  enemy  who  was 
even  now  threatening  us  more  violently  than  ever.  The  sentiment  was 
practically  unanimous  that  the  count  of  Tripoli,  and  he  alone,  would 
be  capable  of  undertaking  this  duty  successfully.  This  happened  in  the 
year  of  the  Incarnation  of  the  Lord  1183,  of  the  first  Indiction,  on 
November 

William’s  own  hopes  and  wishes  must  have  inclined  him  to  regard  the  choice 
of  RajTOond  of  Tripoli  as  ^‘practically  unanimous.”  Raymond’s  chief  opponents  were 
probably  not  present  at  this  meeting. 


CONFLICT  OF  INTERESTS 


503 


30.  The  king  assembles  his  forces  and  hastens  across  the  Jordan 
to  the  helf  of  the  besieged,  Saladin  raises  the  blockade. 

While  these  events  were  talcing  place  at  Jerusalem,  Saladin  was 
harassing  the  besieged  city  with  unremitting  diligence  and  violence. 
His  importunate  perseverance  denied  all  chance  of  rest  to  those  shut 
up  within  the  place.  He  had  caused  eight  machines  to  be  erected,  six 
within,  where  the  ancient  city  had  stood,  and  two  outside,  in  that  place 
which  is  commonly  known  as  Obelet.  The  attack  was  carried  on  in- 
defatigably  by  night  as  well  as  by  day,  and  stones  of  such  great  size 
were  hurled  that  no  one  inside  the  walls  dared  raise  a  hand  or  look 
out  of  the  openings  or  try  any  method  of  resistance.  Terror  and 
desperation  had  now  taken  such  hold  of  the  wretched  citizens  that 
they  did  not  venture  to  show  themselves  even  when  the  enemy  slid 
down  by  ropes  and  killed  with  impunity  the  animals  which  the  refu¬ 
gees  had  brought  inside  the  moat  around  the  citadel.  Without  en¬ 
countering  the  least  opposition  or  peril,  the  Turks  cut  up  the  carcasses 
into  joints  and  drew  the  pieces  up  to  be  used  as  food  for  themselves. 

Those  who  acted  as  cooks  and  bakers  in  the  enemy’s  army  and 
those  who  provided  the  market  with  all  sorts  of  commodities  placed 
their  workshops  in  the  homes  of  the  citizens  and  there  freely  carried 
on  their  work  amid  conveniences  of  all  kinds.  These  homes  were  well 
stocked  with  grain,  barley,  wine,  and  oil,  all  of  which  the  enemy  took 
by  force  in  spite  of  the  owners  and  used  as  they  would. 

At  one  time  those  besieged  in  the  fortress  tried  to  set  up  a  machine 
of  their  own.  The  enemy  in  charge  of  the  engines  outside,  however, 
aimed  the  stone  missiles  with  such  skill  that  the  Christians,  appalled 
by  the  constant  blows  and  the  fear  of  death  which  every  stone  seemed 
to  threaten,  abandoned  the  attempt.  They  judged  it  wiser  to  endure 
with  patience  whatever  fate  sent  rather  than  to  expose  themselves  to 
death  by  attempting  any  kind  of  defense. 

These  dangers,  which  caused  men  to  shake  with  terror,  assailed  not 
only  those  who  crept  forth  from  their  hiding  places  to  hurl  weapons 
or  stone  missiles  from  the  ramparts  or  to  gaze  down  upon  the  be¬ 
sieging  forces.  Even  those  who  had  fled  to  the  innermost  apartments, 
the  most  retired  seclusion,  shrank  with  terror  before  the  crash  and 
roar  of  the  oncoming  missiles.  It  seemed  to  them  like  thunder  and, 


CONFLICT  OF  INTERESTS 


504 

ever  in  suspense  lest  the  building  be  shattered  and  fall  upon  them, 
they  momentarily  awaited  the  stroke  of  the  bolt. 

During  this  time  the  king  was  earnestly  endeavoring  to  procure 
help  for  them  in  whatever  way  he  could  and  to  send  the  desired  relief 
as  soon  as  possible.  Summoning  the  strength  of  the  realm  from  every 
source,  he  took  the  Life-giving  Cross  and  marched  thither  himself. 
On  reaching  the  sea  of  Salt  which  is  now  called  the  lake  of  Asphalt, 
after  mature  deliberation  he  made  the  count  of  Tripoli  the  leader 
and  commander  of  the  whole  army. 

But  Saladin,  on  learning  through  his  scouts  that  the  Christian  army 
was  close  at  hand  and  that  the  count  of  Tripoli  was  in  command  of  the 
legions,  abandoned  his  engines  and  ordered  his  men  to  retreat.  Thus, 
after  molesting  the  city  for  an  entire  month  in  this  way,  he  raised 
the  siege  and  returned  to  his  own  land.®® 

The  king,  nonetheless,  continued  his  march  to  Kerak  where  his 
arrival  brought  the  longed-for  relief  to  the  people  of  that  place. 
Then,  sounding  the  call  for  departure,  he  reassembled  his  troops  and 
returned  in  safety  to  Jerusalem. 

His  departure  is  dated  December  12,  1183  (see  R.  Rohricht,  Geschichte  des  Konig- 
retchs  Jerusalenty  i ioo^i2giy  p.  409). 

HERE  ENDS  THE  TWENTY-SECOND  BOOK 


HERE  BEGINS  THE  TWENTY-THIRD  BOOK 


COULD  JERUSALEM  BE  SAVED  BY 

RAYMOND  OF  TRIPOLI? 

Preface 

Wearied  by  the  sad  disasters  which  are  occurring  in  the  kingdom  so 
frequently — indeed,  almost  continually — we  had  resolved  to  abandon 
the  pen  and  commit  to  the  silence  of  the  tomb  the  chronicle  of  events 
which  we  had  undertaken  to  write  for  posterity.  For  there  is  no  one 
who  is  not  reluctant  to  recount  the  failings  of  his  country  and  to  bring 
forth  into  the  light  the  faults  of  his  own  people.  It  has  come  to  be 
almost  habitual  among  men,  and  indeed  is  regarded  as  natural,  that 
each  one  should  strive  with  all  his  might  to  extol  his  own  land  and 
not  disparage  the  good  fame  of  his  fellow  countrymen. 

But  now  every  source  of  glorious  renown  is  taken  from  us,  and  the 
only  subjects  that  present  themselves  are  the  disasters  of  a  sorrowing 
country  and  its  manifold  misfortunes,  themes  which  can  serve  only 
to  draw  forth  lamentations  and  tears. 

Up  to  the  present  time,  in  the  preceding  books,  we  have  described 
to  the  best  of  our  ability  the  remarkable  deeds  of  the  brave  men  who 
for  eighty  years  and  more  have  held  the  ruling  power  in  our  part 
of  the  Orient,  and  particularly  at  Jerusalem.^  Now,  in  utter  detes¬ 
tation  of  the  present,  amazed  at  the  material  which  is  presented  before 
our  eyes  and  ears,  things  unfit  to  be  told  even  in  the  songs  of  a 
Codrus  ^  or  the  recitals  of  a  Maevius,®  whatever  they  may  be,  we  lack 
courage  to  continue.  In  the  acts  of  our  princes  there  is  nothing  which 
seems  to  a  wise  man  worthy  of  being  committed  to  the  treasure  house 
of  the  memory,  nothing  which  can  contribute  refreshment  to  the 

^  The  state  o£  mind  revealed  by  these  opening  remarks  was  probably  upon  him  in 
1182,  when  the  repeated  successes  of  Saladin,  culminating  in  the  crowning  insult  of  his 
departure  to  the  north  without  troubling  to  make  a  truce,  must  have  been  very  dis¬ 
couraging.  The  hostile  court  party  was  still  in  control,  and  doubtless  William  blamed 
its  incompetence  for  Saladin’s  success.  Perhaps  the  fact  that  he  was  recording  the  begin¬ 
ning  of  this  series  of  blunders — namely,  the  marriage  of  Sibylla  to  Guy — ^about  this 
time  (late  1182)  accentuated  his  feelings. 

2  The  allusion  is  to  Virgil  Ed.  vii.  22. 

®  Another  allusion  to  Virgil  Ed.  ill.  90. 


RAYMOND  OF  TRIPOLI 


506 

reader  or  confer  honor  upon  the  writer.  Truly,  we  can  lament  with 
the  prophet  that  there  has  perished  from  our  midst  “law  from  the 
priest,  counsel  from  the  wise,  and  the  word  from  the  prophet.”  ^ 
Among  us  it  has  come  to  pass  that  “like  people,  like  priest”;  ^  and  to 
us  also  can  truly  be  applied  that  prophecy  which  says,  “The  whole 
head  is  sick  and  the  whole  heart  faint.  From  the  sole  of  the  foot  even 
unto  the  head  there  is  no  soundness  in  it.”  ®  For  we  have  now  reached  a 
point  where,  “We  can  endure  neither  our  evils  nor  their  remedy.” 
Wherefore,  in  punishment  for  our  sins,  the  enemy  has  become  stronger 
than  ourselves,  and  we  who  used  to  triumph  over  our  foes  and  custom¬ 
arily  bore  away  the  glorious  palm  of  victory,  now,  deprived  of  divine 
favor,  retire  from  the  field  in  ignominious  defeat  after  nearly  every 
conflict. 

It  is  therefore  time  to  hold  our  peace;  for  it  seems  more  fitting  to 
draw  the  shades  of  night  over  our  failures  than  to  turn  the  light  of 
the  sun  upon  our  disgrace.  There  are  some,  however,  who  desire  us 
to  continue  the  task  once  undertaken,  who  earnestly  entreat  that  every 
phase  of  the  kingdom  of  Jerusalem,  adverse  as  well  as  prosperous,  be 
recorded  in  this  work  for  posterity.  For  our  encouragement,  they  cite 
the  example  of  most  distinguished  historians,  namely  Titus  Livius, 
who  recorded  in  his  history  not  only  the  successes  of  the  Romans, 
but  also  their  reverses,  and  Josephus,  who  made  known  in  his  com¬ 
prehensive  works  not  only  the  brilliant  deeds  of  the  Jews,  but  also 
those  shameful  things  which  were  done  to  them.^ 

In  their  efforts  to  persuade  us  to  continue  this  work,  they  offer 
many  other  examples  also.  We  are  the  more  readily  influenced  to  ac¬ 
quiesce  in  this  request,  since  it  is  indeed  evident  that  chroniclers  of 
past  events  have  recorded  without  partiality  adverse  as  well  as  aus¬ 
picious  happenings.  For,  by  narrating  successful  achievements,  they 
hope  to  inspire  posterity  with  courage,  while  by  furnishing  examples 
of  misfortunes  patiently  endured  they  may  render  later  generations 
more  cautious  under  similar  conditions. 

The  writer  of  annals,  by  virtue  of  his  office,  must  commit  to  letters 
not  such  events  as  he  himself  might  desire,  but  such  as  the  times 
afford.  The  outcome  of  worldly  affairs,  especially  of  wars,  is  ever 

^  Je.  18 :  18.  ®  Ho.  4:  9.  This  is  another  favorite  quotation, 

®  Is.  1 :  5—6.  "  Livy,  Preface. 

^  This  would  seem  to  indicate  his  familiarity  with  the  other  works  of  Josephus  as 
well  as  the  Antiquities,  which  he  so  frequently  cites. 


j 


RAYMOND  OF  TRIPOLI  507 

variable  and  uncertain  3  prosperity  is  never  continuous,  nor  is  adversity 
wholly  without  brighter  intervals. 

Accordingly  we  have  given  way  and,  abandoning  our  previous 
determination,  by  the  help  of  God  while  life  remains  ^  we  shall  con¬ 
tinue  to  record  with  the  utmost  care,  as  we  have  done  in  the  past, 
whatever  events  the  future  brings  forth.  God  grant  that  these  may 
be  happy  and  prosperous! 

I.  The  long  frevailing  enmity  between  the  king  and  the  count 
of  Jaffa  breaks  out  into  furious  strife.  No  hofe  of  reconcilia¬ 
tion  seems  'possible.  The  count  of  Tripoli  becomes  regent  of 
the  kingdom  and  guardian  of  the  king. 

Meanwhile  the  hatred  between  the  king  and  the  count  of  Jaffa, 
nourished  by  secret  causes,  continued  to  grow  stronger  day  by  day.^^ 
Rancor,  up  to  this  time  restrained,  had  now  burst  forth  so  violently 
that  the  king  seemed  openly  to  be  seeking  reasons  for  separating  his 
sister  from  her  husband  and  annulling  the  marriage.  In  pursuance  of 
this  intention,  Baldwin  went  without  disguise  to  the  patriarch  and 
demanded  that,  as  he  intended  to  make  complaint  against  the  mar¬ 
riage,  a  day  be  set  when  the  annulment  might  be  solemnly  pronounced 
in  the  presence  of  the  patriarch. 

On  his  return  from  the  campaign  the  count  was  informed  of  the 
entire  proceeding.  He  immediately  left  the  army  and  set  out  for 
Ascalon  by  the  shortest  way  to  warn  his  wife,  who  was  in  Jerusalem 
at  the  time,  to  leave  that  city  for  Ascalon  before  the  king  arrived,  for 
he  feared  that  if  Baldwin  should  have  her  in  his  power  he  would  not 
permit  her  to  return  to  her  husband. 

The  king  then  sent  a  messenger  to  summon  the  count  to  appear 
and  to  inform  him  of  the  reason  for  the  summons.  Guy  resisted,  how¬ 
ever,  and  excused  his  nonappearance  by  pleading  illness.  When,  after 

^  Vita  comite.  This  phrase  occurs  both  here  and  in  the  Prologue  and  suggests  that 
the  two  were  written  about  the  same  time. 

The  ray  of  hope  for  the  future  is  doubtless  the  result  of  the  transfer  of  the 
regency  from  Guy  de  Lusignan  to  Raymond  of  Tripoli. 

These  events  must  have  occurred  early  in  1 1 84.  The  evidence  of  the  king^s  wrath 
was  clear  enough  in  the  meeting  of  November  20,  1183.  The  campaign  for  the  relief 
of  Kerak  probably  distracted  the  king’s  attention  for  nearly  a  month.  He  could  scarcely 
have  resumed  his  antagonism  toward  Guy  before  the  end  of  December.  Thereafter, 
the  series  of  events  here  recounted  rolled  on  in  continuous  succession  to  the  council 
of  Acre. 


RAYMOND  OF  TRIPOLI 


508 

repeated  summonses,  Guy  still  neglected  to  obey,  the  king  resolved  to 
go  to  him  in  person  and  solemnly  deliver  the  call  to  justice  by  word 
of  mouth.  On  his  arrival  at  Ascalon,  attended  by  some  of  the  nobles 
of  his  court,  Baldwin  found  the  gates  of  the  city  closed.  He  beat  upon 
them  with  his  hand  and  three  times  demanded  that  they  be  opened  to 
him.  Since  no  one  offered  to  obey  his  command,  he  retired  in  just 
indignation.  This  took  place  in  full  view  of  all  the  people  of  the  city, 
who,  on  learning  of  the  king’s  arrival,  had  established  themselves  in 
the  towers  and  on  the  walls  to  await  the  result  of  the  matter. 

From  Ascalon  he  proceeded  directly  to  Jaffa.  He  was  met  on  the 
way  by  many  citizens  of  that  place,  the  most  important  men  of  both 
classes.  The  city  gates  were  opened  to  him,  and  he  entered  without 
difficulty.  After  placing  a  governor  there  to  take  charge  of  affairs,  he 
went  on  to  Acre,  where  he  proclaimed  a  general  council  in  that  same 
city.  When,  on  the  appointed  day,  all  the  barons  of  the  realm  had 
assembled,  the  patriarch,  with  the  support  and  cooperation  of  the  two 
masters,  namely  of  the  Temple  and  the  Hospital,  addressed  the  lord 
king  and  on  bended  knees  began  to  intercede  for  the  count.  He  made 
an  earnest  plea  that  Baldwin  should  lay  aside  his  resentment  and 
restore  Guy  to  favor.  When  the  petition  was  not  immediately  heard, 
the  patriarch  and  his  supporters  withdrew  in  great  indignation  and 
left  not  only  the  court  but  the  city  as  well. 

A  proposal  had  been  made  before  the  assembled  barons  that  envoys 
be  sent  to  the  kings  and  other  princes  beyond  the  mountains  to  invite 
them  to  come  to  the  help  of  the  realm  and  of  Christianity  itself.  This 
matter  should  have  been  taken  up  first,  but  the  patriarch,  as  has  been 
said,  interrupted  the  proceedings  and,  forestalling  the  principal  sub¬ 
ject,  entered  upon  the  speech  mentioned  above.  Then,  carried  away 
by  passion,  he  left  Acre,  as  has  been  described. 

When  the  count  of  Jaffa  learned  that  the  king  would  not  con¬ 
descend  to  make  peace  with  him,  he  aggravated  his  previous  evil 
conduct  by  still  more  violent  deeds.  With  the  forces  at  his  disposal  he 
directed  his  course  toward  the  fortress  called  Daron,  where  he  threw 
himself  suddenly  upon  the  camp  of  certain  Arabs  who  had  pitched 
their  tents  in  those  parts  for  the  convenience  of  the  pasturage.  The 
king  had  promised  them  protection  and  on  this  they  were  relying 

William  is  obviously  not  in  sympathy  with  this  conduct  of  Heraclius.  This  is  one 
of  the  few  instances  in  which  William  clearly  indicates  his  attitude  toward  his  success¬ 
ful  rival  for  the  patriarchate. 


RAYMOND  OF  TRIPOLI 


509 

implicitly,  but  the  count,  finding  them  unprepared  to  resist,  drove  off 
their  cattle  and  slaves  and  with  this  plunder  returned  to  Ascalon. 

When  the  news  of  this  raid  reached  the  king,  he  again  called  his 
barons  together  and  committed  the  care  and  general  administration 
of  the  realm  to  the  count  of  Tripoli,  in  whose  wisdom  and  magnanim¬ 
ity  he  had  reason  to  trust.  This  act  seemed  to  be  satisfactory  to  the 
wishes  of  the  whole  people  and  to  the  majority  of  the  nobles,  for  it 
was  plain  to  all  that  the  only  safety  lay  in  placing  the  affairs  of  the 
kingdom  in  the  hands  of  the  count  of  Tripoli. 

When  Jubair  visited  Acre  in  September,  1184,  he  was  told  that  the  king,  whom 
he  calls  “king  of  Acre,^^  was  kept  confined  from  all  gaze  because  he  was  suffering  from 
leprosy.  He  adds  that  the  “count,’^  lord  of  Tripoli  and  Tiberias,  was  the  most  con¬ 
siderable  and  powerful  person  among  the  Franks.  “He  is  worthy  of  the  throne  for 
which  he  seems  born  and  has  remarkable  intelligence  and  astuteness”  (see  R.H.C.  Or.f 

in,  45 1-55)  • 


HERE  THE  BOOK  STOPS 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


ABBREVIATIONS 


The  following  abbreviations  are  used  for  all  but 
the  first  reference  in  the  footnotes  of  each  Book. 

H,  Chron,  H.  Hagenmeyer,  ^‘Chronologic  de  la  premiere  croisade, 
(1094-1100)”  and  “Chronologic  de  Thistoire  du  royaume  de 
Jerusalem,  regne  de  Baudoin  I,”  Revue  d.e  orient  latiny  Vols.  VI— 
XII.  Though  the  title  of  this  work  changes,  the  numbering  is  con¬ 
tinuous  throughout,  and  both  parts  are  referred  to  as  H.  Hagen¬ 
meyer,  Chronologie, 

H.  Ef.  H.  Hagenmeyer,  ed.,  Epistulae  et  chartae  ad  historiam  primi 
belli  sacri  spectantes  quae  supersunt  aevo  aequalis  ac  genuinae. 

H.  F,  H.  Hagenmeyer,  ed.,  Fulcheri  Carnotensis  historia  Hierosoly- 
mitana  (1095— 1127). 

H.  G,  H.  Hagenmeyer,  ed.,  Anonymi  gesta  Francorum  et  aliorum 
Hierosolymitanorum . 

H,  Ga,  H.  Hagenmeyer,  ed.,  Galterii  Cancellarii  bella  Antiochena. 

Munro-Crusades  The  Crusades  and  Other  Historical  Essays  Presented 

to  Dana  C.  Munro. 

» 

R.H^C,  Oc,  Recueil  des  historiens  des  croisades:  Historiens  occidentaux. 

R,H,C,  Or,  Recueil  des  historiens  des  croisades:  Historiens  orientaux. 

R,K,J,  R.  Rohricht,  Geschichte  des  Konigreichs  Jerusalem,  1100— 
1291. 

R,  Reg,  R,  Rohricht,  Regesta  regni  Hierosolymitani,  1097— 1291. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Anderson,  Romola,  and  R.  C.  Anderson.  The  Sailing  Ship.  London, 
1926. 

Archer,  T.  A,  “On  the  Accession  Dates  of  the  Early  Kings  of  Jeru¬ 
salem,”  English  Historical  Reviewy  IV  (1889),  89—105. 

Auber,  C.  A.,  Abbe.  Histoire  generale  civile,  religieuse,  et  litteraire  du 
Poitou.  9  vols.  Fontenay-le-Comte,  1885—1893. 

Baldwin,  M.  W.  Raymond  III  of  Tripolis  and  the  Fall  of  Jerusalem 
(1140—1187).  Princeton,  1936. 

Beaumont,  A.  A.,  Jr.  “Albert  of  Aachen  and  the  County  of  Edessa,” 
The  Crusades  and  Other  Historical  Essays  Presented  to  Dana  C. 
Munro,  pp.  101—38.  New  York,  1928. 

Beazley,  C.  R.  The  Dawn  of  Modern  Geography.  3  vols.  London, 
1897-1906. 

Beha  ed-Din.  The  Life  of  Saladin  (1137— 1 193  a.d.).  Trans,  by 
C.  W.  Wilson;  rev.  by  C.  R.  Conder.  London,  1897.  Palestine 
Exploration  Fund,  Publications. 

Bongars,  J,,  ed.  Gesta  Dei  per  Francos.  2  vols.  in  one.  Hanover,  1611. 
Brehier,  L.  L’Eglise  et  POrient  au  moyen  age.  5th  ed.  Paris,  1928. 
Byrne,  E.  H.  “The  Genoese  Colonies  in  Syria,”  The  Crusades  and 
Other  Historical  Essays  Presented  to  Dana  C.  Munro,  pp.  139—82. 
New  York,  1928. 

-  Genoese  Shipping  in  the  Twelfth  and  Thirteenth  Centuries. 

Cambridge,  1930.  Mediaeval  Academy  of  America,  Monograph  I. 

-  “Genoese  Trade  with  Syria  in  the  Twelfth  Century,”  American 

Historical  Review y  XXV  ( 1 9 1 9—2 0),  191— 219. 

Cambridge  Medieval  History,  The.  8  vols.  London  and  New  York, 

1911-1936. 

Chalandon,  F.  Les  Comnene;  etudes  sur  Pempire  byzantin  au  xie  et 
xiie  siecles. 

Vol.  I:  Essai  sur  le  regne  d’Alexis  ler  Comnene  (1081— 1 1 18).  Paris, 
1900.  Societe  de  PEcole  des  chartes,  Memoires  et  documents, 

Vol.  IV. 

Vol.  II:  Jean  II  Comnene  (i  118—1143)  et  Manuel  I  Comnene 
(1143-1180).  Paris,  1912, 

-  Histoire  de  la  domination  normande  en  Italie  et  en  Sicile.  2  vols. 


Paris,  1907. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


514 

Chalandon,  F.  (^Continued)  Histoire  de  la  premiere  croisade  jusqu’a  Selec¬ 
tion  de  Godefroi  de  Bouillon.  Paris,  1925. 

Chartrou,  Josephe.  L’ Anjou  de  1109  a  1151.  Paris,  1928. 

Chevalier,  U.  Repertoire  des  sources  historiques  du  moyen  age:  Bio-bi- 
bliographie.  New  ed.  2  vols.  Paris,  1905—1907. 

Colvin,  Mary  Noyes,  ed.  Godeffroy  of  Boloyne;  or.  The  Siege  and 
Conqueste  of  Jerusalem,  by  William,  Archbishop  of  Tyre.  Trans¬ 
lated  from  the  French  by  William  Caxton  and  Printed  by  Him  in 
1481.  London,  1893.  Early  English  Text  Society,  Extra  Series, 

Vol.  LXIV. 

Corpus  Juris  Civilis,  ed.  by  P.  Kreuger  and  T.  Mommsen,  Vol.  I.  Berlin, 
1882. 

David,  C.  W.  Robert  Curthose,  Duke  of  Normandy.  Cambridge. 

1920.  Harvard  Historical  Studies,  Vol.  XXV. 

Dawes,  Elizabeth  A.  S.,  trans.  The  Alexiad  of  the  Princess  Anna 
Comnena.  London,  1928. 

Delisle,  L.,  ed.  Chronique  de  Robert  de  Torigni,  abbe  du  Mont-Saint- 
Michel.  2  vols.  Rouen,  1872—1873. 

Diehl,  C.  Figures  byzan tines,  2d  Series:  Byzance  et  I’Occident  a 
Pepoque  des  croisades.  3d  ed.  Paris,  1909. 

DuCange,  Charles  du  Fresne,  Sieur.  Les  Families  d’outre-mer.  Paris, 
1869.  Collection  de  documents  inedits  sur  Phistoire  de  France. 
Duncalf,  F.  *‘The  Peasants’  Crusade,”  American  Historical  Revie*iVy 

XXVI  (1920-21),  440-53. 

- — ‘  ‘‘The  Pope’s  Plan  for  the  First  Crusade,”  The  Crusades  and 

Other  Historical  Essays  Presented  to  Dana  C.  Munro,  pp.  44—56. 
New  York,  1928. 

Duncalf,  F.,  and  A.  C.  Krey.  Parallel  Source  Problems  in  Medieval 
History.  New  York  and  London,  1912. 

Dussaud,  R.  Topographic  historique  de  la  Syrie  antique  et  medievale. 
Paris,  1927*  Haut“Commissariat  de  la  Republique  Frangaise  en 
Syrie  et  au  Liban.  Service  des  antiquites  et  des  beaux-arts.  Biblio- 
theque  archeologique  et  historique,  Vol.  IV. 

Eginhard.  “Annales  Laurissenses  et  Einhardi,”  Monumenta  Germaniae 
historica,  Scriptores,  I,  124-218.  Hanover,  1836. 

-  “Vita  Karoli  Imperatoris,”  Monumenta  Germaniae  historica, 

Scriptores,  II,  426—63.  Hanover,  1829. 

Emerton,  E.  Mediaeval  Europe  (814-1300).  Boston,  1894. 

Fliche,  A.  Le  Regne  de  Philippe  ler,  roi  de  France,  1060— 1108.  Paris, 

1912. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


515 


Funk,  P.  Jakob  von  Vitry,  Leben  und  Werke.  Leipzig  and  Berlin, 
1909.  Beitrage  zur  Kulturgeschichte  des  Mittelalters  und  der 
Renaissance,  H.3. 

Gibb,  H.  A.  R«,  trans.  The  Damascus  Chronicle  of  the  Crusades;  Ex¬ 
tracted  and  Translated  from  the  Chronicle  of  ibn  al-Qalanisi. 
London,  1932.  University  of  London  Historical  Series,  VoL  V, 
Gibbon,  E,  The  History  of  the  Decline  and  Fall  of  the  Roman  Empire. 

Ed.  by  J.  B.  Bury.  7  vols.  London,  1896—1900. 

Gindler,  P.  Graf  Balduin  I  von  Edessa.  Halle,  1901. 

Giry,  A,  “Les  Chatelains  de  Saint-Omer  (1042—1386),”  Bibliotheque 
de  TEcole  des  chartes,  XXXV  (1874),  325-55. 

Gjerset,  K.  History  of  the  Norwegian  People,  Vol.  I.  New  York,  1915. 
Gregorovius,  F.  A.  History  of  the  City  of  Rome  in  the  Middle  Ages. 

Trans,  by  Lady  Hamilton.  8  vols.  in  13.  London,  1894—1902. 
Grober,  G.  Grundriss  der  romanischen  Philologie.  2d  ed.  2  vols.  Strass- 
burg,  1 904-1 91 4. 

Grousset,  R.  Histoire  des  croisades  et  du  royaume  franc  de  Jerusalem. 
3  vols.  Paris,  1934-1936. 

Hagenmeyer,  H.  “Chronologic  de  la  premiere  croisade  (1094— 1 100),” 
Revue  de  P Orient  latiny  VI  (1898),  214—93,  4 9 ^“54 9  > 

(1899),  275-339,  430-503;  VIII  (1900-1901),  318-82. 

-  “Chronologic  de  Phistoire  du  royaume  de  Jerusalem,  regne  de 

Baudouin  I  (l  lOl— 1 1 18),”  Revue  de  P Orient  latiny  IX  (1902), 

384-465;  X  (1903-4),  372-405;  XI  (1905-8),  145-80, 
453-85;  XII  (  1909— II ),  68—103,  283—326.  Incomplete. 

- Peter  der  Eremite.  Leipzig,  1879. 

Hagenmeyer,  H.,  ed.  Anonymi  gesta  Francorum  et  alio  rum  Hierosoly- 
mitanorum.  Heidelberg,  1890. 

-  Ekkehardi  Uraugiensis  abbatis  Hierosolymita.  Tubingen,  1877. 

- Epistulae  et  chartae  ad  historiam  primi  belli  sacri  spectantes  quae 

supersunt  aevo  aequalis  ac  genuinae.  Innsbruck,  1901. 

-  Fulcheri  Carnotensis  historia  Hierosolymitana  (1095— 1127). 

Heidelberg,  1913* 

-  Galterii  Cancellarii  bella  Antiochena.  Innsbruck,  1896. 

Halphen,  L.  Le  Comte  d’Anjou  au  Xle  siecle.  Paris,  1906. 

Haskins,  C.  H.  The  Normans  in  European  History.  Boston  and  New 
York,  1915. 

- The  Renaissance  of  the  Twelfth  Century.  Cambridge,  1927. 

Hefele,  H.,  trans.  Albert  von  Aachen,  Geschichte  des  ersten  Kreuzzugs. 
2  vols.  Jena,  1923. 


5i6  bibliography 

Heyd,  W.  von.  Histoire  du  commerce  du  Levant  au  moyen-age.  Ed.  and 
trans.  by  Furcy  Raynaud,  2  vols.  Leipzig,  1885—1886. 

Hildt,  J.  C.  ‘‘The  Ministry  of  Stephen  of  Perche  during  the  Minority 
of  William  II  of  Sicily,’’  Smith  College  Studies  in  History y  III 
(1918),  139-86. 

Hitti,  P.  K.  History  of  the  Arabs.  2d  ed.  London,  1940. 

Hitti,  P.  K.,  trans.  An  Arab-Syrian  Gentleman  and  Warrior  in  the 
Period  of  the  Crusades;  Memoirs  of  Usamah  ibn-Munqidh.  New 
York,  1929.  Records  of  Civilization,  Sources  and  Studies. 

Husseini,  S.  A,  S.  “Inscription  of  the  Khalif  El-Mustansir  Billah  458 
A.H.  (=  A.D.  1065),”  Palestine,  Department  of  Antiquities,  Quarterly y 

IX  (1942),  77-80. 

Iskenderian,  Galust  Ter-Grigorian.  Die  Kreuzfahrer  und  ihre  Bezie- 
hungen  zu  den  armenischen  Nachbarfursten  bis  zum  Untergange 
der  Grafschaft  Edessa.  Weida  i.  Th.,  1915. 

Joranson,  E.  “The  Alleged  Frankish  Protectorate  in  Palestine,” 
American  Historical  Review y  XXXII  (1926—27),  241—61. 

- “The  Great  German  Pilgrimage  of  1064—1065,”  The  Crusades 

and  Other  Historical  Essays  Presented  to  Dana  C.  Munro,  pp.  3—43. 
New  York,  1928. 

-  “The  Palestine  Pilgrimage  of  Henry  the  Lion,”  Medieval  and 

Historiographical  Essays  in  Honor  of  James  Westfall  Thompson,  pp. 
146—225.  Chicago,  1938. 

King,  E.  J.  The  Knights  Hospitallers  in  the  Holy  Land.  London, 

1931- 

Klein,  C.  Raimund  von  Aguilers.  Berlin,  1892. 

Knappen,  M.  M.  “Robert  II  of  Flanders  in  the  First  Crusade,”  The 
Crusades  and  Other  Historical  Essays  Presented  to  Dana  C.  Munro, 
pp.  79-100.  New  York,  1928. 

Kohler,  C.  “Chartes  de  I’Abbaye  de  Notre-Dame  de  la  Vallee  de 
Josaphat  en  Terre-Sainte  (1108—1291),”  Revue  de  V Orient  latiuy 

VII  (1899),  108-222. 

Kretschmayr,  H.  Geschichte  von  Venedig.  3  vols.  Gotha,  1905— 

1934* 

Krey,  A.  C.  “A  Neglected  Passage  in  the  Gesta,”  The  Crusades  and 
Other  Historical  Essays  Presented  to  Dana  C.  Munro,  pp.  57-78. 
New  York,  1928. 

-  “William  of  Tyre:  The  Making  of  a  Medieval  Historian,” 

Sfeculumy  XVI  (1941),  149—66. 

Krey,  A.  C.,  trans.  The  First  Crusade.  Princeton,  1921. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


517 


Kugler,  B.  Albert  von  Aachen.  Stuttgart,  1885. 

-  Analecten  zur  Geschichte  des  zweften  Kreuzzugs.  Tubingen, 

1878. 

-  -  Analekten  zur  Kritik  Albert’s  v.  Aachen.  Tubingen,  1888. 
-  Geschichte  der  Kreuzziige.  Berlin,  1880. 

-  Neue  Analecten  zur  Geschichte  des  zweiten  Kreuzzugs. 

Tubingen,  1883. 

- ^ — •  Studien  zur  Geschichte  des  zweiten  Kreuzzugs.  Stuttgart,  1866. 

La  Monte,  J.  L.  Feudal  Monarchy  in  the  Latin  Kingdom  of  Jerusalem, 
1100  to  1291.  Cambridge,  1932,  Mediaeval  Academy  of  America, 
Monograph  IV. 

- “Rise  and  Decline  of  a  Frankish  Seigneury  in  Syria  in  the  Time 

of  the  Crusades,”  Revue  hhtonque  du  Sud-Est  Eurofeeriy  Annee 

XV  (1938),  pp.  301-20. 

-  “Some  Problems  in  Crusading  Historiography,”  Sfeculumy  XV 

(1940),  57-75- 

-  “The  Viscounts  of  Naplouse  in  the  Twelfth  Century,”  Syriay 

XIX  (1938),  272-78. 

-  “The  Lords  of  Le  Puiset  on  the  Crusades.”  Sfeculurriy  XVII 

(1942),  100-18. 

Lane-Poole,  S.  The  Mohammedan  Dynasties.  Westminster,  1894. 
Lawrence,  T.  E.  Crusader  Castles.  2  vols.  London,  1936. 

- Revolt  in  the  Desert.  New  York,  1927. 

Lees,  Beatrice  A.,  ed.  Anonymi  gesta  Francorum  et  aliorum  Hierosoly- 
mitanorum.  Oxford,  1924. 

-  Records  of  the  Templars  in  England  in  the  Twelfth  Century. 

London,  1935.  British  Academy,  Records  of  the  Social  and  Eco¬ 
nomic  History  of  England  and  Wales,  Vol.  IX. 

Le  Quien,  M.  Oriens  Christianus.  3  vols.  Paris,  1740* 

Luard,  H.  R.,  ed.  Matthaei  Parisiensis,  monachi  Sancti  Albani,  chronica 
majora.  7  vols.  1872—1883. 

Luchaire,  A.,  ed.  Louis  VI  le  Gros:  annales  de  sa  vie  et  de  son  regne, 
1081-1137.  Paris,  1890. 

Lundgreen,  F.  Wilhelm  von  Tyrus  und  der  Templerorden.  Berlin, 
1 91 1.  Historische  Studien,  H.  XCVII. 

-  ^‘Das  Jerusalem  des  Wilhelm  von  Tyrus  und  die  Gegenwart,” 

k 

Neue  kirchliche  Xeitschrijty  XX  (1909),  973“9^* 

Madden,  F.,  ed.  Matthaei  Parisiensis,  monachi  Sancti  Albani,  historia 
Anglorum,  sive,  ut  vulgo  dicitur,  historia  minor.  3  vols.  London, 

1866-1869. 


5i8  bibliography 

Manitius^  M.  Deutsche  Geschichte  unter  den  sachsischen  und  salischen 
Kaisern,  911— 1125.  Stuttgart,  1889. 

-  Geschichte  der  lateinischen  Literatur  des  Mittelalters.  3  vols. 

Munich,  1911—1938. 

Mansi,  J.  D,,  and  others,  eds.  Sacrorum  conciliorum  nova  et  amplissima 
coUectio.  53  vols.  Paris,  etc.,  1759—1927. 

Mas  Latrie,  L.  de.  “Essai  de  classification  des  continuateurs  de 
Phistoire  des  croisades  de  Guillaume  de  Tyr,’’  Biblioth^ue  de  Pficole 
des  chartes,  XXI  (5th  ser.,  Vol.  I;  i860),  38—72,  140—78. 

Mas  Latrie,  L.  de,,  ed.  Chronique  d’Ernoul  et  de  Bernard  le  Tresorier. 
Paris,  1871. 

Merriman,  R.  B.  The  Rise  of  the  Spanish  Empire  in  the  Old  World 
and  the  New.  4  vols.  New  York,  1918—1934. 

Michaud,  J.  F.,  ed.  Biblioth^ue  des  croisades.  2d  ed.  4  vols.  Paris, 
1829-1830. 

Molinier,  A,  Les  Sources  de  Phistoire  de  France  des  origines  aux  guerres 
d’ltalie.  6  vols.  Paris,  1901—1906. 

Mommsen,  T.,  ed.  C.  Julii  Solini  collectanea  rerum  memorabilium. 
Berlin,  1864. 

Morris,  W.  Britain  and  the  Holy  Land  Prior  to  the  Third  Crusade. 

Unpublished  Ph.D.  thesis,  University  of  Minnesota,  1940. 

Munro,  Dana  C.  ‘‘Did  the  Emperor  Alexius  I  Ask  for  Aid  at  the 
Council  of  Piacenza,  1095?”  American  Histoncal  Review y  XXVII 

(1921-22),  731-33. 

- The  Kingdom  of  the  Crusaders.  Student’s  ed.  New  York,  1935. 

- - “The  Speech  of  Pope  Urban  II.  at  Clermont,  1095,”  American 

Historical  Review y  XI  (1905-6),  231-42. 

Munro,  Dana  C.,  and  others.  Essays  on  the  Crusades.  Burlington,  Vt., 

1903. 

Muratori,  L.  A.,  ed.  Rerum  Italicarum  scriptures  ab  anno  aerae  Chris- 
tianae  500  ad  1500.  25  vols.  in  28.  Milan,  1723— 1751 ;  new  ed. 
1900—.  References  are  to  the  original  edition. 

Nicholson,  R.  L.  Tancred.  Chicago,  1940. 

Norgate,  Kate.  England  under  the  Angevin  Kings.  2  vols.  London  and 
New  York,  1887. 

Oman,  Charles.  A  History  of  the  Art  of  War  in  the  Middle  Ages.  2d  ed. 
2  vols.  London,  1924. 

Ordericus  Vitalis.  The  Ecclesiastical  History  of  England  and  Normandy. 

Trans,  by  Thomas  Forester.  4  vols.  London,  1853-1856. 

Pantaleon  H.,  ed.  Historia  belli  sacri  verissima  .  .  .  authore  olim 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


519 

Willelmo  Tyrio  .  .  .  una  cum  continuatione  .  .  .  Cum  praefatione 
Henrici  Pantaleonis  atque  ipsius  authoris  vita.  Basel,  1564. 

Paris,  P.  Guillaume  de  Tyre  et  ses  continuateurs.  2  vols.  Paris,  1879. 
Pastoret,  Claude,  “Guillaume  de  Tyr,”  Histoire  litteraire  de  la  France, 

XIV  (1817),  587-96. 

Pocock,  Edward,  ed.  ^  Contextio  gemmarum,  sive  Eutychii  .  .  .  annales 
.  .  .  interprete  Edwardo  Pocockio,  Arab.  &  Lat.  Oxford,  1650. 
Potthast,  A.  Bibliotheca  historica  medii  aevi.  2d  ed.  2  vols.  Berlin,  1896. 
Preston,  Helen  G.  Rural  Conditions  in  the  Kingdom  of  Jerusalem  during 
the  Twelfth  and  Thirteenth  Centuries.  Philadelphia,  1903. 

Prutz,  Hans.  Entwicklung  und  Untergang  des  Tempelherrenordens. 
Berlin,  1888. 

— -  Die  geistlichen  Ritterorden;  ihre  Stellung  zur  kirchlichen,  poli- 

tischen,  gesellschaftlichen,  und  wirtschaftlichen  Entwicklung  des 
Mittelalters.  Berlin,  1908. 

- Kulturgeschichte  der  Kreuzziige.  Berlin,  1883. 

-  “Studien  iiber  Wilhelm  von  Tyrus,”  Gesellschaft  fiir  altere 

deutsche  Geschichtskunde,  Neues  ArchiVy  VIII  (1882),  93—132. 
Rashdall,  H.  The  Universities  of  Europe  in  the  Middle  Ages.  2  vols.  in  3. 
Oxford,  1895. 

Recueil  des  historiens  des  croisades.  16  vols.  Paris,  1841—1906. 

Documents  armeniens,  2  vols. 

Historiens  grecs,  2  vols, 

Historiens  occidentaux,  5  vols. 

Historiens  orientaux,  5  vols. 

Lois,  assises  de  Jerusalem,  2  vols. 

Rey,  E.  G.  Les  Colonies  franques  de  Syrie  aux  Xllme  et  Xlllme  siecles. 
Paris,  1883. 

Riant,  Paul,  Comte.  Expeditions  et  pelerinages  des  Scandinaves  en  Terre 
Sainte  au  temps  des  croisades.  Paris,  1865. 

-  “Inventaire  sommaire  des  manuscrits  de  PEracles,”  Archives  de 

V Orient  lathty  I  (1881),  247—5  6* 

Rdhricht,  R.  Die  Deutschen  im  Heiligen  Lande.  Innsbruck,  1894. 

- Geschichte  des  ersten  Kreuzzuges.  Innsbruck,  1901. 

- - —  Geschichte  des  Kbnigreichs  Jerusalem,  1100— 1291.  Innsbruck, 

1898. 

Rdhricht,  R.  ed.  Regesta  regni  Hierosolymitani,  1097— 1291.  Innsbruck, 

1893- 

-  Regesta  regni  Hierosolymitani,  1097— 1291.  Additamentum. 

Innsbruck,  1904. 


520  BIBLIOGRAPHY 

I 

Roziere,  E.  de,  ed.  Cartulaire  de  I’eglise  du  Saint  Sepulchre  de  Jerusalem. 
Paris,  1849. 

Salloch,  Marianne.  Die  lateinische  Fortsetzung  Wilhelms  von  Tyrus. 
Greifswald,  1934. 

Salmon,  F.  J.,  comp.  Palestine  of  the  Crusades;  a  Map  of  the  Country. 

Pub.  by  Palestine  Exploration  Fund.  Jaffa,  1937* 

Schlumberger,  G.  L.  Renaud  de  Chatillon.  Paris,  1898. 

Siedschlag,  Beatrice  N,  English  Participation  in  the  Crusades,  1150— 
1220.  Menasha,  Wis.,  1939. 

Simonsfeld,  H.  Jahrbiicher  des  deutschen  Reiches  unter  Friederich  I, 
Vol.  I:  1152—1158.  Leipzig,  1908. 

Spinka,  M.  ‘‘The  EhFect  of  the  Crusades  upon  Eastern  Christianity,” 
Environmental  Factors  in  Christian  History,  ed.  by  J.  T.  McNeill 
and  others,  pp.  252—85.  Chicago,  1939. 

Steenstrup,  J.  C.  H.,  and  others.  Danmarks  Riges  Historie,  Vols.  I— VI. 
Copenhagen,  1896—1907. 

Stevenson,  W.  B.  The  Crusaders  in  the  East.  Cambridge,  1907. 

Sybel,  H.  von.  Geschichte  des  ersten  Kreuzzugs.  Diisseldorf,  1841;  2d 
ed.,  Leipzig,  1881. 

Thorndike,  L.  A  History  of  Magic  and  Experimental  Science  in  the 
Middle  Ages,  Vols.  I— 11.  New  York,  1923. 

Tiedau,  W.  Geschichte  der  Chanson  d’Antioche  des  Richard  le  PHerin 
und  des  Graindor  de  Douay.  Gottingen,  1912. 

Vacandard,  E.  Vie  de  Saint  Bernard,  abbe  de  Clairvaux.  3d  ed.  2  vols. 
Paris,  1902. 

Vasiliev,  A.  A.  History  of  the  Byzantine  Empire.  Trans,  by  Mrs.  S. 
Raggin.  2  vols.  Madison,  Wis.,  1928—1929.  Wisconsin  Studies  in  the 
Social  Sciences  and  History,  nos.  13—14. 

Wiet,  G.  L’Egypte  arabe  de  la  conquete  arabe  a  la  conquete  ottomane, 
642—1517  de  Fere  chretienne.  Paris,  1937.  Vol.  IV  of  Gabriel 
Hanotaux,  ed.,  Histoire  de  la  nation  egyptienne. 

Wilken,  F.  Geschichte  der  Kreuzziige  nach  morgenlandischen  und 
abendlandischen  Berichten.  7  vols.  Leipzig,  1807—1832. 

Yewdale,  R.  B.  Bohemond  I,  Prince  of  Antioch.  Princeton,  1924. 
Zacher,  Gustav,  ed.  Die  Historia  orientalis  des  Jacob  von  Vitry. 
Konigsberg,  1885. 


INDEX 


INDEX 


Abbas  [Habeis],  slays  caliph  of  Egypt, 
II:  Z5 1  i  killed,  252 

Abdallah  [Boaldelle],  envoy  of  Assassins 
to  Amaury  I,  is  slain  by  Knights  Tem¬ 
plars,  II:  392 

Abgar,  king,  I:  189  j  II:  144. 

Abraham  of  Nazareth,  II:  439 

Absalom,  bishop  of  Ascalon,  removed  by 
pope,  II:  233 

Abu-Bakr,  I:  6o??i  II:  323 

Achard,  prior  of  the  Temple,  I:  536 

Acheldama,  burial  place  for  pilgrims, 

I:  342  ^ 

Acre,  pilgrims  camp  near :  conditions 
under  which  governor  promises  to  re¬ 
sign  city,  I:  3  3  2  i  besieged  by  Bald¬ 
win  I,  453,  4545  city  described,  4535 
Genoese  lend  aid:  city  falls,  4555  safe 
approach  opened  to,  456  j  Venetian  fleet 
550 >  privileges  granted  to  Vene¬ 
tians,  554J  city  conferred  upon  Fulk, 
II:  5 1  j  bishoprics  recovered  by  Fulcher, 
66}  emperor,  kings,  and  nobles  assem¬ 
ble  at,  183}  general  council,  184}  de¬ 
cision  to  lay  siege  to  Damascus,  186} 
assigned  to  Baldwin  III  in  division  of 
kingdom,  205 

Adam,  archdeacon  of  Acre,  chosen  bishop 
of  Banyas,  II:  1125  at  council  of  Acre, 

Adana,  I:  1 8 1 }  11:  275 

Adelaide,  countess  of  Sicily,  Baldwin  I 
induced  to  marry,  while  wife  is  living, 
I:  489}  lands  at  Acre,  496}  sent  back 
to  her  own  land,  514}  death,  523 

Adele,  wife  of  Stephen  of  Blois,  daughter 
of  William  the  Conqueror,  I:  148/?, 
225«,  386?^,  431/^ 

Adhemar,  bishop  of  Puy,  I:  94,  95,  96, 
172}  in  Dalmatia,  139}  captured:  re¬ 
leased,  142}  resumes  pilgrimage:  ar¬ 
rives  at  Nicaea,  i47>  1555  3-t  Antioch, 
207,  210,  215}  decrees  a  fast,  220 } 
forestalls  attempts  at  desertion,  267} 
rebukes  would-be  deserters,  280;  offers 
himself  as  sacrifice  to  the  Lord,  286} 
leads  his  followers  and  those  of  count 
of  Toulouse,  287}  restores  churches 
of  Antioch,  296}  death,  2995  seen  in 
Holy  City,  374 


Adid,  caliph  of  Egypt,  II:  320^}  appear¬ 
ance,  disposition,  321 }  slain,  359 
Agnes,  abbess,  II:  245 
Agnes,  daughter  of  Louis  VII,  weds  Alex¬ 
ius,  son  of  Emperor  Manuel,  II:  449 } 
crowned,  467 

Agnes,  niece  of  William  de  Bury,  II:  77 
Agnes,  wife  of  Amaury  I,  king’s  separa¬ 
tion  from,  I:  ii,  II:  300 }  son,  Baldwin 
IV,  legitimized,  I:  145  influence,  21; 
children,  II:  53)  300 }  birth  of  son,  286 } 
relationship  between  Amaury  and :  gen¬ 
ealogy:  weds  Hugh  d’lbelin,  301 }  al¬ 
liance  with  Renaud  of  Sidon,  302}  Jos- 
celin  III  restored  to  liberty  through 
efforts  of,  414}  influence  in  behalf  of 
Heraclius,  451^}  Baldwin  IV  shame¬ 
lessly  influenced  bv,  460  j  urges  corona¬ 
tion  of  Baldwin  V,  501 
Aicard,  prior  of  the  Temple  of  the  Lord, 
I:  556 

Aicard  de  Montmerle,  I:  356 
Aimery,  elected  patriarch  of  Antioch,  suc¬ 
ceeds  Ralph,  II:  12  2}  as  protector  of 
afilicted  land,  200;  shamefully  abused 
by  Renaud  de  Chatillon,  235 }  repairs  to 
Jerusalem,  236}  celebrates  marriage 
rites  of  Baldwin  III  and  Theodora,  275  } 
government  of  land  committed  tem¬ 
porarily  to,  287}  Maronites  repair  to, 
and  return  'to  unity  of  catholic  church, 
458 

Al-Afdal  [Emireius],  I:  326,  393}  in¬ 
vades  kingdom,  464}  put  to  flight,  466} 
murdered,  546^ 

Alan  Fergant,  I:  149 
Albara,  capture  of,  and  Peter  of  Narbonne 
made  bishop  of,  I:  309 
Albered  de  Cagnano,  I:  134 
Albericus,  bishop  of  Ostia,  sent  to  investi¬ 
gate  trouble  in  church  at  Antioch,  II: 
1 10-22 

Albericus,  brother  of  William  of  Grand- 
mesnil,  I:  266,  267 

Albert,  bishop  of  Bethlehem,  II:  430,  456 } 
delegate  to  general  synod  at  Rome,  436 
Albert,  count,  Jaffa  given  to,  II:  71 
Aleppo,  given  to  Aqsunqur,  I:  2043  in¬ 
jury  done  to,  by  Christians,  545}  be¬ 
sieged,  II:  22}  Turks  encamped  near, 


INDEX 


524 

Aleppo  {Continued) 

57  j  Emperor  John  plans  to  take,  93  j 
Joscelin  II  dies  in  prison,  201  j  de¬ 
stroyed  by  earthquake,  370^  taken  over 
by  Saladin,  4105  bequeathed  to  Thebet, 
lord  of  Mosul,  4575  acquired  by  Sal¬ 
adin,  489 

Alexander  III,  pope,  I:  20  j  ordained:  dan¬ 
gerous  schism  arises  in  church  of  Rome, 
II:  281 J  Emperor  Frederick  becomes 
reconciled  to,  281,  435  j  sends  legate  to 
Orient,  285;  dies,  succeeded  by  Lucius 

ni,  457 

Alexander,  count  of  Conversana  and  of 
Gravina,  II:  347,  361,  420 

Alexandria,  seized  by  Shirkuh:  blockaded 
by  Amaury,  II:  334;  famine:  city  de¬ 
scribed,  335  J  Pharos  tower,  336,  341 } 
Christians  level  orchards,  3375  surren¬ 
dered  to  king,  341 5  tribute  imposed 
upon,  343  J  fleet  of  king  of  Sicily  suffers 
enormous  loss  before,  399 

Alexandria  Minor,  captured,  I:  186 

Alexandrium  [Scandalium],  fortress,  I: 
514 

Alexius  I  Comnenus,  Byzantine  emperor, 
reign,  I:  123  ff.,  378  j  refuses  to  release 
nobles  of  Godfrey's  army  from  prison, 
123  ;  Godfrey  refuses  to  go  to:  hostility 
arises,  124;  treachery,  1275  Bohemond 
I  warns  duke  against:  Godfrey’s  reply, 
129;  sends  son  as  hostage:  Godfrey 
goes  to  emperor:  peace  restored,  1303 
prepares  to  entrap  Bohemond,  1333  let¬ 
ter  to  Bohemond:  secret  attack  on  his 
camp:  evil  designs  disclosed,  1353  hon¬ 
ors  Robert,  count  of  Flanders,  1383 
sends  deputation  to  meet  Raymond, 
count  of  Toulouse,  1413  orders  attack 
on  count’s  army,  1433  repents  action, 
1 44  3  treachery  revealed :  invited  to  ac¬ 
company  Christian  leaders,  1463  hon¬ 
ors  Robert,  count  of  Normandy,  and 
Eustace,  148 ;  rewards  Christians  for 
heads  of  Turks,  1573  proposal  to  sur¬ 
render  Nicaea  to,  1663  sends  envoy  to 
receive  city,  1673  Stephen  of  Chartres 
visits,  2743  sets  out  for  Antioch  with 
aid  for  Christians,  2753  Stephen’s  deceit¬ 
ful  speech  to,  2753  returns  home:  dis¬ 
misses  force,  2773  envoys  from,  com¬ 
plain  of  Bohemond,  3263  emperor’s 
neglect  to  fulfil  agreement  with  leaders, 
envoys  beg  army  to  await  his  arrival, 
3273  causes  Turks  to  set  ambushes  for 


pilgrims,  4323  foul  play,  4703  fear  of 
Latins:  treaty  with  Bohemond,  4713 
death,  5233  John  II  recalls  agreement 
with,  II:  833  first  to  break  pledges,  84 
Alexius  II  Comnenus,  Byzantine  emperor, 
weds  Agnes,  daughter  of  Louis  VII, 
11:  449  3  succeeds  to  throne  of  Manuel 
under  mother’s  guardianship,  453,  461 5 
nobles  conspire  against,  4533  sought  ad¬ 
vice  of  Latins,  4623  character,  4625 
crowned,  467 

Alexius,  son  of  Emperor  John,  dies,  II: 
123 

Alexius  Contostephanus  [Megalducas] , 
II:  361^,  3673  deserts  Emperor  Alex¬ 
ius  n,  463 

Alexius  the  chamberlain,  11  :  277 
Alexius  the  frotosebastosy  conspires 
against  Alexius  II,  II:  4533  affairs  of 
empire  administered  by,  4613  plot  to 
drive  from  control,  4633  blinded  and 
mutilated,  464 

Ali,  son  of  Abu-Talib,  I:  6o«,  II:  323 
Alice,  daughter  of  Baldwin  II,  I:  5223 
married  to  Bohemond  II,  II  :  33;  plan 
to  rule  Antioch :  refuses  king  admission 
to  city,  443  determined  to  disinherit 
daughter,  44,  533  granted  Laodicea 
and  Jabala,  45  3  wickedness  revealed, 
543  marches  to  Antioch  and  assumes  role 
of  sovereign :  deceived  by  patriarch, 
783  retires,  79 

Alix,  queen  of  France,  II  :  451 
al-Mahdi  [Almahadi],  II:  324 
al-Malik  al-Salah  [Melehe  Salah],  II: 
404 

Alp  Arslan  [Belfeth],  lays  waste  the 
Christian  empire,  I:  77,  78« 

Alphonse,  count  of  Toulouse,  I:  454,  II: 
181 

Amalfi,  11:  2425  makes  offering  to  hospi¬ 
tal  at  Jerusalem,  244 

Amalfitani,  II:  2413  area  at  Jerusalem  set 
aside  for,  242  3  establish  monastery  and 
convent,  243 

Amalrich,  patriarch  of  Jerusalem,  I:  203 
death:  succeeded  by  Heraclius  (9.?;.), 
22,  n:  45  1 3  election  to  succeed  F ulcher 
(9.1^.)  causes  strife  among  bishops,  271 3 
receives  pallium  in  recognition  of  office, 
2723  carries  cross  into  Egypt,  3725  at 
Gaza,  3733  Baldwin  IV  crowned  by, 

399^ 

Amalrich,  bishop  of  Sidon,  succeeds  Ber¬ 
nard,  11:  2255  goes  to  Rome,  246 


INDEX 


Amaury  I,  king  of  Jerusalem,  separation 
from  Agnes,  I:  ii,  II:  300  j  in  Egypt, 
I:  12,  13  j  weds  Greek  princess  Maria, 
1 2,  H:  344  J  selection  of  William  as  his 
historian,  I:  i2j  interest  in  Muslim  his¬ 
tory,  1 6  5  supplied  Arabic  accounts,  1 6, 
30,  56}  William^s  sorrow  at  death  of, 
16 J  marriage  to  Agnes:  children,  II: 
53)  300)  age  at  death  of  Fulk,  135  j  as 
count  of  Jaffa:  loyalty  to  mother,  2063 
city  of  Ascalon  bestowed  upon,  23  3  j 
received  by  Emperor  Manuel,  279  j  son, 
Baldwin,  born  to,  2865  succeeds  Bald¬ 
win  III  293 )  i'eig'n,  Bks.  XIX— 

XX  5  characteristics,  life,  and  manners, 
296  ff.  J  physical  traits,  298,  3005  ques¬ 
tions  future  resurrection,  299  j  children 
by  Agnes  legitimized:  genealogy,  300 } 
coronation,  3445  cupidity,  358}  visits 
Constantinople,  377-833  death,  395 

Amida,  bishoprics,  II:  65  j  seized  by  Sala- 
din,  489 

Anacletus,  consecration,  II:  61  j  death,  62, 
1 1 3» 

Anar  [Ainardus],  governor  of  Damascus, 
begs  Fulk’s  aid  against  Zangi:  condi¬ 
tions  offered,  II:  1053  at  siege  of  Banyas, 
107,  109  3  secret  negotiations  with  amir, 
n  1 5  wisdom  and  fidelity,  1123  au¬ 
thority  in  Damascus,  1463  temporary 
peace  between  Baldwin  III  and,  147  J 
daughters  and  sons-in-law :  efforts  to 
gain  favor  of  Christians,  1483  king 
sends  envoy  to,  1543  Turk  blinded  by, 
1573  death,  224 

Anastasius  IV,  pope,  II:  236,  24 1» 

Anavarza,  II:  64,  275 

Andreas,  count  of  Rapacanina,  II:  238, 

■ 

247,  250 

Andronicus  I  Comnenus,  Byzantine  em¬ 
peror,  receives  Beirut:  abducts  Theo¬ 
dora,  II:  3455  in  plot  to  drive  Alexius, 
the  frotosebastos  from  control  of  em¬ 
pire,  463  3  kills  nobles,  seizes  palace 
and  Constantinople,  4643  in  possession 
of  Constantinople:  has  Emperor  Alex¬ 
ius  II  crowned,  467 

Andronicus,  son  of  Emperor  John,  dies, 
II:  123 

Andronicus  Angelus,  II:  4203  deserts  Em¬ 
peror  Alexius  II,  463 

Anfred,  I:  484 

Anna  Comnena,  I:  123^,  i6o«,  219/^ 

Ansaldus,  I:  4763  Jubail  surrenders  to, 

477 


525 

Anselm,  bishop  of  Bethlehem,  II:  118, 
1 26 

Anselm,  constable  of  Tower  of  David,  I: 

484 

Anselm  de  Brie,  II:  54 
Anselm  de  Pass,  II:  372 
Anselm  de  Ribemont,  I:  286,  289,  323 
Antioch,  a  tributary  of  infidels,  1;  795 
communication  with  Edessa  opened: 
citizens  lay  ambush  for  pilgrims,  1953 
history  and  description  of  city,  199  ff.  3 
converted  to  Christianity,  200,  2403 
Yaghi  Siyan  ruler,  2043  siege 

and  capture  by  Crusaders,  204-603  de¬ 
scription  of  mountain,  2613  town  scant¬ 
ily  provisioned  and  strongly  fortified, 
2613  Karbuqua’s  (^q.v.)  advance  guard 
before,  262  3  besieged  by  Karbuqa,  266- 
9  5  3  peace  and  order  established, 
churches  restored,  2963  towers  held  by 
count  of  Toulouse  seized  by  Bohemond 
I,  3135  Tancred  summoned  to  take 
over  care  of,  399,  4283  Bohemond  I 
returns,  4513  invaded  by  Turks,  4893 
Roger,  son  of  Richard,  succeeds  to  prin¬ 
cipality,  4923  earthquakes,  500,  II: 
3703  ravished  by  Bursuq,  I:  500,  5035 
invasion  by  Il-Ghazi,  5283  Christian 
army  defeated,  5303  principality  com¬ 
mitted  to  king,  5353  Balak’s  invasion, 
5393  privileges  granted  to  Venetians, 
5563  invaded  by  Bursuqi,  II:  23,  313 
king  goes  to  aid  of,  243  restored  to 
Bohemond  II  (^.‘Z'.))  33  j  death  of 
prince,  43  5  king  refused  admission  to, 
44  3  people  appeal  to  king  against  mach¬ 
inations  of  Alice,  5  3  3  affairs  put  in 
safe  condition :  left  in  charge  of  Renaud 
Masoier,  553  King  Fulk  summoned: 
aids  Pons,  563  undertakes  administra¬ 
tion,  58  5  suffragan  bishops  under  juris¬ 
diction  of  church  of,  643  independent 
metropolitans  and  archbishops  under, 
653  conspiracy  against  king,  703  Ray¬ 
mond  of  Poitou  (^.*2^.)  marries  Con¬ 
stance,  becomes  prince,  793  besieged  by 
Emperor  John,  833  treaty  with  John, 
93  5  emperor  again  demands  citadel,  97- 
1003  legate  of  church  of  Rome  sent  to 
investigate  trouble  between  Ralph 

patriarch,  and  canons,  iioff. 3 
synod  held  at,  1183  emperor  demands 
city,  1243  clergy  oppose  reestablish¬ 
ment  of  Greek  hierarchy,  1253  Louis 
VII  conducted  with  pomp  into  city,  1793 


INDEX 


526 

Antioch  {Continued^ 

departs  ignominiously,  181}  extent  of 
principality,  182 j  Nureddin  invades 
land:  victory  at  Neva,  1965  Prince 
Raymond  slain,  198  j  Nureddin  burns 
vicinity,  1995  Baldwin  III  hastens  to 
relief  of  country,  200  j  Emperor  Manuel 
sends  army  to,  208  j  church  of,  loses 
three  archbishoprics,  212;  Renaud  de 
Chatillon  weds  Constance,  be¬ 

comes  prince,  224  j  Emperor  Manuel 
comes  to,  275-80;  Bohemond  III 
prince  of,  307;  Amaury  assumes 
charge  of,  310;  land  placed  under  inter¬ 
dict,  456-57;  patriarchs,  see  Aimery; 
Bernard ;  John ;  Ralph 
Apamea,  I:  309,  449,  III  30,  64,  198^ 
Apulia,  II:  31,  78;  Emperor  Manuel  in¬ 
vades,  247;  King  William  of  Sicily 
defeats  Greek  forces,  250 
Aqsunqur,  Aleppo  given  to,  I:  204 
Arabia,  I:  340,  429,  II:  5;  fortresses, 

I:  506,  II,  127 

Arabs,  Syria  seized  by,  I:  60  ff. ;  wife  of 
chief  taken  prisoner,  is  courteously 
treated,  429;  he  vows  to  be  faithful  to 
Baldwin  I,  430;  rescues  king,  445; 
alliance  with  Tughtigin,  538;  a  chief 
is  killed,  11:  155;  captured  by  Baldwin 
III  in  defiance  of  treaty,  255 ;  fight  with 
lances  only,  331;  avoid  dangers  of 
combat,  attach  themselves  to  victor, 
433  ;  attacked  by  Guy  de  Lusignan,  508 
Arados,  I:  319,  11:  5,  68,  448 
Archard,  deacon,  I:  482,  484 
Arda,  wife  of  Baldwin  I,  I:  416??;  put 
aside,  461 ;  king  vows  to  restore  to  dig¬ 
nity,  514 

Ariano,  bishop  of,  1:  401 
Arius,  I:  152,  11:  167 
Arka,  II:  5,  68,  447;  pilgrims  camp  near, 
I:  317;  description  of,  318;  siege  of, 
317-29 

Armenians,  open  gates  of  Artasium,  I: 
196;  at  Antioch,  227,  258;  cut  off  head 
of  Yaghi  Siyan,  259;  attacked  on  Eu¬ 
phrates,  474;  privileges  granted  to,  in 
Jerusalem,  538;  rescue  Baldwin  II, 
541 ;  put  to  sword  by  Balak,  543 
Arnold,  prior  of  Mt.  Sion,  I:  536,  556 
Arnold  of  Toroge,  II:  456 
Arnulf  de  Choques,  patriarch  of  Jerusa¬ 
lem,  character,  reputation,  I:  324,  359, 
380,  417,  489;  raised  to  patriarchate, 
384;  election  made  null  and  void,  402; 


intimacy  with  Baldwin  I,  417?  disturbs 
peace  of  Daimbert,  425,  452;  Daimbert 
driven  out  through  machinations  of, 
467;  plots  to  put  Gibelin  in  patriarchal 
chair,  468 ;  goes  to  Rome,  482 ;  succeeds 
Gibelin  as  patriarch:  introduces  canons 
in  church  at  Jerusalem,  4893  scheme 
contrived  to  deceive  countess  of  Sicily 
and  supplement  resources  of  king,  489, 
497  ;  escapes  Turks,  494;  deposed,  505  ; 
goes  to  Rome:  reinstated,  506;  in  con¬ 
ference  on  appointment  of  king,  519; 
death,  524 

Arnulf,  bishop  of  Lisieux,  at  council  of 
Acre,  II:  185 

Arnulf  of  Calabria,  11:  61 ;  becomes  bishop 
of  Cosenza:  treachery,  1133  indulges 
rage  against  patriarch,  114,  1163  at 
synod  of  Antioch,  119 
Arnulf  of  Turbessel,  II:  340 
Arsequinus  [Asclettin? ],  II:  248 
Arsuf,  besieged,  I:  409,  4343  seized  by 
Baldwin  I,  4353  king  escapes  to,  446 
Artasium  [Artah],  siege  of,  I,  195-975 
battle  between  Tancred  and  Ridwan, 
463  3  Roger,  prince  of  Antioch,  at,  5283 
bishopric  of,  II:  68 

Ascalon,  captured  and  fortified,  I:  12; 
Egyptians,  Arabs,  and  Turks  encamp 
before,  3943  are  put  to  flight,  3973  ex¬ 
pedition  of  Baldwin  I  against,  4263 
people  join  Egyptians,  443 ;  Egyptian 
army  arrives,  464,  5233  church  subject 
to  see  at  Bethlehem,  4823  still  in  power 
of  Egyptians,  547 ;  grants  to  Venetians, 
555  >  victory  of  Baldwin  II,  11:  253 
Egyptians  periodically  reinforce  garri¬ 
son,  26,  203,  2203  subject  to  Egyptian 
potentate,  80;  effort  to  make  a  barrier 
between  Christian  state  and  Egypt,  8 1 ; 
encircled  by  impregnable  forts,  130  ff. ; 
capture  of,  184-2343  Baldwin  III  be¬ 
sieges,  202-34;  situation  of  city,  219; 
church  organized,  granted  to  bishop  of 
Bethlehem,  233  ;  possessions  distributed: 
city  bestowed  upon  Amaury,  233;  ref¬ 
ugees  attacked  and  robbed  by  Turk, 
2343  soil  produces  sixtyfold  crop,  2363 
given  to  William  of  Montferrat,  4153 
Saladin  takes  position  before:  Baldwin 
IV  goes  out  to  meet  him,  426,  4293 
gates  of  city  closed  against  king,  508 
Ascalonites,  fall  into  trap  laid  for  pil¬ 
grims,  I:  4683  assault  Jerusalem,  495, 
11:  12,  173  besiege  Jaffa,  I:  5023  forays 


INDEX 


into  kingdom,  11;  735  fortress  built  to 
check,  80,  130,  131;  attacked  and 
robbed,  234 

Aschetinus,  bishop  of  Bethlehem,  I:  482, 
536,  5565  villages  granted  to,  483 
Assassins,  Banyas  held  by,  II:  77  j  sect  de¬ 
scribed,  390 i  send  peace  envoy  to  Am- 
aury  I,  392  j  envoy  killed  by  Knights 
Templars,  392;  king  roused  to  violent 
anger  by  outrage,  3935  is  able  to  clear 
his  own  honor,  394 
Athanasius,  II:  336 
Attalia,  II:  123,  178 

Attard,  archbishop  of  Nazareth,  seeks  wife 
for  Baldwin  III,  II:  2655  dies,  273 
Ayyubid  dynasty,  II:  358-59:^ 

Azot,  I:  465,  524 

Baalbec,  I:  198,  403  j  taken  over  by  Sala- 
din,  n:  405,  409  j  Raymond  III  of 
Tripoli’s  depredations,  413 
Babilyun  [Babylon],  II:  315,  334 
Bacades,  bandits  from,  II:  437 
Baccar,  valley  of,  II:  107J  laid  waste  by 
Baldwin,  4125  entered  by  Saladin,  476 
Bagdad,  caliph  promises  assistance  to 
Yaghi  Siyan,  I:  205  j  visited  by  Shir- 
kuh,  II:  3 1 3  i  commands  princes  to 
lend  him  aid,  3145  why  caliph  of 
Egypt  is  adversary  of,  323 
Bait  Nuba  [Bettenuble],  fortress,  11:  58 
Balak,  Turkish  prince,  invades  land  of 
Antioch,  I:  539-435  dream  fulfilled,  11: 
16 

Balas,  ruler  of  Seruj,  I:  194,  306 
Balbis,  attacked  and  claimed  by  Shirkuh, 
II:  3055  claimed  by  Hospital  at  Jerusa¬ 
lem,  3505  seized  and  pillaged,  351 
Balduk,  ruler  of  Samosata,  I:  192,  194, 
308 

Baldwin  I,  king  of  Jerusalem,  pilgrimage, 
I:  95,  116,  13  I,  1725  given  as  hostage 
to  Coloman,  1205  puts  Greeks  to  flight, 
1285  withdraws  from  main  army,  1755 
death  of  wife,  177,  4155  quarrel  with 
Tancred  at  Tarsus,  179-855  seizes 
northern  Syria  to  Euphrates,  187  ff .  5 
reprimanded  for  treatment  of  Tancred: 
makes  amends,  1875  summoned  to 
Edessa,  1895  relations  with  ruler:  aids 
city  against  oppression  of  Turks,  1915 
lays  siege  to  Samosata,  1925  made  count 
of  Edessa :  buys  Samosata,  1935  seizes 
Seruj,  1945  sends  gifts  to  chiefs  at  An¬ 
tioch,  2375  forces  infidels  to  relinquish 


527 

attack  on  Edessa,  245  5  summonded  to 
aid  Ezaz,  3015  citizens  of  Edessa  con¬ 
spire  against,  3055  their  punishment, 
3065  Balas  plots  against,  3065  declines 
alliance  with  Turks,  3085  genealogy, 
3855  goes  to  Jerusalem  to  celebrate  the 
Lord’s  nativity,  4005  Malatia  given  to, 
4125  reign  as  king  of  Jerusalem,  Bks. 
X— XI  inch  5  laid  aside  clerical  habit  to 
become  a  soldier,  4155  physical  and 
moral  characteristics,  4165  crowned, 
4275  wounded,  4535  puts  away  legit¬ 
imate  wife,  Arda,  4615  marriage  with 
Adelaide,  countess  of  Sicily,  489,  496- 
975  repents  treatment  of  Arda,  sends 
Adelaide  back  to  Sicily,  513-145  death, 

515 

Baldwin  II  (Baldwin  du  Bourg),  king  of 
Jerusalem,  I:  95,  116,  127,  131,  287, 
3695  wins  lasting  glory,  1735  with¬ 
draws  from  main  army,  1755  becomes 
count  of  Edessa,  4225  marriage  to 
Morfia,  daughter  of  Duke  Gabriel: 
generosity  to  Joscelin  de  Courtenay, 
4505  in  siege  of  Haran,  4565  wrangles 
with  Bohemond  over  rule  of  Haran, 
4585  taken  prisoner,  4595  returns; 
stirs  up  war  against  Tancred,  4745 
visits  father-in-law,  4785  cunning 
scheme  to  get  money,  4795  forces  Jos¬ 
celin  to  leave  Edessa,  4985  onslaught 
against  Bursuq,  5045  reign,  Bks  XII- 
XIH5  genealogy,  5175  elected  king, 
5205  appearance,  personality,  5215 
crowned,  522,  5355  taken  prisoner  by 
Balak,  5405  liberated  by  Armenians, 
5425  retaken  by  Balak,  5435  released, 
II:  215  illness,  death,  45-465  difficulties 
with  Alice  at  Antioch,  53 

Baldwin  III,  king  of  Jerusalem,  I:  9,  12, 
165  as  boy  summoned  before  king,  II: 
465  reign,  Bks.  XVI-XVIII  inch:  joint 
rule  with  Melisend,  136-835  succeeds 
Fulk  of  Anjou  (q.v.)y  1365  personal 
appearance,  life,  and  habits,  1375 
crowned,  2045  marriage,  264,  273-755 
poisoned,  2925  death,  2935  built 
stronghold  at  Gaza,  374 

Baldwin  IV,  the  leper,  king  of  Jerusalem, 
William  appointed  tutor  to,  I:  14,  II: 
397  i  legitimized,  I:  145  afflicted  with 
leprosy,  14,  II:  398,  446,  4605  crowned, 
I:  16,  II:  3995  William’s  career  in  reign 
of,  I:  16-255  death,  25  5  son  of  Amaury 
and  Agnes,  II,  535  birth,  2865  geneal- 


INDEX 


528 

Baldwin  IV  {Continued) 

ogy,  301 5  reign,  Bks.  XXI-XXIII  incl.  5 
character,  appearance,  3  9  8  j  intellect, 

398,492 

Baldwin  V,  king  of  Jerusalem,  I:  25  j 
crowned,  11:  501 

Baldwin,  archbishop  of  Caesarea,  1:  392?^, 
438,  II:  185,  218,  247 
Baldwin,  bishop  of  Beirut,  11:  67,  118 
Baldwin,  canon  of  the  Sepulchre  of  the 
Lord,  II:  475 

Baldwin,  count  of  Hainault,  I:  95,  116, 
208,  232,  289  i  sent  as  envoy  to  Alex¬ 
ius:  disappears,  298 
Baldwin  Calderon,  I:  158 
Baldwin  de  Lille,  responsibility  of  realm 
entrusted  to,  II:  269 

Baldwin  d’lbelin  of  Ramlah,  I:  536,  H: 
87,  131,  204  j  an  adherent  of  Raymond 
III  of  Tripoli,  400  j  goes  out  to  meet 
Saladin,  430 j  captured,  443  j  in  Con¬ 
stantinople,  453  j  prowess  in  battle, 
474,  497  J  urges  coronation  of  Baldwin 
V,  501 

Baldwin  du  Bourg,  see  Baldwin  II 

Baldwin  of  Ghent,  I:  158 

Baldwin  of  Marash,  EC:  158,  161 

Baldwin  of  Ramlah,  see  Baldwin  d’lbelin 

Balearic  Isles,  II:  458 

Balian  d’lbelin  of  Ramlah,  the  Elder,  11: 

73,  1 3 1,  204;  at  council  of  Acre,  185 
Balian  d’lbelin  of  Ramlah,  the  Younger, 
I:  38-39/2,  11:  13 1,  204 j  weds  Maria, 
widow  of  King  Amaury,  302,  425  j  fa¬ 
vors  regency  of  Raymond  III  of  Trip¬ 
oli,  4015  given  city  of  Nablus,  425  j 
goes  out  against  Saladin,  430  j  prowess 
in  battle,  487  j  urges  coronation  of 
Baldwin  V,  501 
Balian  of  Jaffa,  II:  261,  402 
Balian  of  Nablus,  see  Balian  d’lbelin  of 
Ramlah 

Banyas,  in  hands  of  enemy,  II:  745  prison¬ 
ers  taken  at,  restored,  76  j  city  held  by 
Assassins,  ceded  to  Christians,  77  j  same 
as  Caesarea  Philippi,  1865  Damascenes 
promise  to  restore,  io6i  history:  block¬ 
ade,  io7i  provision  of  surrender,  1115 
besieged  by  Nureddin,  225,  257,  262, 
309  j  Arabs  and  Turks  attacked  near, 
in  defiance  of  treaty,  255  j  Humphrey 
of  Toron  grants  half  of  city  to  Hospital¬ 
lers,  256;  supplies  captured  by  infidels. 
Hospitallers  withdraw  from  agreement, 
2575  Baldwin  III  raises  siege,  2585  re¬ 


mains  until  city  is  restored,  259  j  king 
summons  prince  and  nobles  to  relieve, 
263  J  situation,  history,  3095  falls  to 
Nureddin,  310;  Amaury  lays  siege  to: 
truce  concluded,  395 

Barac,  physician,  poisons  Baldwin  III,  11: 
292 

Bari,  II:  247 

Barison,  constable  of  Jaffa,  I:  536 
Baswaj,  Damascenes  under,  invade  land  of 
Tripoli,  II:  8  2  j  pillages  and  burns  Na¬ 
blus,  88 

Bavarians,  I:  208 

Beatrice,  wife  of  Joscelin  II,  11  :  53  5  gov¬ 
ernment  of  Edessa  in  hands  of,  201  j 
Emperor  Manuel  offers  annual  revenue 
in  exchange  for  fortresses,  208  j  taken 
under  protection  of  Baldwin  III,  209 
Beauvoir,  castle  of,  II  •  473 
Bedar,  I:  483 

Bedegene  taken  by  Baldwin  IV,  II:  412 
Beersheba,  II:  81,  131 
Beherslin,  II;  282 

Beirut,  I:  3315  Baldwin  meets  pilgrims  at, 
442  J  besieged  and  captured,  484!!.  i 
Egyptian  fleet  at,  11:  32,  448  j  bishop¬ 
rics,  66  J  Egyptian  fleet  aids  Saladin, 
he  invests  city,  476-79 
Belfast,  11:  442 
Belgrade,  Teutons  at,  I:  1 1 1 
Benedict,  archbishop  of  Edessa,  I:  456,  459 
Benevento,  siege  of,  II:  238,  248,  250 
Beni-Zerra  family,  I:  24 1 
Berengar,  bishop  of  Orange,  sent  to  Syria 
as  papal  legate,  I:  505 
Berengar,  count  of  Sulzbach,  daughters 
married  emperors  Conrad  and  Manuel, 

II:  174 

Bernard,  patriarch  of  Antioch,  formerly 
bishop  of  Artasium,  I:  297,  452,  456, 
544  J  first  Latin  incumbent,  309,  522  j 
resents  privilege  granted  to  Gibelin, 
510;  Paschal  II’s  replies  to  accusations, 
510,  511 J  peacemaker,  11:  345  admon¬ 
ished  to  restore  suffragans  of  church  at 
Tyre,  37 j  dies,  60 

Bernard,  bishop  of  Lydda,  formerly  abbot 
of  Mt.  Tabor,  IE:  359,  372 
Bernard,  bishop  of  Nazareth,  I:  536,  556 
Bernard,  bishop  of  Sidon,  11:  67,  ii8,  162, 
225  J  at  council  of  Acre,  185J  dies, 
225 

Bernard  de  Neufchatel,  11:  554 
Bernard  de  St.  Valery,  I:  369/? 

Bernard  d’Estampes,  £1:151 


INDEX 


Bernard  de  Tremelay,  II:  218,  227 
Bernard  of  Clairvaux,  I:  525^,  526^,  11; 

62,  1 93^5  preaches  Second  Crusade,  164 
Bernard  the  Treasurer,  I:  39,  43 
Bernard  Vacher,  II;  104,  149 
Beroea,  destroyed  by  earthquake,  11;  370 
Bertha  of  Sulzbach,  or  Irene,  wife  of  Em¬ 
peror  Manuel,  11:  287^,  288,  450 
Berthold  of  Andechs,  II:  184 
Bertrada  [Bertelea] ,  mother  of  King 
Fulk,  II:  47  j  deserted  Fulk  IV,  le 
Rechin,  for  Philip  I  of  France,  48  j 
begs  Fulk  IV  to  restore  paternal  in¬ 
heritance  to  son,  49 

Bertram,  count  of  Tripoli,  I:  463, 11:  403  ; 
comes  to  Syria,  I:  4755  quarrel  with 
William  Jordan,  475-76;  fealty  to 
Baldwin  I,  478 ;  invited  to  join  in  siege 
of  Beirut,  4855  goes  to  aid  of  Tancred, 
4913  Pons  his  successor,  492;  called  to 
aid  in  battle  against  Mawdud,  493; 
blames  king  for  disaster,  494 
Bertram,  son  of  Alphonse  of  Toulouse, 
captured  by  Nureddin,  11:  i97»;  re¬ 
leased,  280 

Bertrand,  son  of  Count  Gislebert,  II:  457 
Bertrand  de  Blanquefort,  II:  261 
Bethany,  Queen  Melisend  builds  convent, 
H:  132 

Bethbezan,  I:  483 

Bethlehem,  sends  envoys  to  pilgrims,  I: 
7o>  335  >  Tancred,  dispatched  to  city, 
takes  possession,  336;  the  Lord’s  na¬ 
tivity  celebrated  in,  40 1 ;  church  raised 
to  dignity  of  a  cathedral,  481 
Bethune,  advocate  of,  effort  to  bring  about 
marriage  between  daughters  of  King 
Amaury  and  his  sons,  I:  18,  II:  419 
Bettegene,  destroyed  by  our  army,  II;  485 
Beugnot,  A.,  I:  44 

Bile,  fortress  given  into  power  of  Greeks, 
II;  209 

Bilin,  11;  1 8,  374^ 

Bithynia,  Peter  the  Hermit  encamps  in,  I: 
106;  Tancred  moves  his  legions  into, 
1373  taken  by  Andronicus,  11:  463 
Blachernae  palace,  I:  125,  127,  1283  11: 
382 

Blanchegarde,  fortress,  11:  132 
Boello  de  Chartres,  I:  134 
Bohemond  I,  prince  of  Antioch,  as  prince 
of  Taranto,  I:  963  message  to  Godfrey, 
1293  hastens  to  Constantinople:  nobles 
in  his  train:  Alexius  prepares  to  en¬ 
trap,  133  ff.j  biography,  133??;  legions 


529 

plunder  and  murder  heretics,  1343  vis¬ 
its  emperor,  1363  advice  to  count  of 
Toulouse,  1453  arrives  at  Nicaea,  147, 
156)  1573  leaders  separate,  1693  at¬ 
tacked  by  Turks,  1703  rescued  by 
Tancred,  1713  at  Antioch,  207,  215, 
229,  230,  231,  2653  scheme  to  remove 
spies,  2213  reputation  as  master  of 
guile  and  courage,  222,  223^3  returns 
stolen  pavilion  given  him  by  Pakrad, 
2383  friendship  with  Firuz:  plot  con¬ 
trived  between  them,  2423  asks  that 
Antioch  be  conceded  to  him,  244,  2483 
makes  known  a  secret,  2473  chiefs  con¬ 
cede  city  to,  2493  urges  Firuz  to  com¬ 
plete  work,  2553  first  to  scale  wall, 
2563  placed  in  supreme  control,  2663 
forestalls  attempts  at  desertion,  2673 
sets  fire  to  city,  2793  given  command, 
2873  aids  in  rout  of  Qilij  Arslan,  293; 
known  as  prince  of  Antioch,  2973 
makes  himself  master  of  Cilicia,  300;  at 
Ezaz,  3033  at  Maara,  3103  controversy 
with  count  of  Toulouse,  312;  seizes 
towers  held  by  count  at  Antioch,  3133 
at  Laodicea,  3203  envoys  from  Alexius 
complain  of,  3263  upheld  by  chiefs, 
3273  goes  to  Jerusalem  to  celebrate  the 
Lord’s  nativity,  4003  friendship  with 
Daimbert,  402^3  received  investiture 
of  principality  from  Daimbert,  403  3 
taken  prisoner  at  Malatia,  41 1 3  Taim- 
bert’s  appeal  to,  4193  released,  returns 
to  Antioch:  resigns  principality  to  Tan¬ 
cred,  45 1 3  assigns  benefice  to  Daimbert, 
4523  wrangles  with  Baldwin  du  Bourg 
over  Haran,  4583  Joscelin’s  land  under 
care  of,  4593  entrusts  principality  to 
Tancred:  goes  to  France:  marries  Con¬ 
stance,  daughter  of  Philip  I,  4603  en¬ 
ters  land  of  Greeks,  pillages  cities,  470  3 
treaty  with  Alexius,  4713  returns  to 
Apulia,  dies,  leaving  heir,  472  {see 
Bohemond  II) 

Bohemond  II,  prince  of  Antioch,  I:  472^3 
to  be  given  Antioch  on  demand,  4923 
inheritance  usurped,  531;  as  prince  of 
Taranto  arrives  at  Antioch,  11:  323 
lands  restored  to :  marries  Alice,  daugh¬ 
ter  of  Baldwin  II,  33;  genealogy:  be¬ 
sieges  Kafartab,  3  3  3  enmity  between 
Joscelin  and,  34;  at  siege  of  Damas¬ 
cus,  403  death,  43 

Bohemond  III,  prince  of  Antioch,  I:  213 
at  siege  of  Harim,  11:  3073  cast  into 


INDEX 


530 

Bohemond  III  {Continued) 

prison,  308  j  restored  to  liberty,  raises 
ransom  for  hostages:  gifts  from  Em¬ 
peror  Manuel,  3115  Nureddin^s  mo¬ 
tive  in  freeing,  3 1 1  j  declares  war 
against  Malih,  387  j  aids  in  siege 
against  Harim,  425  j  raises  siege,  435; 
causes  Baldwin  IV  alarm,  446  j  leaves 
wife  to  marry  Sibyl,  452  f.j  continues 
wicked  course,  is  excommunicated,  454  j 
patriarch  and  prelates  try  to  find  a 
remedy,  455-57?  arranges  exchange 
of  Tarsus  with  Rupen,  491  j  urges  cor¬ 
onation  of  Baldwin  V,  501 
Bohemond,  castle  of,  I:  128 
Bohemond,  staircase  of,  I:  201 
Bosphorus,  I:  126 

Bostrum,  bishoprics,  II:  64  j  governor  of¬ 
fers  to  surrender  to  Baldwin  III,  146} 
king  finds  city  occupied  by  Turks,  1515 
besieged  by  Saladin,  409  j  our  army 
raids  territory  near,  485 
Brethren  of  the  Soldiery  of  the  Temple, 
see  Knights  Templars 
Bulgarians,  disturbances  between  pilgrims 
and,  I:  98,  100,  loi,  102;  overrun 
countries  from  Danube  to  Adriatic,  121 
Burdinus,  archbishop  of  Braga,  1:  527 
Buria,  assailed  by  Saladin,  II:  469;  peo¬ 
ple  are  carried  into  captivity,  470 
Bursuq  [Bursequinus],  ravishes  land  of 
Antioch,  I:  500,  503;  forces  flee,  504 
Busuqi  [Bursequinus],  Turkish  prince,  in¬ 
vades  Antioch,  11:  23,  31 }  defeat,  25  j 
death,  3 1 
Butella,  II:  349 

Caesarea,  I:  332  j  description,  435  j  cap¬ 
tured,  4365  citizens  massacred  by  Chris¬ 
tians,  437  J  governor  and  kadi  held  for 
ransom,  438 
Caicapha,  I:  483 

Cairo,  description:  founder,  II:  315  j  Cru¬ 
saders  protect,  328-32,  339  J  Amaury 
encamps  near,  352 
Calabria,  bishop  of,  I:  380 
Caliph,  title,  11:  323 
Calixtus  11,  pope,  I:  5275  death,  II:  22 
Calogenbar,  besieged,  II:  145 
Campania,  II:  247,  250 
Canestrivum,  II:  57 
Cannaie  des  Etourneaux,  II:  431 
Carmel,  Amaury  I  holds  army  in,  II:  389 
Castle  Arnold,  II:  58 
Castle  Nepa,  II:  265 


Castoria,  I:  134 
Catholicij  I:  200,  II:  122 
Cavea  Roab,  II:  156 

Cave  beyond  Jordan,  surrendered  to  Shir- 
kuh  by  Knights  Templars,  II:  3 1 2 
Cave  of  Tyre  seized  by  Shirkuh,  II:  312 
Caxton,  William,  I:  43 
Cecilia,  daughter  of  Philip  I  of  France, 
bride  of  Tancred,  I:  460  j  marries 
Pons,  49 2  J  genealogy,  II:  485  dowry, 
54 J  appeals  to  king  to  aid  Pons,  56 
Cerep,  I:  528,  532,  II:  22 
Chalcedon,  Godfrey’s  legions  camp  at,  I: 

133  J  fourth  synod  held  at,  133,  II:  166 
Charlemagne  [Charles,  emperor],  I:  63, 

64 J  II:  3oo?2 
Chastel  Neuf,  II:  263 
Chastel  Rouge,  II:  265 
ChatZy  I:  548 
Choelin,  II:  478 

Chosroes,  churches  overthrown  by,  I:  60  j 
invasion  of  Syria,  60,  61 
Church  councils:  Antioch,  I:  296-97,  II: 
117-225  Chalcedon,  I:  133,  II:  1665 
Jerusalem,  I:  467,  505-6,  II:  1225 
Nablus,  I:  535-365  Nicaea,  152,  200, 
341,  II:  1675  Rome,  436,  4385  Troyes, 

I-  5^5)  11:40 

Cilicia,  province,  I:  1785  invaded,  1865 
Bohemond  I  makes  himself  master,  3005 
earthquake,  5005  Emperor  John  in,  II: 
83?  94?  Thoros  raids,  2535  land  seized 
by  Thoros:  emperor  appears  suddenly, 
2755  fortress  surrendered  to  emperor, 
2785  Knights  Templars  dispossessed  of 
holdings  in,  387 
Civitot,  besieged,  I:  109 
Clarebold  de  Vendeuil,  I:  1 12,  124,  246 
Clement  III,  antipope,  see  Guibert,  arch¬ 
bishop  of  Ravenna 

Clermont,  council  of,  I:  87-885  leaders 
who  offered  themselves  for  pilgrimage, 

93 

Coats  of  arms,  early  instance  of  use  of, 

I:  372W 

Coelesyria,  province  of,  I:  200,  II:  45  Bur- 
suqi  enters,  315  earthquake,  3705  cities 
of,  brought  under  rule  of  Saladin,  404 
Colman  [Calamanus],  governor  of  Ci¬ 
licia,  at  seige  of  Harim,  II:  3075  cast 
into  prison,  308 

Cologne,  outrages  of  pilgrims  at,  I:  113 
Coloman,  king  of  Hungary,  kindness  to 
pilgrims,  I:  975  Godfrey’s  relations 
with,  1 1 7-2 1 


INDEX 


531 


Conan,  count  of  Brittany,  I:  369,  U:  48 
Conon,  de  Montague,  I:  116,  127,  131, 
149,  208,  369 
Conon  Roto,  I:  287 

Conrad,  emperor  of  the  Romans,  wears 
token  of  cross,  11:  1645  arrives  with 
army  at  Constantinople,  1655  disastrous 
march  in  Asia  Minor,  167-735  returns 
to  Constantinople,  1745  reception  in 
Jerusalem,  1815  at  council  of  Acre, 
1845  remarkable  feat  of,  1895  returns 
to  his  own  land :  dies,  succeeded  by  Fred¬ 
erick  I  195 

Constance,  daughter  of  Bohernond  II, 
Alice  plans  to  disinherit,  11:  44,  5  3  5 
Antioch  and  dependencies  held  for,  45  5 
Raymond  of  Poitou  invited  to  marry, 
595  marriage,  795  in  charge  of  state 
and  principality  of  Antioch,  1995  king’s 
advice  to  marry  not  heeded,  2135  weds 
Renaud  de  Chatillon,  224 
Constance,  daughter  of  Philip  I,  married 
to  Bohernond  I,  I:  460,  4725  mother  of 
Bohernond  II,  11:  33 
Constance  of  Castile,  11:  196/^ 

Constantine  I,  emperor,  I:  66 
Constantine  IX,  Monomachus  emperor,  I: 
69,  406 

Constantine  X,  emperor,  I:  406 
Constantine,  bishop  of  Lydda,  II:  247 
Constantine,  palace  of,  Constantinople : 

approach  described,  11:  379 
Constantinople,  description  of  site,  I:  1255 
army  quartered  outside:  ambushed  by 
Greeks,  127-305  visit  of  Amaury  I,  II: 
377-825  nobles  conspire  against  Alex¬ 
ius  II,  450-61 5  uprising  in  which  An- 
dronicus  (g'.v.)  prevails,  461  ff .  5  causes 
of  dissension,  462 

Contostephanus  [Gundostephan] ,  II:  287 
Coritium,  church  held  by  infidels,  11:  212 
Cresson,  11:  52,  282 
Cross,  sign  of,  worn  by  pilgrims,  I:  93 
Cross  of  the  Lord,  brought  from  Persia 
by  Heraclius,  I:  605  taken  to  Persia 
by  Chosroes,  6 1 5  found,  3855  carried 
before  troops,  439,  4655  sent  back  to 
Jerusalem,  535,  miracle  wrought  by, 
II:  154 

Crusading  expeditions 

-  Peasants  Crusade,  led  by  Peter  the 

Hermit,  I:  43,  82-1085  Walter  the 
Penniless,  97-99,  1095  Gottschalk,  iio- 
115  Count  Emicho,  113,  115 
■  First  Crusade,  Bks.  I— VIII 5  God¬ 


frey  and  Baldwin,  I:  43,  57,  95,  96, 
117-765  Raymond  of  Toulouse  and 
Adhemar,  bishop  of  Puy,  95,  96,  139, 
141,  143-46,  155,  1585  Robert  of  Nor¬ 
mandy  and  Stephen  of  Blois,  95,  148, 
1695  Robert  of  Flanders,  95,  138,  145, 
147,  149,  156,  1575  Bohernond  and 
Tancred,  96,  129,  133  ff.,  145  ff.,  156, 
1575  Svein,  2175  Emperor  Alexius, 

275-77 

-  Crusade  of  the  Faint-Hearted,  led 

by  William  of  Poitou,  Stephen  of  Blois, 
Stephen  of  Burgundy,  with  bands  from 
Lombardy  and  Germany,  I:  430-33 

-  Second  Crusade,  led  by  Conrad  III 

and  Louis  VII,  11:  163-96 

- Other  expeditions :  Crusade  of  Bohe- 

mond  against  Alexius,  I:  470-725  Ber¬ 
tram  of  Toulouse,  475-765  Scandina¬ 
vian  crusade,  led  by  Sigurd,  486-885 
Adelaide  of  Sicily,  4965  Bohernond  II, 
11:  32-33  5  Crusade  of  the  Templars  led 
by  Hugh  de  Payens,  40-425  Raymond 
of  Poitou,  77-795  Emperor  John,  83- 
84,  92-1025  second  expedition  led  by 
Emperor  John,  123-285  Emperor  Man¬ 
uel,  208-125  Thierry  of  Flanders,  264- 
7 1 5  second  expedition  led  by  Emperor 
Manuel,  275-815  second  expedition  led 
by  Thierry  of  Flanders,  3085  Stephen, 
son  of  Theobald  of  Blois,  and  Stephen, 
son  of  William  de  Saone,  3845  third 
expedition  led  by  Emperor  Manuel, 
414-15  5  William  Long  Sword,  4155 
Philip  of  Flanders,  417-25,  434-35 

- Naval  contingents,  see  Fleets 

Cyprus,  provides  help  for  Christians,  I: 
330,  3345  seized  by  Renaud  de  Chatil¬ 
lon,  II:  2535  atrocities  committed,  2545 
he  makes  amends,  275 
Cyril,  II:  336 

Dacia,  I:  122 

Daimbert,  patriarch  of  Jerusalem,  I:  401, 
4025  strife  over  possession  of  tower  of 
David,  403-45  neither  city  nor  tower 
surrendered  to,  4175  letter  to  Bohe- 
mond,  4195  retires  to  church  of  Mt. 
Sion,  425  5  reconciliation  between  Bald¬ 
win  I  and,  4275  takes  refuge  with 
Bohernond,  4525  in  siege  of  Haran, 
4565  unfolds  wrongs  at  Rome,  4615 
given  apostolic  letter  to  resume  see: 
death,  467 

Dalmatia,  I:  139,  140 


INDEX 


532 

Dalmatians,  murder  sick  and  aged  pil¬ 
grims,  I:  140  j  count  of  Toulouse  or¬ 
ders  hands  and  feet  cut  off,  141 
Damascenes  in  battle  with  Hugh  de  St. 
Omer,  I:  469  j  capture  Banyas,  11:  745 
treaty  with  Fulk,  765  under  command 
of  Baswaj  aided  by 

Fulk,  105-6 

Damascus,  seized  by  Omar,  I:  6 1  j  given 
to  Duqaq,  204  j  Tughtigin  iq.v.)y 
king  of,  goes  to  aid  of  Tyre,  11:  13  j 
invaded  by  Baldwin  II,  25,  27,  405 
bishoprics,  65  j  Zangi’s  attempt  against, 
105-65  besieged  by  Second  Crusade, 
186-93  5  taken  by  Nureddin,  224;  Bald¬ 
win  III  invades,  282-835  taken  by 
Saladin,  4045  Baldwin  IV  invades  and 
ravages  country,  4115  invasion  of  Bald¬ 
win  IV,  481,  485 

Damietta,  besieged,  II:  3635  famine,  3665 
pilgrims  shipwrecked  at,  468 
Dan,  river,  11:  27 

Danes,  under  Svein,  annihilated  by  Turks, 
I:  2171.5  fleet  of,  arrives  in  Syria, 
486 

Danishmand,  Turkish  satrap,  captures 
Bohemond  I:  lays  siege  to  Malatia,  I: 
411 

Daria,  11:  186,  1875  our  army  lays  waste, 

4S5 

Daron,  Saladin  lays  siege  to  fortress,  H: 
3715  described,  3725  Saladin^s  brother 
invades  vicinity,  4775  attack  on  Arabs, 
508 

David,  Tower  of,  I:  343,  383,  384W,  417, 
11:  428 

Dead  sea,  I:  339,  11:  390 
Deserters,  I:  267,  2745  vigorous  reproach 
to,  280 

Dioscurus,  patriarch  of  Alexandria,  I:  1 3  3 
Dirgham  [Dargam],  sultan  of  Egypt, 
goes  out  to  meet  King  Amaury:  forced 
to  retreat,  11:  3025  fate  of,  303-5 
Djawali,  11:  368» 

Dodo  de  Conti,  I:  1 16 
Dog  river,  I:  422,  442 
Domenigo  Michieli  [Dominicus  Mich- 
aelis],  doge  of  Venice,  sails  for  Syria, 
I:  5485  agreement  with  barons  on  siege 
of  Tyre,  5505  treaty,  5525  places  con¬ 
firmed  to,  554 
Domfront,  castle,  11:  60 
Dorylaeum,  battle  of,  I:  169^ 

Drogo  de  Monci,  I:  287 
Drogo  de  Nesle,  I:  124,  246 


Dubais  [Dabaisj,  I:  528,  534 

Duqaq,  I:  204,  422 

Ebremar,  patriarch  of  Jerusalem,  I:  452, 
556  5  carries  Cross  into  battle,  465,  5335 
visits  Rome:  deposed,  4675  granted 
church  of  Caesarea,  4685  at  council  of 
Nablus,  535 

Edessa,  Baldwin,  summoned  to  (^see  Bald¬ 
win  1)  :  the  city  and  its  people,  I:  1895 
Baldwin  made  ruler,  190-93  5  free  com¬ 
munication  with  Antioch  opened,  1955 
Persians,  Turks,  and  Kurds  lay  siege 
to:  forced  to  retire,  2455  citizens  con¬ 
spire  against  Baldwin,  3055  left  in  care 
of  Baldwin  du  Bourg  {see  Baldwin  II), 
4225  Turks  ravage  country  of,  472- 
73  j  Joscelin  becomes  count  of,  5225 
bishoprics,  11:  645  Zangi  captures,  140- 
435  location  described,  1405  Joscelin  II 

attempts  to  recover,  157-605 
extent  of  county,  1825  sultan  of  Iconium 
invades  land,  2005  countess  governs 
people,  201,  2075  in  power  of  enemies, 
2045  sultan  of  Iconium  siezes  region 
bordering  on  his  territory,  2065  Bald¬ 
win  III  repairs  to,  2075  Emperor 
Manuel  demands  and  obtains  country, 
2085  king  takes  those  who  wish  to 
leave  under  his  protection,  2095  Nured¬ 
din  stops  exodus,  2105  siezes  region, 
2125  church  held  by  infidels,  2125  seized 
by  Saladin,  480 

Egypt,  Amaury’s  adventures  in,  I:  12,  135 
Constantinople  urges  conquest  of,  185 
strife  with  Persia,  65  5  condition  of 
Christians  in,  705  Malik  Shah’s  sus¬ 
picion  of,  2045  enmity  between  Orien¬ 
tals  and  Egyptians,  2235  caliph  sends 
envoys  to  pilgrim  chiefs,  223,  229, 
3255  envoys  sent  by  our  chiefs  return, 
3255  change  of  attitude  toward  pil¬ 
grims,  3265  prince  of,  wrested  sover¬ 
eignty  of  Jerusalem  from  Turks,  3335 
attacks  against  Christians,  393-97,  439; 
Tyre  regarded  as  bulwark  of,  II:  75 
palace  revolution,  251-525  Amaury  I 
makes  expedition  into,  302-35 
Amaury’s  campaigns  to  assist  Shawar, 
314-425  Amaury’s  struggle  for,  in  al¬ 
liance  with  Emperor  Manuel,  344-965 
subjection  by  Turks,  356  5  relations  with 
kingdom  changed  for  worse,  358,  3605 
Philip  of  Flanders  thwarts  proposed 
invasion,  420-22 


INDEX 


Egyptians,  and  Turks  draw  together,  I: 
394  j  sinister  story  at  Jaffa,  441  j  defeat 
Baldwin  I,  443  j  take  citadel  of  Ramlah, 
446 j  invade  kingdom,  464,  523,  5455 
put  to  flight,  466,  547  j  return  to  Egypt, 
524i  arrive  before  Ascalon,  II:  26; 
periodically  reinforce  Ascalon,  26,  203, 
220  j  attack  Gaza,  203 
Eleanor  of  Aquitaine,  queen  of  France,  II: 
1795  plot  to  separate  from  king,  i8oj 
marriage  with  Louis  VII  annulled:  be¬ 
comes  wife  of  Henry,  duke  of  Nor¬ 
mandy,  196 

Elinandus  of  Tiberias,  11:  142,  185 
Elvira,  wife  of  Count  Raymond,  I:  454 
Embriaco,  Genoese  family,  I:  47  6w 
Emelota,  wife  of  Hugh,  count  of  Jaffa,  I: 

489^,  II:  71 

Emicho,  Count,  I:  113,  115 
Emir-Ali,  ruler  of  Assassins,  II:  77 
Emmaus,  see  Nicopolis 
English  sea,  I:  386 

Enguerrand,  son  of  Lord  Hugh  of  St.  Pol, 
I:  116,  287,  314 
Ephesus,  11:  1 74 
Ercarselle,  II:  335 

Eremberge  [Guiberg],  wife  of  Fulk,  II: 

48,  49 

Ernoul,  I:  38;^,  39,  40,  II:  45 
Eschiva,  wife  of  Raymond  III  of  Tripoli, 
11:  404 

Eudes  de  Montfaucon,  U:  105 
Eudes  de  Saint-Amand,  II:  261;  Master 
of  Knights  Templars,  3935  Amaury  I 
demands  satisfaction  for  outrage  against 
envoy,  393  j  goes  out  to  meet  Saladin, 
430  J  in  battle  with  Saladin,  442;  taken 
prisoner,  443 

Eugenius  III,  pope,  11:  139,  i62j  solici¬ 
tude  for  East,  163 

Euphrates,  Christians  attacked  on  banks 
of,  I:  473 

Eustace  II,  count  of  Boulogne,  I:  ii6«, 
386 

Eustace  III,  count  of  Boulogne,  I:  95, 
1725  honored  by  Alexius,  148  j  biog¬ 
raphy,  i487?i  at  Antioch,  208,  231, 
232,  287,  289  J  at  Maara,  310}  at  Jeru¬ 
salem,  366,  368 J  genealogy,  385 j  at 
Nablus,  3955  lawful  successor  to  Bald¬ 
win  I,  519  J  offered  throne  of  Jeru¬ 
salem,  520 

Eustace  Cholet,  II  •  332 
Eustace  Grenier,  I:  4^4)  53^}  granted 
Sidon,  4885  Arnulf  confers  niece  upon. 


533 

489  J  administration  of  kingdom  en¬ 
trusted  to,  541;  concentrates  troops  to 
meet  Egyptians,  5465  death,  5475 
widow  marries  Hugh,  count  of  Jaffa, 

II:  71 

Eustace  Grenier  the  Younger,  II:  71,  409 
Eutyches,  I:  133,  II:  166 
Eutychius  [Seith],  son  of  Patricius,  I:  56 
Evrard  de  Breteuil,  11:  176 
Evrard  du  Puiset,  I:  95,  198,  229,  266, 
287 

Ezaz  [Hasarth],  lord  of,  seeks  duke’s  help 
against  Ridwan,  I:  301  j  besieged,  II: 
24  J  Humphrey  the  constable  sent  to 
protect,  200 

Farama,  11:  327,  363 
Firuz,  betrays  Antioch  to  Bohemond,  I: 
241-56 

Fleet,  Egyptian,  appears  at  Jaffa,  I:  357, 
465-66,  502  J  at  Ascalon  and  Tyre,  524  5 
doge  of  Venice  forces  retreat,  549  j  ex¬ 
pected  at  Tyre,  II:  135  defeated  at 
Beirut,  32  j  caliph  orders  prepared  for 
action  at  Ascalon,  222-23  j  prepared  by 
Saladin,  447-48  \  summoned  by  Saladin, 
lays  siege  to  Beirut,  475 
Fleet,  Genoese,  arrives  at  Antioch,  I:  229  j 
at  Jaffa,  355)  433  >  at  Syria,  454  j  lands 
aid  in  siege  of  Acre,  455;  lands  near 
Tripoli,  475}  sails  to  Jubail,  476}  city 
captured,  477 

Fleet,  Greek,  sent  to  Syria,  II:  361}  aids 
Amaury  against  Egypt,  362-68 
Fleet,  Sicilian,  loss  before  Alexandria, 
II:  399}  wrecked,  458 
Fleet,  Venetian,  at  the  siege  of  Tyre,  I: 
548-50,  II:  14 

Fleets:  of  Guinemer  from  English  Chan¬ 
nel,  I:  184,  321 }  of  pilgrims  from 
vicinity  of  Ratisbon,  309}  Pisan  at 
Laodicea,  401 }  of  Danes  and  Nor¬ 
wegians  arrive  at  Syria,  486}  aid  in 
siege  of  Sidon,  487 

Fleets,  royal,  at  Tyre,  11:  lO}  at  siege  of 
Ascalon,  220,  222 

Florus,  son  of  Philip  I  of  France,  11:  48 
Forbelet,  II:  472,  495 
Franco  of  Hierapolis,  II:  117,  119 
Franco  of  Malines,  I:  273 
Frederick  I,  Barbarossa,  emperor  of  the 
Romans,  as  duke  of  Swabia,  II:  173, 
184}  succeeds  to  throne  of  Conrad 
(9.^;.),  195}  crowned  at  Rome,  236} 
siege  of  Tortona,  237}  urged  to  seize 


INDEX 


534 

Frederick  I,  Barbarossa  {Continued) 
Sicily,  238}  losses  in  Italy,  2475  recon¬ 
ciled  to  Pope  Alexander,  281,  435  j 
Amaury  I  and  bishops  appeal  to,  360, 

377 

Frederick,  archbishop  of  Tyre,  I:  iij 
as  bishop  of  Acre,  11:  218,  235,  2465 
secures  favor  of  pope  for  Amalrich, 
272 i  succeeds  Peter  as  archbishop  of 
Tyre,  304J  in  Egypt,  337 j  bestows 
office  of  archdeacon  of  Tyre  upon  Wil¬ 
liam,  345  i  embassy  to  princes  of  West, 
360J  returns  unsuccessful,  384J  death, 
402  j  succeeded  by  William  II,  411 
Frisians,  I:  208 

Fulcher,  patriarch  of  Jerusalem,  I:  10, 
12,  205  as  archbishop  of  Tyre,  II:  625 
desire  to  receive  pallium,  63  j  rank  in 
church  at  Jerusalem,  64  j  pope  com¬ 
mands  his  suffragans  to  obey  him,  65  j 
at  siege  of  Banyas,  iioj  at  synod  of 
Antioch,  118}  succeeds  William  as 
patriarch  of  Jerusalem :  succeeded  as 
archbishop  of  Tyre  by  Ralph  the  king^s 
chancellor,  1625  receives  Emperor  Con¬ 
rad,  i8ij  meets  Louis  VII,  183  j  at 
council  of  Acre,  1855  admonishes  Bald¬ 
win  III  to  desist  from  wicked  project, 
206  J  at  siege  of  Ascalon,  2183  alterca¬ 
tion  with  Hospitallers,  239  j  goes  to 
Rome  to  visit  Hadrian  IV,  245  j  death, 
269  i  opposed  marriage  of  Agnes  and 
Amaury  I,  300 
Fulcher  of  Chartres,  I:  15 
Fulcher  [Fulbert]  of  Chartres,  I:  308 
Fulcher  of  Orleans,  slain,  I:  109 
Fulk,  king  of  Jerusalem,  William’s  error 
regarding  age,  I:  9j  ancestry,  460^; 
as  count  of  Anjou  lands  at  Acre  and 
weds  Melisend:  endowed  with  Tyre 
and  Acre,  II:  38  j  in  siege  of  Damascus, 
40  j  unbars  gate  of  Antioch,  45  j  reign, 
Bks.  XIV— XV  incl.j  succeeds  Baldwin 
II:  character,  genealogy,  475  first  mar¬ 
riage,  485  second  marriage,  495  pil¬ 
grimage  to  Jerusalem,  505  invited  to 
espouse  daughter  of  Baldwin  II:  Tyre 
and  Acre  conferred  upon  as  wife’s 
dowry,  51  j  crowned,  51  j  death,  134 
Fulk  IV,  le  Rechin,  count  of  Touraine 
and  Anjou,  II:  47 
Fulk  of  Tiberias,  11:  471 

Gabriel,  ruler  of  Malatia,  I:  411,  450, 
478-79,  522 


Gadara,  11:  156 

Galen  of  Calvo  Monte,  I:  96 

Galeran,  I:  54O)  544 

Galilee,  I:  399  i  Amaury  I  advances  into, 

11:  3835  overrun,  469 
Galo  de  Chaumont,  I:  173,  287 
Galo  de  Lille,  I:  158 
Garinus  Gainart,  11:  457 
Gamier  de  Grey,  count,  I:  95,  n6,  229, 
287,  399*,  siezes  tower  of  David,  4175 
message  to  Baldwin:  death,  417 
Gaston  de  Bearn,  I:  95,  173,  357 
Gaston  de  Beziers,  I:  95,  287,  337,  369 
Gastun,  II:  1 24 

Gauchiers  de  Mont  joy,  11:  176 
Gaudentius,  archbishop  of  Caesarea,  11: 
1 1 8 

Gaza,  seized  by  Omar,  I:  6 1 ;  rebuilt :  city 
described:  committed  to  care  of  Knights 
of  the  Temple,  II:  202  j  attacked  by 
Egyptians,  203  j  Amaury  I  engaged 
in  battle  at,  372-75 

Gelasius  II,  pope,  I:  522,  523  j  death,  527 
Geldemar  Carpinel,  I:  356,  399?^ 
Genealogy:  William,  archbishop  of  Tyre, 
I:  6j  Tancred,  i37»j  Godfrey  of 
Bouillon,  385  j  Baldwin  I,  385  j  Bald¬ 
win  II,  517 ;  Bohemond  II,  II:  33  j  Fulk, 
47  i  Ibelin,  131,  204,  301  j  Amaury  I, 
Agnes,  301 ;  Raymond  III  of  Tripoli, 
402;  William  the  Younger,  marquis  of 
Montferrat,  416;  see  also  names  of 
individual  nobles  from  the  West 
Genoese,  capture  green  vase  for  their 
church,  I:  4375  in  siege  of  Acre,  455 
i^see  also  Fleet,  Genoese)  j  join  our 
forces,  II:  496 

Geoffrey,  abbot  of  the  Temple  of  the 
Lord,  I:  9,  II:  126,  277 
Geoffrey  de  Rancogne,  II:  175 
Geoffrey  Fulcher,  II:  319,  35 
Geoffrey  Martel,  II:  47,  49 
Geoffrey  Plantagenet,  II:  49 
Geoffrey  the  Monk,  I:  529,  II:  52 
George,  St.,  I:  332 

George  Sinaites  [Georgius  of  Sinai],  II: 
420 

Gerald,  bishop  of  Bethlehem,  II:  185,  218, 

233  ^ 

Gerald,  bishop  of  Tripoli,  II:  82 
Gerald,  master  of  the  hospital  at  Jeru¬ 
salem,  I:  335,  II:  245 
Gerald  Jeberrus,  II:  59 
Gerard,  bishop  of  Angouleme,  II:  62 
Gerard,  bishop  of  Laodicea,  II:  1 1 9,  276 


INDEX 


Gerard,  prior  of  the  Sepulchre  of  the 
Lord,  I:  536,  556 
Gerard,  the  chamberlain,  I:  484 
Gerard  de  Cherisi,  I:  96,  173,  246 
Gerard  de  Pougy,  II:  328,  333,  378 
Gerard  de  Roussillon,  I:  96,  287,  369 
Gerard  of  Co  rice,  II:  119 
Gerard  of  Sidon,  II:  77,  218,  302;  at 
council  of  Acre,  i85i  fleet  placed  in 
command  of,  220 }  attempt  to  hinder 
progress  of  Egyptian  fleet,  223 
Gerard  of  Tripoli,  II:  66 
Gerasa  destroyed,  I:  539 
Gervaise,  bishop  of  Rheims,  I:  517}  re¬ 
nounced  oflSce  to  become  count  of 
Rethel,  518 

Gesta  Amalrici  regis  (William  II,  arch¬ 
bishop  of  Tyre),  I:  15,  27,  28,  33 
Gesta  Hiersolymitanorum  regum  (Wil¬ 
liam  II,  archbishop  of  Tyre),  I:  15, 
16,  27,  29,  30,  33,  40 
Gesta  orientaliwn  frincifum  (William 
II,  archbishop  of  Tyre),  I:  16,  26,  27, 
30,  40,  6$ 

Gibelin,  patriarch  of  Jerusalem,  as  arch¬ 
bishop  of  Arles,  sent  to  Jerusalem,  I: 
467,  4825  character,  483  j  deposes 

Ebremar,  4675  made  patriarch,  468  j 
dies,  4895  Paschal  II  grants  a  privilege 
to,  and  his  successors,  509 
Gilbert  d^Assaily  [Gerbert  Assallit],  II: 

350 

Gilbert  de  Lacy,  II:  306 
Gilbert  de  Montclair,  I:  175,  185 
Gilbert  de  Treves,  I:  356 
Gilduin,  abbot-elect  of  St.  Mary  in  the 
Valley  of  Jehoshaphat,  I:  536,  556 
Giles,  bishop  of  Tusculum,  II  •  37 
Gislebert,  I:  369 

Godechaux  [Godescalous  and  Gottschalk] 

de  Turout,  II:  393,  439 
Godehilde  [Gutuera],  wife  of  Baldwin 
I,  I:  177,  415 

Godfrey,  bishop  of  Langres,  II:  185 
Godfrey,  count  of  Vendome,  I:  442 
Godfrey,  duke  of  Lorraine,  uncle  of  God¬ 
frey  of  Bouillon,  I:  386 
Godfrey  Burel,  I:  108 
Godfrey  Charpulu,  II:  86 
Godfrey  de  St.  Omer,  I:  525 
Godfrey  dTsch,  I:  ii6j  sent  with  mes¬ 
sage  to  king  of  Hungary,  117 
Godfrey  Martel,  11:  306 
Godfrey  of  Bouillon,  first  Latin  ruler 

of  Jerusalem,  I:  43,  57,  95)  9^)  ^3^) 


535 

287,  415  j  pilgrimage:  nobles  who  went 
with  him,  116  If.  j  biography,  ii6?2j 
journey  through  Hungary,  117-205 
legions  advance  into  Greek  empire,  121- 
28  j  message  from  Bohemond  I,  answer, 
1295  reconciliation  with  Alexius,  1305 
legions  encamp  around  Chalcedon,  1325 
conducts  Bohemond  to  Alexius,  1365 
resumes  pilgrimage:  at  Nicaea,  1475 
notable  feat,  1625  aids  Bohemond,  1725 
encounters  bear,  176}  at  Antioch,  208, 
244,  247,  2875  illness,  216,  2215  plan 
of  retaliation  for  slaughter  of  pilgrims, 
230 }  clove  knight  in  two,  234;  to 
receive  revenues  from  lands  in  his  pos¬ 
session,  2385  demands  return  of  gift 
sent  to  Bohemond,  2385  position  at 
Antioch,  2625  vanquished,  2645  re¬ 
bukes  would-be  deserters,  2805  sugges¬ 
tion  to  Peter  the  Hermit,  284;  routes 
strongest  cohort  of  enemy:  hurries  to 
Bohemond’s  aid,  2925  aids  in  route  of 
Qilij  Arslan,  2935  has  no  horses,  2955 
sets  forth  to  aid  Ezaz,  3015  at  Edessa, 
3045  destroys  fortresses  of  traitors,  3055 
at  Maara,  3105  falls  into  an  ambush 
but  escapes,  3125  at  Laodicea,  3205 
effects  release  of  Guinemer,  3205  invests 
Jabala:  forced  to  abandon  siege,  3215 
hurries  to  Arka,  322;  camp  at  Jeru¬ 
salem,  349,  366}  leads  way  into  city, 
3685  defender  of  the  Holy  Sepulchre: 
precarious  tenure  of  Jerusalem  and 
Antioch,  379-4145  chosen  ruler  of  Jeru¬ 
salem,  3825  demands  citadel  from  count 
of  Toulouse,  3835  genealogy,  3855 
character,  3875  in  single  combat,  3885 
reign,  Bk.  IX  5  death,  4145  last  wishes 
disregarded,  417 
Godfrey  of  Villeneuve,  11:  475 
Gorgon,  pilgrims  camp  in  valley,  I:  169 
Gormond,  patriarch  of  Jerusalem,  I:  550, 
553)  55^)  character,  5245  at  council 
of  Nablus,  5355  death 5  succeeded  by 
Stephen,  II:  39 

Goscelon,  son  of  Conon  de  Montague,  I: 

195)  197 
Goshen,  II:  330 

Gottschalk,  Teuton  priest,  outrages  against 
Hungarians,  I:  1105  army  destroyed, 

III 

Greater  Syria,  II:  4 

Greek  Orthodox  Church,  preparatory 
negotiations  for  union  with  Roman 
Catholic  Church,  I:  205  difference  in 


INDEX 


536 

Greek  Orthodox  Church  (Continued) 
sacraments  between  Roman  Catholic 
Church  and,  a  cause  of  jealousy,  II: 
4625  effect  of  ManuePs  approval  of 
union  with  Latin  church,  46 5« 

Greeks,  wretched  condition:  empire  over¬ 
run  by  Bulgarians,  I:  121  j  privileges 
granted  to,  in  Jerusalem,  538 j  Latins 
aroused  against,  II:  100,  loiwj  up¬ 
rising  against  Latins  in  Constantinople, 
461  ff.  j  characteristics,  4625  atrocities 
committed  by,  464 

Gregory  I  (Gregory  the  Great),  pope,  I: 
62 

Gregory  VII,  pope,  controversy  with  Em¬ 
peror  Henry,  I:  85  j  vigorous  policies, 
3  8o«j  rescused  by  Robert  Guiscard,  420 
Gregory  VIII,  antipope,  see  Burdinus 
Gregory,  cardinal  deacon  of  St.  Angelo 
becomes  pope,  see  Innocent  II 
Guarmond  of  Tiberias,  II:  378 
Guelf,  duke,  at  council  of  Acre,  II:  1 84 
Guelf,  seizes  Adana,  I:  181 
Guerricus,  bishop  of  Petra,  II:  346 
Guibert,  archbishop  of  Ravenna,  I:  86 
Guichard  de  Lisle  [Giscard  de  Lille],  II: 

457 

Guido,  brother  of  Bohemond,  I:  277 
Guinemer  of  Boulogne,  I:  184,  321,  330 
Guy,  count  of  Blandras,  11:  184 
Guy  de  Brisebar,  II:  51,  87 
Guy  de  Fremelle,  I:  529 
Guy  de  Lusignan,  count  of  Jaffa,  marriage 
to  Sibylla,  I:  21,  II:  446  i  in  power  as 
regent,  I:  24-25,  11:  492-501  j  rift  with 
Baldwin  IV,  I:  24,  II:  501,  507-9  j 
coronation,  I:  25 
Guy  de  Troussel,  I:  267 
Guy  of  Beirut,  11:  185,  207,  218 
Guy  of  Florence,  II:  185 
Guy  of  Garland,  I:  96 
Guy  of  Ponthieu,  II:  174 
Guy  of  Possessa,  I:  96,  157,  158 
Guy  of  Scandalium,  II:  263 

Hadrian  IV,  pope  [Adrian  III],  H:  i63i 
elected  pope,  236  j  enmity  between  King 
William  of  Sicily  and,  237  j  negotiates 
with  both  emperors  to  seize  Sicily,  2385 
Patriarch  Fulcher  and  bishops  of  the 
East  visit,  245  5  Emperor  Manuel  at 
suggestion  of,  invades  Apulia,  247  j 
receives  Hospitallers  cordially:  bribed 
by  gifts,  refuses  justice  to  Fulcher,  249  5 


concludes  peace  with  king  of  Sicily, 
250;  death,  281 

Hadrian,  emperor  of  the  Romans,  moved 
Jerusalem  to  top  of  mountain,  I:  3415 
grants  privileges  to  Beirut,  484 
Haifa,  bestowed  upon  Tancred,  I:  3995 
relinquished,  428 
Hakim,  caliph  of  Egypt,  I:  65 
Hama,  11:  93,  370J  taken  over  by  Saladin, 
405,  409 

Hantab,  fortress,  11:  209,  210 

Haran  of  Mesopotamia,  history:  siege,  I: 

456-59;  seized  by  Saladin,  480 
Harim,  attacked  by  Fulk,  II:  57;  fortress 
of,  seized  by  Nureddin,  199;  Baldwin 
III  lays  siege  to,  200;  captured,  268; 
delivered  to  prince  of  Antioch,  271; 
besieged  by  Nureddin,  306-7;  count  of 
Flanders  attacks,  425;  task  abandoned, 

434 

Hartman  [Hermann],  count,  I:  113,  159, 

295 

Harun-al-Rashid,  king  of  Persia,  I:  35, 
63 

Havedic,  11:  15 

Hebron,  tombs  of  patriarchs,  I:  340;  mas¬ 
sacre  of  Christians,  II:  104-5;  church 
established,  346 

Helie  [Elia],  count  of  Maine,  11:  48,  49 
Helie,  son  of  King  Fulk,  II:  49 
Helim,  I:  513 
Heliopolis,  see  Baalbec 
Henry  IV,  emperor  of  the  Romans,  I: 
378;  controversy  with  Pope  Gregory 
VII,  85;  victory  over  Rudolph,  389 
Henry  V,  emperor  of  the  Romans,  I:  86, 
527,  II;  49«;  death,  31 
Henry  I,  king  of  England,  I:  398,  11:  49, 

59 

Henry  II,  king  of  England,  11:  49 ;  mar¬ 
riage,  i96«;  Amaury  I  and  bishops  ap¬ 
peal  to,  360,  377 
Henry,  bishop  of  Toul,  11:  184 
Henry,  count  of  Troyes,  at  council  of 
Acre,  11:  185;  embassy  sent  to,  360; 
arrives  in  Syria,  443  ;  goes  with  king  to 
Tiberias,  444;  negotiations  with  duke 
of  Burgundy,  445 
Henry,  duke  of  Austria,  11:  184 
Henry,  duke  of  Burgundy,  II:  385;  agrees 
to  come  to  kingdom:  promised  king’s 
sister  as  wife:  refuses  to  fulfil  promise, 
436;  negotiations  renewed:  declines  to 
come,  445 

Henry,  duke  of  Louvain,  11:  497 


INDEX 


Henry  son  of  Henry  I,  king  of  England, 
11:  50 

Henry  d’Esch,  I:  95,  116,  127,  159,  2875 
gains  possession  of  tower,  272  j  saved 
from  hunger,  2955  death,  299 
Henry  the  Lion,  I:  7W,  II:  385W,  393^ 
Heraclius,  patriarch  of  Jerusalem,  suc¬ 
ceeds  Amalrich  I'  45ij 

succeeded  Hernesius  as  archbishop  of 
Caesarea,  4125  delegate  to  general 
synod  at  Rome,  4365  sent  to  Antioch 
to  remedy  conditions,  45  5  j  intercedes 
for  Guy  de  Lusignan  on  bended  knees: 
forestalls  movement  to  invite  princes 
beyond  mountains  to  aid  kingdom,  508 
Heraclius,  emperor  of  the  Romans,  I:  60 
Herbert,  bishop  of  Tiberias,  II:  247 
Hereditary  succession,  I:  519^,  555« 
Herluin,  I:  282 
Herman  de  Canni,  I:  134 
Hermann,  margrave  of  Verona,  II:  184 
Hermengarde,  11:  47 
Hernesius,  archbishop  of  Caesarea,  II:  271, 
344  j  embassy  to  princes  of  West,  360  j 
dies:  succeeded  by  Heraclius,  412 
Hiaroquin,  Turkish  satraps,  determine  to 
seize  Jerusalem,  11:  2 1 5  j  defeated,  216 
Hierapolis,  besieged  by  Balak,  II:  165 
bishoprics,  64  j  church  held  by  infidels, 
212 

Hims,  bishoprics,  11:  65  5  Emperor  John^s 
promise  to  restore  to  prince  of  Antioch, 
93  J  destroyed,  3705  taken  by  Saladin, 
405,  4095  refugees  beg  aid:  hostages 
in  citadel,  409 
Hippodromes,  IT  :  450 
Hodierna,  daughter  of  Baldwin  II,  I:  522, 
11:  213,  214,  283,  403 
Hodierna,  wife  of  Herbrand  of  Herges,  I: 

517 

Holy  Lance,  see  Lance  of  the  Lord 
Honorius  II,  pope,  I:  525,  II:  22,  36,  61 
Hospitallers,  fortress  granted  to,  11:  823 
altercation  between  patriarch  and,  239- 
40}  origin  and  development,  241  ff.  j 
granted  half  of  Banyas,  256}  supplies 
captured  by  Nureddin,  they  return  city 
to  Humphrey  of  Toron,  2575  responsi¬ 
bility  for  campaign  in  Egypt,  350 }  ef¬ 
fort  to  avoid  encounter  with  Turks,  447 
Hubald,  bishop  of  Ostia,  succeeds  Alex¬ 
ander  III  as  Pope  Lucius  III,  II:  457 
Hugh,  bishop  of  Jabala,  11:  119 
Hugh,  count  of  Jaffa,  accused  before  king, 
H:  70}  marriage  to  Emelota,  715  chal- 


537 

lenged  by  Walter  of  Caesarea,  72  j  takes 
refuge  with  enemy,  73  \  exiled : 
wounded,  74 }  in  Apulia,  7 5 }  granted 
county  of  Gargan:  death,  76 
Hugh,  count  of  Rethel,  I:  95,  517 
Hugh  Cholet,  count  of  Roussy,  11:  70 
Hugh  de  Lusignan,  brother  of  Raymond 
of  Toulouse,  I:  442 

Hugh  de  Lusignan  the  Elder,  surnamed 
the  Brown,  pilgrimage,  II:  306}  cast 
into  prison,  308}  father  of  Guy,  446 
Hugh  de  Payens,  I:  525,  II:  40 
Hugh  de  St.  Omer  (Falkenberg) ,  I:  428, 
447}  builds  fortress:  battle  with  Da¬ 
mascenes,  469 }  death,  470 
Hugh  de  Vermandois,  the  Great,  brother 
of  King  Philip  I,  I:  95}  in  prison, 
122}  Godfrey  demands  his  release,  123  } 
liberated,  1245  at  Durazzo,  149}  at 
Nicaea,  158}  aids  Bohemond,  172}  at 
Antioch,  207,  230,  232,  244,  289} 
command,  286}  position  in  battle  for¬ 
mation,  288 }  puts  enemy  to  flight,  293  } 
sent  as  envoy  to  Alexius  I,  298}  under¬ 
takes  a  fresh  crusade,  430 }  death,  433 
Hugh  d’lbelin  of  Ramlah,  at  Ascalon,  11: 
218}  taken  prisoner,  261 }  released: 
visits  Emperor  Manuel,  279}  weds 
Agnes,  former  wife  of  Amaury  I,  301 } 
completes  bridge  over  Nile,  327}  sent 
to  protect  Cairo,  328,  339 
Hugh  du  Puiset,  II:  70,  71 
Hugh  Embriacus,  I:  476,  477 
Hugh  of  Caesarea,  envoy  to  caliph  of 
Egypt,  H:  319  }  taken  prisoner,  332} 
confers  with  Shirkuh  about  peace,  339} 
arranges  terms  of  treaty,  340 
Hugh  of  Creona,  II:  332 
Hugh  of  St.  Pol,  count,  I:  95,  116,  169, 
232,  287,  369 

Hugh  of  Tiberias,  II:  443,  474 
Hugo,  archbishop  of  Edessa,  11:  143 
Huitiers,  count  of  Rethel,  I:  518 
Humphrey,  son  of  Ralph,  I:  134 
Humphrey  of  Montescaglioso,  I:  134 
Humphrey  of  Toron,  the  elder,  II:  19 
Humphrey  of  Toron,  the  younger,  the 
royal  constable,  11:  87,  200,  205,  207, 
210,  211,  274,  401 }  at  council  of  Acre, 
185}  at  siege  of  Ascalon,  218}  grants  to 
Hospitallers  half  of  Banyas,  256}  seeks 
wife  for  Baldwin  III,  265}  Banyas  a 
possession  of,  309}  with  Amaury  I  in 

326,  353}  put  in  charge  of 
army,  388 }  favors  regency  of  Raymond 


INDEX 


538 

Humphrey  of  Loron,  the  younger  (Con/.) 
Ill  of  Tripoli,  400  j  accused  of  friend¬ 
ship  with  Saladin,  410  j  weds  Philippa, 
41 6  j  illness,  417,  4275  wounded  pro¬ 
tecting  king,  439  j  death,  440 
Humphrey  III  of  Toron,  betrothed  to 
Isabelle,  sister  of  Baldwin  IV,  11  :  451J 
made  exchange  of  patrimony  %vith  king, 
45  2  i  Petra  attacked  during  nuptial 
celebration,  499 

Hungary,  Walter  the  Penniless  in,  I:  97; 
Peter  the  HermiPs  march  through,  995 
outrages  of  Gottschalk  in,  1103  letter  of 
king  to  Gottschalk :  host  destroyed,  1113 
pilgrims  ask  permission  to  cross,  1133 
Wieselburg  besieged,  1143  closed  be¬ 
cause  of  outrages  of  Christians,  1153 
Emperor  Conrad  honorably  received, 

11:  165 

Ibelin,  I:  396,  546,  II:  130 
Iberians,  crush  pride  of  Persians,  I:  490 
Ibn  Jubair,  I:  3  on 

Iconium,  pilgrims  come  to,  I:  1773  in¬ 
vaded  by  Nureddin,  11:  2823  Emperor 
Manuel  ignominiously  defeated  at,  4143 
antagonism  of  sultan,  11:  166-67 
Ida,  mother  of  Duke  Godfrey,  I:  386, 
prediction,  387 

Il-Ghazi  [Gazi],  invades  land  of  Anti¬ 
och,  I:  528-343  again  invades  land, 
536;  death,  537 

Innocent  II,  pope,  II:  613  letters  to  Wil¬ 
liam,  patriarch  of  Jerusalem,  63,  653 
commands  Fulcher’s  suffragans  to  obey 
him,  6  5  3  letters  to  patriarch  of  Antioch 
and  to  bishops  retained  by  patriarch  of 
Jerusalem,  673  favors  adversaries  of 
Patriarch  Ralph,  1143  sends  legate  to 
bring  patriarch’s  case  to  a  conclusion, 
117 

Investiture  Struggle,  I:  85,  309,  siyn 
Irene,  wife  of  Emperor  Manuel,  11:  287W, 
288,  450 

Iron  bridge,  fortress,  II:  291 
Isaac,  son  of  Emperor  John,  11:  1233 
claim  to  throne  set  aside,  1285  daughter 
marries  Baldwin  III,  274 
Isabella,  daughter  of  Joscelin  II,  sent  as 
hostage  to  emperor,  11:  124 
Isabelle,  sister  of  Baldwin  IV,  weds 
Humphrey  III  of  Toron,  11:  451,  499 
Isoard,  count  of  Die,  I:  95,  287,  370 
Itiers  de  Meingnac,  II:  177 
Iven,  I:  500 


Ives  de  Nesle,  count  of  Soissons,  II:  185, 
205,  213 

Iveta,  daughter  of  Baldwin  II,  I:  522,  II: 
27 1«,  283,  308W,  3993  superior  of  con¬ 
vent  at  Bethany,  132 
Ivo,  I:  266 

Izz-al-Din,  11:  457-58;^ 

Izz-al-Din  abu-al-Asakin,  II: 

Jabala  [Gabulum],  I:  3213  given  to  Alice, 
II:  45  3  destroyed  by  earthquake,  370 
Jacob’s  ford,  fortress  beyond  Jordan,  built, 
II:  4373  committed  to  care  of  Templars ; 
razed  by  Saladin,  444 
Jaffa,  I:  3393  fleet  from  Genoa  arrives 
355,  433?  Egyptian  fleet  appears: 
city  abandoned,  3573  part  of,  resigned 
to  church,  4043  sinister  story  terrifies 
citizens,  4413  battle  near,  4483  king 
commands  all  forces  to  assemble  at, 
4645  besieged  by  Ascalonites,  5023  be¬ 
stowed  upon  Hugh  du  Puiset :  later 
given  to  Count  Albert,  11:  7 1 3  besieged : 
nobles  treat  for  peace,  733  given  to 
William  of  Montferrat,  415 
Jawhar  [Johar],  founder  of  Cairo,  II: 

3163  subjugates  Egypt,  324 
Jehoshaphat,  valley  of,  monks  in  train  of 
Godfrey  located  in,  I:  392 
Jericho,  I:  339,  348 

Jerusalem,  prospects  of  kingdom  steadily 
improving,  I:  1 2  3  Saladin’s  invasion  of, 
1 9  3  court  party  alienating  loyalty  of 
barons,  233  captured  by  Saladin,  263 
first  Latin  ruler,  43,  57,  95,  96,  232, 
287,  415  {see  also  Godfrey  of  Bouil¬ 
lon)  3  plans  for  relief  of,  60-1153  in¬ 
vaded  by  Arabs,  623  Temple  of  the 
Lord  rebuilt  by  Omar,  63  3  under  power 
of  caliph  of  Egypt:  destruction  of 
church,  65  5  conditions  of  Christians 

in,  67,  79,  333,  354)  405  i  church  of 
Holy  Resurrection  built,  70,  343  3  de¬ 
livered  again  into  hand  of  Turk,  793 
aid  given  by  monastery  of  St.  Mary  of 
the  Latins,  805  tribute  imposed  on  Chris¬ 
tians  who  entered,  80,  823  coming  of 
Peter  the  Hermit,  823  fortified,  3333 
army  arrives,  3373  situation  and  sur¬ 
rounding  country,  339  ff. 3  in  arid  spot 
without  water,  340,  346,  3523  names 
by  which  city  has  been  called,  3403 
history,  description,  341  fiF. 3  siege  and 
capture  by  Crusaders,  349-763  city 
cleansed,  3773  Godfrey  elected  ruler. 


INDEX 


demands  surrender  of  citadel,  3835 
Syrian  Christians  introduced  into,  507  j 
citizens  granted  full  liberty,  537 i  pro¬ 
visions  brought  in  without  tax,  5  3  8  j 
legate  holds  synod,  dedicates  Temple 
of  the  Lord,  II:  122 
Jerusalem,  patriarchate,  I:  384,  402,  468, 
489,  523,  II:  43,  161J  see  also  Amal- 
richj  Arnulf;  Daimbertj  Fulcher;  Gi- 
belin;  Gormond;  Heracliusj  Stephen; 
William 

Jevelino,  satrap,  II:  368,  428 
Jikirmish,  lord  of  Mosul,  I:  45 9?^ 

John,  St,,  the  Almoner,  I:  80;  altar  in 
honor  of,  II:  244 

John  II  Comnenus,  Byzantine  emperor, 
called  Porphyrogenitus,  sent  as  hostage 
to  Godfrey,  I:  130;  returned,  132; 
succeeds  Alexius  I :  character,  523; 
marches  upon  Antioch  and  seizes  all 
Cilicia:  recalls  agreement  with  Alexius, 
II:  83  ;  treaty  with  Raymond  of  Poitou, 
prince  of  Antioch,  93;  seeks  to  extend 
influence  over  Latin  States,  94-135  > 
lays  siege  to  Shayzar,  94;  Antioch,  97, 
102;  again  in  Syria,  summons  prince 
to  carry  out  covenant,  123-26;  fatally 
wounded,  127;  proclaims  Manuel  em¬ 
peror:  dies,  128;  appearance,  charac¬ 
ter,  129 

John,  Greek  patriarch  of  Antioch,  vol¬ 
untarily  leaves  office,  succeeded  by 
Bernard,  I:  297 
John,  bishop  of  Acre,  II:  67 
John,  bishop  of  Banyas,  II:  360 
John,  bishop  of  Beirut,  II:  162 
John,  cardinal-priest  of  church  of  Rome, 
sent  as  legate  to  Syria,  raises  altercation 
among  bishops,  11:  285 
John,  subdeacon  of  holy  Roman  church, 
II:  465 

John  Carianis,  I:  69 

John  Contostephanus,  II:  287^ 

John  Gaetanus,  see  Gelasius  II 

John  Gomani  [Gotmanus],  II:  152,  261 

John  of  Arsuf,  11:  378 

John  of  Pisa,  archdeacon  of  Tyre,  II:  162 

John  of  St.  Martin,  II:  249 
John  of  Salisbury,  I:  34,  37 
John  the  Megaltriarch  \_sic]^  11:  420 
John  the  ‘protosebastoSy  II:  129,  277; 
daughter,  Maria,  weds  Amaury  I,  344  5 
sent  to  meet  Amaury,  379;  generosity, 
383;  killed,  414 
Jordan  river,  II;  27 


539 

Joscelin  I  (de  Courtenay),  count  of 
Edessa,  extensive  possessions  conferred 
upon,  I:  450;  character,  451;  in  siege 
of  Haran,  456;  taken  prisoner,  459; 
returns:  stirs  up  war  against  Tancred, 
474;  forced  to  leave  Edessa,  498; 
Tiberias  granted  to,  499 ;  effort  to 
put  Baldwin,  count  of  Edessa,  on 
throne,  520;  made  count  of  Edessa, 
522;  aid  sought  by  prince  of  Antioch, 
528;  captured  by  Turks,  540;  im¬ 
prisoned  in  Kharpart,  541;  freed,  sets 
out  to  bring  aid  to  king,  542;  collects 
large  force,  544;  alarmed  at  disaster, 
disbands  army,  545 ;  defeats  Balak,  II: 
16;  estate  near  Tyre,  20;  goes  to  aid 
of  Antioch,  245  enmity  between  Bohe- 
mond  II  and,  34;  in  siege  of  Damascus, 
40;  unbars  gate  of  Antioch  for  king, 
45  5  goes  on  litter  to  meet  enemy,  5 1 ; 
puts  them  to  flight:  dies,  52 
Joscelin  II,  count  of  Edessa,  character,  II: 
5^>  53>  201;  appearance,  marriage, 
children,  53 ;  tries  to  oppose  King  Fulk, 
54;  refugees  at  Montferrand  appeal  to, 
for  aid,  87 ;  goes  to  relief  of  king,  88  ; 
trouble  with  Emperor  John,  94-99; 
comes  to  aid  siege  of  Banyas,  109; 
invites  patriarch  of  Antioch  to  visit 
him,  116;  emperor  demands  hostages 
of,  124;  feud  between  Raymond  and, 
140,  14 1 ;  gives  up  home  in  Edessa, 
140;  citizens  appeal  to,  157;  appears 
before  Edessa,  158;  pursued  by  Nured- 
din:  army  massacred,  160;  besieged  by 
sultan  of  Iconium,  releases  prisoners 
and  concludes  peace:  goes  to  Antioch 
to  thank  king,  200;  captured,  dies, 
201 

Joscelin  III,  count  of  Edessa,  perpetrated 
couf  d^etat  by  which  Guy  de  Lusignan 
was  made  king,  I:  25;  genealogy: 
seneschal  of  Amaury  I,  II:  301;  cast 
into  prison,  308;  released,  414;  goes 
out  against  Saladin,  430;  in  Constan¬ 
tinople,  453;  shamelessly  influenced 
Baldwin  IV,  460 ;  prowess  in  battle,  497 
Joscelin  of  Samosata,  11:  334 
Joscelin  Pisellus,  II:  274,  277 
Joscius,  bishop  of  Acre,  succeeds  William 
in  office,  II:  386;  delegate  to  general 
synod  at  Rome,  436 

Joseph,  made  inhabitants  of  Egypt  subject 
to  the  pharaoh,  11:  322;  built  dykes, 
levelled  off  ground,  330 


540 


INDEX 


Joufier  de  Lastours  [Guelferus  of  the 
Towers],  I;  311 

Jubail  [Biblos],  I  *  3305  476;  surrendered 
to  Genoese,  477  j  bishoprics,  11:  66 

Kafartab  [Cafarda],  I:  504, 11:  24,  33 
Kamil  [Chemel],  son  of  Shawar,  II: 
326,  328 

Karbuqa  [Corbagath],  sent  to  aid  An¬ 
tioch  iq.'V.)y  lays  siege  to  Edessa,  I: 
245  j  Christians  anxious  over  approach 
of,  245  j  besieges  Antioch,  262-94 
Kerak,  see  Petra  of  the  Desert 
Kharpart  [Quartapiert] ,  Baldwin  II  cast 
into  fortress,  I:  5405  Joscelin  and 
Galeran  imprisoned  in,  541 
Kingship,  hereditary  succession,  I:  519^, 

555« 

Knights  Templars,  established,  I:  5245 
habit  assigned,  5255  Gaza  committed 
to  care  of,  II:  202  j  cupidity  at  Ascalon: 
suffer  death,  227 j  carry  off  plunder, 
252;  sell  prisoner,  2535  brothers  of, 
surrender  stronghold  and  are  hanged, 
3 1 2  J  decline  to  take  part  in  campaign 
against  Egypt,  3  5  0  j  stronghold  at  Gaza 
given  to,  3  74 ;  dispossessed  of  holdings 
in  Cilicia,  3875  kill  envoy  of  Assassins, 
392-94 J  join  Baldwin  IV  against  Sala- 
din,  429  J  effort  to  avoid  encounter  with 
Turks,  447 

Kogh  Vasil  [Corasilius],  I:  304,  451?^ 
Kurds,  sent  to  Syria,  I:  245 

La  Boquea,  11:  265 

Lambert,  archdeacon  of  Antioch,  11:  61, 
113,  117,  118,  119 

Lambert,  bishop  of  Ostia,  elected  pope,  II: 

225  see  also  Honorius  II 
Lambert,  son  of  Conon  de  Montague,  I: 
287,  369 

Lambert  the  Poor,  I:  267 
Lance  of  the  Lord  discovered,  I:  280, 
287;  doubts  arise,  3245  Amaury  per¬ 
mitted  to  view,  II:  381 
Laodicea  of  Asia  Minor,  I:  449 
Laodicea  of  Syria,  I;  320,  401  j  Tancred 
receives  control  of,  449  j  destroyed  by 
earthquake,  II:  370 

Lateran  Council,  Third,  I:  20,  26,  II: 

281;^,  436,  438 
Lawrence,  T.  E.,  I:  46 
Lebanon,  forest  of,  11:  255 
Leo,  pope,  I:  133, 11:  166 


Leo  the  Armenian,  II:  52 
Le  Prevost,  A.,  I:  44 
Letard,  prior  to  the  canons  of  Nazareth, 
made  archbishop,  II:  273 
Little  Gerin,  11:  495 
Locusts,  plague  of,  I:  535 
Longobards,  join  our  forces,  II:  496 
Lorraine,  duke  of,  see  Godfrey  of  Bouillon 
Lothair,  emperor,  11:  31 
Lotharingians,  II:  208 
Louis  VII,  king  of  France,  wears  token 
of  cross,  II:  1645  disaster  to  army  in 
Asia  Minor,  1 69-78 j  king  and  nobles 
leave  people  nearly  perished,  go  by 
boat  to  Syria,  179;  quarrel  with  Ray¬ 
mond  at  Antioch,  179-81  j  proceeds  to 
Jerusalem,  1825  at  council  of  Acre, 
1855  tarries  in  Syria,  195  j  decides  to 
put  wife  away:  espouses  Constance 
[Maria],  daughter  of  emperor  of 
Spain,  196 J  Amaury  I  and  bishops  ap¬ 
peal  to,  360,  377 i  dies:  succeeded  by 

Philip  II,  451 

Lucius  III,  pope,  succeeds  Alexander  III 

U:  457 

Ludolf,  I:  369 

Ludovic  de  Moncons,  I:  287,  369 
Luke,  apostle,  I:  200 
Lycaonia,  pilgrims  cross,  I:  177 
Lydda,  I:  332  j  seized  by  Jevelino,  II:  428 

Maara,  siege  and  capture,  I:  310^  strife 
between  count  of  Toulouse  and  Bohe- 
mond  I,  312,  granted  to  bishop  of 
Albara:  destroyed,  313,  504 
Mache dolus,  begs  emperor  to  save  Shay- 
zar,  II:  96 

Mahadan,  son  of  Shawar,  11:  328,  333 
Mahalla,  island,  II:  327 
Mahaza,  son  of  sultan,  11:  351 
Mainard,  bishop  of  Beirut,  II:  411 
Mainz,  outrages  of  pilgrims  at,  I:  1 1 3 
Majd  al-Din  [Megedin],  II:  284 
Malatia,  I:  411,  478 

Malih  [Milo],  Armenian  renegade,  way¬ 
lays  Stephen  of  Blois,  11:  3845  drives 
out  Thomas:  dispossesses  Knights 
Templars:  alliance  with  Nureddin,  386- 

87 

Malik  Salah  [Melechsalah],  son  of  Nu¬ 
reddin,  Saladin  rises  against,  II:  4085 
then  makes  peace  with,  425  j  permitted 
to  retain  only  a  few  strongholds,  426, 
45 7 i  dies:  bequeathes  patrimony  to 
Thebeth,  457 


INDEX 


Malik  Shah  [Solimannus],  sultan  of 
Persia,  I:  78,  2045  territory  seized  by, 
153,  223 

Mamilia,  wife  of  Hugh  du  Puiset,  II: 

705  becomes  wife  of  Count  Albert,  71 
Mamistra,  seized  by  Tancred,  I:  i8ij 
Baldwin  arrives,  184J  earthquake,  500J 
seized  by  Thoros,  II;  275 
Mamluks,  11:  431 
Manasses,  count  of  Rethel,  I:  517 
Manasses  of  Herges,  the  constable,  I:  517, 
H:  142,  185,  204,  206 
Manuel  I  Comnenus,  Byzantine  emperor, 
I:  13;  friendship  for  West,  20  j  with 
Emperor  John  {q.v.)  in  Cilicia,  II: 
1235  proclaimed  emperor,  128;  rela¬ 
tions  with  Emperor  Conrad 
166-745  sends  army  to  Antioch,  2085 
Edessa  surrendered  to,  2095  urged  to 
seize  Sicily,  2385  invades  Apulia,  2475 
comes  to  Antioch,  2755  reception  of 
king,  2775  Thoros  swears  fealty  to, 
2785  entry  into  Antioch,  2795  liberal¬ 
ity  toward  citizens:  skill  as  surgeon, 
2805  arranges  with  Nureddin  for  re¬ 
lease  of  prisoners,  2805  returns  to  his 
own  realm,  2815  arouses  wrath  of 
count  of  Tripoli,  288-91 5  struggle  for 
Egypt  in  alliance  with  Amaury  I 

\q.v.)-i  344-965  treaty  with  Amaury  for 
conquest  of  Egypt,  347-485  sends  fleet 
to  Syria  (^see  also  Fleet,  Greek),  361- 
69  5  negotiations  with  Amaury  at  Con¬ 
stantinople,  378-835  defeated  ignomin- 
iously  at  Iconium,  414-15  5  negotiations 
for  Egyptian  expedition  frustrated  by 
Philip  of  Flanders,  420-23  5  death,  452  5 
succeeded  by  Alexius  II,  4535  attitude 
toward  Latins,  461 

Manuel,  son  of  elder  Andronicus,  II  :  453 
Manuel  Sebastos  [Manuel  Comnenus], 

H:  344 

Manzikart,  battle  of,  I;  78 
Marash,  pilgrims  arrive  at,  I:  177,  1955 
destroyed  by  earthquake,  5005  falls 
under  power  of  Nurredin,  II:  282 
Maria,  daughter  of  Emperor  Manuel 
weds  Renier,  son  of  William  of  Mont- 
ferrat,  II:  4505  conspires  against  Alex¬ 
ius  II,  453 

Maria,  niece  of  Emperor  Manuel  weds 
Amaury  I,  II:  344?  weds  Balian  d^Ibe- 

lin,  302,  425 

Maria  of  Antioch,  marries  Emperor  Man¬ 
uel,  11:  2885  regent,  461 


Maronites,  return  to  unity  of  Catholic 
Church,  II:  458 
Marrim,  forest,  II:  212 
Martian,  emperor,  I:  133,  II;  166 
Mary,  daughter  of  Emperor  Maurice,  I: 
62 

Mary  Magdalene,  convent  built,  11: 

243 

Mas  Latrie,  L.  de,  I:  41,  44 
Matilda,  daughter  of  Fulk,  II:  50 
Matilda,  daughter  of  Henry  I  of  England, 
II:  49 

Matilda,  wife  of  castellan  of  Vitry,  I: 

517 

Matilda  of  Boulogne,  I:  386 
Matthew  Paris,  I:  42 
Maurice,  emperor  of  the  Romans,  slain, 
I:  62 

Maurice,  Greek  noble,  II:  361 
Maurice,  nephew  of  Paganus,  II:  499 
Maurice  of  Montreal,  II:  218 
Mawdud  [Menduc],  invades  kingdom,  I; 
4935  defeats  Baldwin  I,  4945  assassi¬ 
nated,  495 

Maximus,  bishop  of  Armenia,  II:  122 
Maximus,  bishop  of  Jerusalem,  I:  66 
Medan,  plain  of,  11:  27 
Melisend,  queen  of  Jerusalem,  daughter 
of  Baldwin  II,  I:  5225  marriage: 
dowry:  crowned,  11:  51 5  good  fame  be¬ 
smirched,  71,  765  builds  convent  at 
Bethany,  1325  joint  rule  with  Bald¬ 
win  III,  135-395  discord  between 
mother  and  son,  204-75  effort  to  recon¬ 
cile  Raymond  II  of  Tripoli  and  his 
wife,  2145  stronghold  recovered 
through  efforts  of,  2695  influenced 
election  of  Amalrich  to  patriarchate, 
2715  illness:  wise  rule,  2835  death: 
burial  place,  291 

Melisend,  daughter  of  Raymond  II  of 
Tripoli,  II:  2155  jilted  by  Manuel,  288- 

89 

Melisend,  countess  of  Rethel,  mother  of 
Baldwin  II,  I:  517 
Memphis,  II:  316 
Mergisafar,  11:  28,  40 
Mesopotamia,  invaded  by  Turks,  I:  4725 
a  province  of  Syria,  II:  45  entered  by 
Saladin,  480 

Michael  Hydruntinus  of  Otranto,  11:  347 
Michel,  lake,  II:  259,  260 
Milon  de  Plancy,  I:  16,  17,  11:  3265  evil 
council,  3545  refused  citizens  of  Gaza 
admission  to  fortress,  374,  3755  affairs 


INDEX 


542 


Milon  de  Plancy  {Continued) 

of  kingdom  brought  under  direction 
of,  400,  401 5  character:  death,  401 
Mirabel,  besieged  by  Baldwin  III,  II:  206 
Modestus,  bishop  of  Jerusalem,  I:  60,  63, 
66 

Monachus,  archbishop  elect  of  Caesarea, 
11:  456 

Monastery  of  the  Latins,  II:  243 
Montferrand,  besieged  by  Zangi,  II:  56, 
85j  87,  89,  90 

Montreal,  fortress,  built  in  Arabia  Ter- 
tia,  I:  5065  besieged  by  Saladin,  11: 
388 

Morel,  Arab  satrap,  II:  155 
Morfia,  daughter  of  Gabriel  of  Malatia, 
wife  of  Baldwin  du  Bourg,  I:  450,  522 
Mosul,  Saladin  takes  fortresses  of  prince 
of,  corrupts  people,  11:  480 
Mount  Cassius,  I:  201 
Mount  Galaad,  fortress  near,  besieged, 
II:  103  j  captured,  105 
Mount  Lebanon,  victory  of  Raymond  II 
at,  II:  82 

Mount  Nigra,  I:  531 

Mount  of  Olives,  I:  359  >  sign  from 
heaven  appears  on,  366,  367 
Mount  of  the  Pilgrims,  I:  454,  4625  bat¬ 
tle  near,  II:  82 
Mount  Orontes,  I:  201 
Mount  Parnassus,  I:  201 
Mount  Tabor,  II:  495 
Muhammad,  pernicious  doctrines  of,  I: 
60)  61;  prophets  of,  rejected  by  Anti¬ 
och,  241;  successors,  II:  323 
Mu’in  al-Din  [Mehen-Eddin],  see  Anar 
Muizz  [Mehezedin-alla],  ruler  in  Africa, 
II:  3i6j  subjugates  Egypt  through 
Jawhar,  324 

Mujir  al-Din  [Mejeredin],  king  of  Da¬ 
mascus,  H:  146,  148 

Muslims,  causes  for  change  in  relations  of 
Latins  and,  between  First  and  Third 
Crusades,  11:  406  ff. 

Musrat  al-Din  [Mirmiran],  Aleppo  sur¬ 
rendered  to,  II:  268 

Mustansir  (Bomensor  Elmostensab) ,  I: 
407 

Myrokephalion,  disaster  of,  11:  415W 

Nablus,  council  held  at,  I:  535  j  pillaged 
and  burned,  11:  88  j  assigned  to  Meli- 
send,  205;  seized  by  Baldwin  III,  206*, 
given  to  Balian  d’lbelin,  425 


Najm  al-Din  [Negem-ed-Din],  II:  282, 

358 

Names  of  places  and  persons,  translitera¬ 
tion  of,  I:  44  ff. 

Nasr  al-Din  [Nosceredinus] ,  11:  251  j  falls 
into  hands  of  Templars,  252  j  sold,  253 
Nazarenes  become  known  as  Christians, 
I:  200 

Nazareth,  I:  399, 11:  5 
Negem-ed-Din,  see  Najm  al-Din 
Neva,  Nureddin  decides  to  invest  for¬ 
tress,  11:  197  J  Raymond,  prince  of  Anti¬ 
och,  slain,  his  forces  flee,  198 
Nicaea,  pilgrim  armies  to  meet  at,  I:  965 
depredations  of  Peter  the  Hermit’s 
army,  106  j  pilgrim  bands  reach,  147  j 
entire  host  stationed  before,  15 1;  siege, 
152-73  J  description  of  city,  152*,  coun¬ 
cils  of,  i52«,  II:  167J  conferred  upon 
Qilij  Arslan  by  Malik  Shah,  204 
Nicephorus,  patriarch,  I:  70 
Nicephorus  I,  emperor,  I:  121 
Nicephorus  III  Botoniates,  I:  123 
Nichosius,  gift  to  Godfrey,  I:  238 
Nicopolis  [Emmaus],  I:  335,  339 
Niketas  [Nichita],  duke  of  the  Bulgar¬ 
ians,  I:  100 

Nile,  river,  Egyptians  break  dykes,  11: 
302}  Christians  build  bridge  over,  325, 
327}  number  of  mouths,  327 
Nineveh,  II:  409 

Nish,  I:  121,  122}  Peter  the  Hermit 
reaches,  loo}  disturbance  between  pil¬ 
grims  and  Bulgarians,  101 
Nocquinus,  II:  234 

Norwegians,  fleet  of,  arrives  in  Syria,  I: 
486 

Nuara,  Damascenes  at,  II:  106 
Nureddin,  sultan  of  Syria,  I:  43}  succeeds 
Zangi,  II:  145}  distrusted  by  Anar, 
148}  seizes  throne  of  Damascus,  149} 
arrives  at  Bostrum,  153}  attacks  Edessa, 
159  >  pursues  Joscelin,  massacres  his 
army,  160}  invades  land  of  Antioch, 
196}  victory  at  Neva,  1975  treatment 
of  region,  199,  208}  stops  exodus  from 
Edessa,  210 }  seizes  whole  region,  212} 
learns  of  death  of  Anar,  marches 
against  Damascus,  224}  city  surrenders 
voluntarily,  225  }  besieges  Banyas,  2255 
captures  Hospitallers’  supplies:  besieges 
Banyas,  257-58}  lays  ambush  in  for¬ 
est,  259}  again  besieges  Banyas,  262- 
64}  serious  malady,  265-66}  lays  siege 
to  cave  near  Sawad,  272}  Emperor 


INDEX 


Manuel  arranges  with,  for  release  of 
prisoners,  280 j  invades  Iconium,  282 j 
tribute  to  Baldwin  III,  294  j  sends 
Shirkuh  into  Egypt  to  aid  Shawar,  303, 
352;  defeated  near  Tripoli,  3065  lays 
siege  to  Harim:  departs,  307  j  captures 
Banyas,  309-11;  collusion  with  An- 
dronicus,  345  ;  becomes  a  serious  men¬ 
ace,  360;  lingers  in  vicinity  of  Banyas, 
383  i  Malih  joins  forces  with:  they  rav¬ 
age  Antioch,  386;  lays  siege  to  Petra, 
387-88;  death:  character,  394;  widow 
concludes  truce  with  Amaury,  395 ;  son 
of  Kara  Arslan,  490 

Obelet,  11:  503 

Octavianus,  see  Victor  IV,  anti-pope 
Octavius,  11:  249 

Odo,  archbishop  of  Tyre,  I:  552»,  11:  20, 
62 

Odo,  bishop  of  Bierut,  11:  457 
Odo,  bishop  of  Sidon,  consecration,  11: 
414 

Old  Man,  chief  of  the  Assassins,  II:  391 
Omar,  son  of  Catab  (Khattab),  II:  323; 
conquest  of  Syria,  I:  60;  circumstances 
which  enabled  him  to  seize  East,  6 1 ; 
ordered  Temple  of  the  Lord  at  Jeru¬ 
salem  rebuilt,  63,  344 
Orestus,  I:  66 
Orontes,  river,  I:  198 
Otto,  bishop  of  Freising,  11:  184 
Otto  of  Risberg,  II:  289 

Paganus  [Payens],  II:  127,  185,  499 
Pakrad  [Pancratius] ,  I:  188,  238,  304 
Palaeologus,  Lord  [George  Palaeologus] , 
U:  344 

Paramus,  Turkish  satrap,  II:  172 
Paschal  II,  I:  482,  483;  magnanimity  to¬ 
ward  Arnulf,  506;  privilege  granted 
to  Gibelin  and  his  successors,  509;  re¬ 
sponse  to  accusations  of  patriarch  of 
Antioch,  510,  511 ;  letter  to  Baldwin  I, 
512;  death,  523 
Patritius,  count,  II  :  49 
Pavilion  of  Karbuqa,  I:  294 
Payens,-  king^s  chancellor,  I:  536,  553 
Payens,  see  Paganus 

‘Teasants  Crusade,”  I:  97^5  Cru¬ 

sading  expeditions 
Pelagonia,  I:  134 

Pepper,  found  at  Caesarea,  I:  43 8« 

Persia,  strife  between  Egypt  and,  I:  65 ; 
provinces  seized  by  sultan,  153,  223; 


543 

promises  assistance  to  Yaghi  Siyan, 
205  ;  prince  of,  sends  host  to  Syria,  239, 

245 

Persians,  condition  of  Christians  under 
rule  of,  I:  70;  seized  country  as  far  as 
Hellespont,  77;  regarded  with  suspi¬ 
cion  by  Egyptian  monarch,  223;  in¬ 
solence,  490;  refuse  battle,  491;  again 
invade  kingdom,  493 
Pestilence,  at  Antioch,  1:  215,  220,  299, 
304,  314;  at  St.  Simeon,  309 
Peter,  apostle,  I:  200,  283,  II:  448 
Peter,  archbishop  of  Apamea,  I:  531 
Peter,  archbishop  of  Lyons,  II:  no,  117 
Peter,  archbishop  of  Tyre  (Peter  of 
Barcelona),  I:  9  ff.  passim,  II:  220, 
225,  22S,  229,  246,  273,  285,  436, 
456;  replaces  Ralph,  the  king^s  chan¬ 
cellor  as  archbishop,  163;  at 

siege  of  Ascalon,  218,  220,  228,  229; 
dies:  succeeded  by  Frederick,  304 
Peter,  abbot  of  Mt.  Tabor,  I:  536 
Peter,  prior  of  the  canons  of  the  Holy 
Sepulchre,  see  Peter,  archbishop  of 
Tyre 

Peter,  count  of  Stenay,  brother  of  Count 
Reinard,  I:  116,  175,  287 
Peter  Armoin,  II:  120,  123 
Peter  Bartholomew,  revelation,  I:  280; 
goes  through  ordeal  of  fire,  324;  death, 

325 

Peter  de  Courtenay,  brother  of  Louis  VII, 
n:  443 

Peter  Latinator,  11  •  45 
Peter  Leo,  chosen  pope,  to  succeed  Ho- 
norius  II,  II:  61 

Peter  of  Narbonne,  bishop  of  Albara,  I: 
309;  receives  Maara,  313,  370;  on 
march  to  Jerusalem,  315,  316;  at 
Arka,  328;  Tower  of  David  placed  in 
charge  of,  384 

Peter  the  Hermit,  I,  43,  359;  coming  of: 
conference  with  Patriarch  Simeon,  82; 
offers  to  help  Jerusalem,  83;  revela¬ 
tion  made  to,  84;  received  by  Pope 
Urban  II,  85;  exhortations  in  West, 
87;  joins  pilgrimage,  96;  disturbances 
between  followers  of,  and  Bulgarians, 
98,  100,  101,  102,  104;  proceeds  to 
Constantinople,  104;  encamps  in 
Bithynia:  depredations  of  army  around 
Nicaea,  106;  Teuton  followers  perish, 
107;  army,  aroused  against  Qilij  Ars¬ 
lan,  is  destroyed,  108;  joins  other  lead¬ 
ers:  tells  of  disaster,  147;  followers  im- 


INDEX 


544 

Peter  the  Hermit  (^Contimied) 

prisoned  by  Qilij  Arslan  restored,  i66j 
sent  as  envoy  to  Karbuqa,  282 j  his 
conditions  spurned,  battle  is  declared, 
2845  tribute  to,  376 

Petra  of  the  Desert,  II:  127  ;  church  estab¬ 
lished  at,  346;  Nureddin  lays  siege  to, 
387  j  Baldwin  IV  camps  near,  469; 
Saladin  takes  by  force,  498-500;  Bald¬ 
win  IV  goes  to  relief  of,  503 
Pharamia,  seized  by  Baldwin  I,  I:  515 
Pharas,  tower  of,  II:  336 
Philae  [Phium],  II:  330 
Philip  I,  king  of  France,  I:  87,  378;  put 
aside  wife  for  Bertrada,  II:  48 
Philip  II,  king  of  France,  succeeds 
Louis  VII,  II:  451 

Philip,  bishop  elect  of  Beauvais,  arrives 
in  Syria,  II:  443 

Philip,  count  of  Flanders,  I:  18,  19,  II: 
49  j  embassy  sent  to,  360;  arrives  in 
kingdom:  refuses  power  and  adminis¬ 
tration  of  realm,  417;  refuses  cam¬ 
paign  into  Egypt,  418,  423;  lays  siege 
to  Harim,  425;  forsakes  siege  for  de¬ 
lights  of  idleness,  434;  sets  sail  for 
home,  435 

Philip,  son  of  Herod,  11:  309 
Philip,  son  of  Philip  I  of  France,  II:  48 
Philip  of  Nablus,  II:  142,  206,  218,  260, 
378,  452,  499;  at  council  of  Acre, 
185;  joins  Amaury  I  in  Egypt,  326 
Philippa,  daughter  of  Prince  Raymond, 
weds  Humphrey  of  Toron,  11:  416; 
death,  417 
Phocas  Caesar,  I:  62 
Phoenicia,  II:  4;  earthquake,  370 
Phoenicians,  11:  i 

Physicians,  Eastern  princes  scorn  practice 
of  Latin,  II:  292 
Piacenza,  council  of,  I:  87 
Pierre,  son  of  Gisla,  I:  266 
Pigeons,  deliver  message,  I:  302 
Pilgrims,  treatment  at  gates  of  Jerusalem 

I:  79;  condition  on  arrival,  80; 
wore  sign  of  cross,  93;  convent  estab¬ 
lished  in  Jerusalem  to  minister  to 
women  pilgrims,  243 ;  condition  of 
earlier,  on  reaching  Holy  City:  hos¬ 
pital  offered  food  and  shelter,  244 
Pirie-Gordon,  H.,  I:  3,  41 
Pisans,  join  our  forces,  II:  496 
Pisidia,  lack  of  water:  suffering  of  army, 

I:  173 

Poitou,  count  of,  see  William  of  Poitou 


Pons,  count  of  Tripoli,  marries  widow 
of  Tancred,  I:  492 ;  goes  to  aid  of  Anti¬ 
och,  501,  528,  5315  declines  service  to 
Baldwin  II,  539;  at  siege  of  Tyre,  II: 
II,  14;  bestows  knighthood  upon 
bearer  of  Balak’s  head,  16;  goes  to  aid 
of  Antioch,  24;  seizes  Raphania,  30;  in 
siege  of  Damascus,  40;  opposition  to 
King  Fulfc,  54;  put  to  flight,  55;  king 
goes  to  aid  of,  56;  taken  prisoner, 
slain,  82 

Pons  de  Balazune,  I:  323 

Purple,  Tyrian,  II:  2 

Puthaha,  battle  of,  II:  273 

Qilij  Arslan  [Soliman],  puts  Teutons  to 
sword,  I:  107;  victorious  over  Chris¬ 
tians:  lays  siege  to  Civitot,  109;  rul¬ 
ing  at  Nicaea  ),  gathers  army  of 
Turks  to  fight  against  pilgrims, 
152  ff . ;  encourages  citizens  under  at¬ 
tack,  154;  army  defeated,  156;  wife 
and  sons  taken  prisoners,  165;  re¬ 
stored,  168;  with  great  host  he  again 
encounters  Christians,  168  j  army  per¬ 
ishes,  1 7 1 ;  Nicaea  conferred  upon  by 
Malik  Shah,  204;  attacks  at  Antioch, 
291;  fierce  onset  on  Bohemond,  292- 
93;  Alexius  invokes  aid  of,  470 

Qutb  al-Din,  brother  of  Nureddin,  11: 
408,  409 

Rainbald,  count  of  Orange,  I:  95,  287, 

369 

Rainulf,  brother  of  Richard  of  the  Prin- 
cipate,  I:  134 

Ralph,  patriarch  of  Antioch,  archbishop 
of  Mamistra,  succeeds  Bernard,  II:  60; 
character,  60,  61;  controversy  with 
William,  patriarch  of  Jerusalem,  64; 
circumstances  which  gave  rise  to  con¬ 
troversy,  68;  deceives  Alice,  78;  dis¬ 
cord  between  Raymond  of  Poitou  and, 
79 ;  legate  of  church  of  Rome  sent  to 
investigate  trouble  with  canon,  110; 
departs  for  Rome,  1 1 3  ;  taken  prisoner 
by  Duke  Roger:  reconciliation:  reaches 
Rome,  1 14;  trial  and  deposition,  115- 
2 1 ;  appearance  and  character :  escape 
to  Rome:  death,  121;  succeeded  by 
Aimery,  122 

Ralph,  bishop  of  Sebaste,  delegate  to  gen¬ 
eral  synod  at  Rome,  II:  436 

Ralph,  brother  of  William,  archbishop  of 
Tyre,  I:  8 


INDEX 


Ralph,  king^s  chancellor,  imposed  as  arch¬ 
bishop  upon  church  of  Tyre,  II:  i6ij 
decision  rendered  null  and  void,  162  j 
later  became  bishop  of  Bethlehem,  163, 
333>  372?  envoy  to  Renaud  de  Chatil- 
lon,  235  i  opposed  election  of  Amalrich 
as  patriarch,  2715  carries  cross  into  bat¬ 
tle,  3885  death,  394,  404 j  succeeded  as 
chancellor  by  William,  404 
Ralph,  son  of  Godfrey,  I:  287 
Ralph  de  Beaugency,  I:  95 
Ralph  de  Fontenay,  I:  266 
Ralph  de  Mauleon,  prowess  in  battle,  11: 

497 

Ralph  de  Merle,  II:  213,  214 

Ralph  of  Foritaneto,  viscount  of  Pisellus, 

I:  4^4 

Ramlah,  Godfrey  sent  to,  I:  3325  place 
found  deserted,  333,  duke  musters 
forces  at,  394}  described:  abandoned 
by  citizens,  438  j  carnage  wrought  by 
pilgrims :  victory  granted  from  on  high, 
440  J  Baldwin  I  retreats  into  citadel, 
445  J  citadel  taken  by  Egyptians,  446 ; 
Egyptians  enter  land  of,  465  5  burned, 
11:  428 

Ranculat,  fortress  given  to  Greeks,  II:  209 
Raphania,  seized  by  Pons,  11:  30 
Rasaline  [Raseline],  Zangi  camps  at: 

withdraws,  II:  106,  473 
Ravendal,  fortress  given  to  Greeks,  11: 
209 

Raymond,  bishop  of  Beirut,  11:  414,  457 
Raymond,  count  of  Toulouse  and  St. 
Gilles,  I:  95,  96}  in  Dalmatia,  1395 
biography,  139^5  at  Durazzo,  1 4 1  j 
troubles  with  Alexius,  143-463  at 
Nicaea,  155,  158;  attempt  to  weaken 
tower,  1 61 3  aids  Bohemond,  1723  sick 
unto  death,  177,  2873  at  Antioch, 

207  if.,  229,  230,  232,  247,  2653  as¬ 
sumes  care  of  new  fortress,  2353  re¬ 
fuses  to  concede  Antioch  to  Bohemond, 
244,  2495  resigns  care  of  fortress,  2683 
at  Ezaz,  3033  takes  Albara,  3093  at 
Maara,  3103  controversy  with  Bohe¬ 
mond,  3123  his  towers  at  Antioch 
seized,  3135  drives  off  enemy’s  cattle : 
starts  march  to  Jerusalem,  3143  army 
attacked  by  brigands,  3163  forces  duke 
to  abandon  siege  of  Jabala,  3213  Tan- 
cred  brings  grave  charges  against,  322, 
3235  hearts  of  other  chiefs  estranged 
from,  3233  advises  waiting  for  Alexius, 
3273  vain  effort  to  take  Arka,  3283  re¬ 


545 

luctant  to  abandon  siege,  3293  camp  at 
Jerusalem,  349,  3583  paid  wages  from 
private  treasury,  3513  sends  escort  to 
meet  fleet,  3563  disagreement  with  Tan- 
cred,  3583  attacks  Jerusalem,  367-783 
choice  of  many  for  secular  leader,  3823 
duke  demands  citadel,  3833  prepares 
to  return  home,  3843  returns  to  Con¬ 
stantinople,  3973  guides  new  contin¬ 
gent  of  pilgrims,  4323  Tortosa  resigned 
to:  remains  in  city,  433,  4423  builds 
fortress  before  Tripoli,  4545  death, 
4623  lauded,  4633  son  joins  pilgrims, 

II:  1 8 1 

Raymond  II,  count  of  Tripoli,  succeeds 
Pons:  avenges  death  of  father,  II:  823 
tortures  prisoners,  833  taken  prisoner 
at  Montferrand,  853  released,  915  en¬ 
mity  arises  between  countess  and:  death 
of  count,  2145  children,  215 

Raymond  III,  count  of  Tripoli,  as  regent, 
I:  173  retires  from  regency,  183  enters 
Jerusalem,  213  relations  with  Bald¬ 
win  IV,  233  again  regent,  243  urged  to 
go  to  relief  of  Antioch,  II:  2633  trouble 
with  Manuel,  288-913  at  siege  of 
Harim,  3073  cast  into  prison,  3083  re¬ 
turns  from  prison:  territory  restored, 
3903  demands  regency  of  realm,  4003 
undertakes  regency:  lineage,  4023  ap¬ 
pearance,  character,  4033  weds  Es- 
chiva,  4043  marches  toward  Coelesyria 
to  oppose  Saladin,  405  3  camps  near 
Arka,  4083  refugees  in  citadel  of  Hims 
beg  aid,  409  3  agreement  with  Saladin : 
returns  home,  4105  in  vicinity  of  Heli¬ 
opolis  burning  everything,  4133  aids 
in  siege  against  Harim,  4255  in  battle 
with  Saladin,  4423  causes  Baldwin  IV 
alarm,  4463  truce  with  Saladin,  4483 
goes  to  Antioch  to  influence  Bohe¬ 
mond  III,  4563  hostility  between  king 
and,  4593  peace  reestablished,  4603 
against  his  advice  the  king  marched 
out  against  Saladin,  4693  responsible 
for  fortress  in  Sawad,  471 3  illness,  473  3 
raid  near  Bostrum,  4853  prowess  in 
battle,  4973  urges  coronation  of  Bald¬ 
win  V,  5013  he  alone  capable  of  under¬ 
taking  regency,  5023  made  commander 
of  whole  army,  5043  could  Jerusalem 
be  saved  by?  505-5093  personality,  in¬ 
tellect,  509;^ 

Raymond,  master  of  the  hospital  at  Jeru¬ 
salem,  II:  218,  245  3  at  council  of  Acre, 


INDEX 


546 

Raymond  (^Continued) 

1855  at  siege  of  Ascalon,  229  j  causes 
trouble  to  prelates  of  church,  239 
Raymond  of  Poitou,  prince  of  Antioch, 
invited  to  marry  Constance,  daughter  of 
Bohemond  II,  II:  5  9  j  arrives  secretly  at 
Antioch,  77 j  effort  of  duke  of  Apulia 
to  waylay:  Alice  strives  to  prevent  al¬ 
liance,  7  8  5  marries  Constance  and  be¬ 
comes  prince  of  Antioch :  relations  with 
patriarch,  79,  no,  ii3ff. 5  manners 
and  appearance,  80  j  refugees  at  Mont- 
ferrand  appeal  to,  87  j  goes  to  relief 
of  king,  88  j  returns,  finds  Antioch  be¬ 
sieged  by  Emperor  John,  92;  treaty 
with  emperor,  93  j  marches  with  em¬ 
peror  to  war,  94  J  conduct  incenses 
John,  95;  Joscelin  II  tries  to  bring  em¬ 
peror’s  displeasure  upon,  97;  emperor’s 
wrath  excited  against:  envoys  offer  ex¬ 
cuses,  1 0 1 ;  comes  to  aid  siege  of  Ban- 
yas,  109;  effort  to  ascertain  legate’s 
intention  concerning  patriarch,  112; 
conspires  with  adversaries  of  patriarch : 
breaks  oath  of  fealty,  1 1 3  ff .  j  troubles 
with  emperor,  123-25;  feud  between 
Joscelin  II  and,  140,  141;  delays  ren¬ 
dering  aid  to  Edessa,  142,  1435  quarrel 
with  Louis  VII,  179-80;  at  Damascus, 
194;  exposes  himself  to  enemy,  197; 
forces  flee:  he  is  slain:  character,  198; 
head  sent  to  all  Turkish  satraps,  199; 
succeeded  by  Renaud  de  Chatillon 
\q.v.)y  224 

Raympnd  Pilet,  I:  287,  356,  370 
Raynald,  abbot  of  Mt.  Sion,  II:  436 
Raynald,  bishop  of  Hebron,  II:  346 
Raynerus,  bishop  of  Lydda,  11:  359 
Reibald  Creton,  I:  266 
Reinard,  count  of  Toul,  I:  116,  175,  208, 
246,  287 

Reinhold  von  Ammersbach,  I:  287,  299 
Renaud,  ruler  in  Apulia,  11:  31 
Renaud  de  Beauvais,  I:  173,  287 
Renaud  de  Chatillon,  I:  19;  at  siege  of 
Ascalon:  served  king  for  pay,  II:  218; 
weds  Lady  Constance,  becomes  prince 
of  Antioch,  succeeding  Raymond  of 
Poitou,  224;  Aimery  shamefully  abused 
by,  23  5;  seizes  Cyprus,  253;  despoils 
inhabitants,  254;  summoned  to  relief 
of  Banyas,  263;  invited  to  invade  en¬ 
emy’s  country,  265;  demands  that  lord 
of  Shayzar  pledge  fealty  to  him,  268; 
Harim  delivered  to,  2  7 1 ;  makes  amends 


for  outrages,  275  ;  disgusts  all  with  vio¬ 
lent  impulses,  277;  plunders  and  robs 
Christians,  283;  captured  and  im¬ 
prisoned  by  Turks,  284;  released,  414; 
constituted  regent  of  realm  and  com¬ 
mander  in  chief  of  army,  418 ;  goes  out 
to  meet  Saladin,  430;  negotiates  mar¬ 
riage  of  stepson,  452;  accompanies 
patriarch  to  Antioch,  456;  charged 
with  breaking  truce  with  Saladin, 
468«;  prowess  in  battle,  497;  goes  to 
protect  Petra,  499)  tactics,  500 
Renaud  de  Nephins,  II:  378 
Renaud  Masoier  [Rainald  Mansour],  I: 
530;  Antioch  left  in  charge  of,  II:  55; 
retires  to  fortress  because  of  Bohe¬ 
mond  Ill’s  conduct,  454 
Renaud  of  Marash,  II  *•  53>  198 
Renaud  of  Sidon,  II:  77;  alliance  with 
Agnes,  302;  a  partisan  of  Raymond  III 
of  Tripoli,  401 ;  goes  out  against  Sala¬ 
din,  430,  442;  prowess  in  battle,  497) 
urges  coronation  of  Baldwin  V,  501 
Renaud  the  Bishop,  II:  87 
Renier,  bishop  of  Sebaste,  II:  247 
Renier,  son  of  William  the  Elder  of 
Montferrat,  weds  Maria,  daughter  of 
Emperor  Manuel,  II:  450 
Renier  de  Brus,  slain,  I:  109;  Banyas: 
wife  captured,  II:  74;  restored,  76; 
marriage  to  Agnes:  Banyas  granted  to, 
77;  a  refuge  at  Montferrand,  87;  tem¬ 
poral  jurisdiction  of  Banyas  restored 
to,  I  1 2 

Renier  de  Maron  a  Mareuil  [Rainerius 
of  Marum],  II:  440 

Resurrection,  William  answers  question 
concerning  a  future,  II:  299 
Rhinococura  [al-Arish],  I:  550 
Richard,  son  of  Count  Rainulf,  I:  134 
Richard  of  the  Principate,  I:  134,  175, 
185 

Ridwan,  prince  of  Aleppo,  lord  of  Ezaz 
seeks  help  against,  I:  301;  flees,  303; 
invades  Antioch,  463;  defeated,  464; 
again  invades  Antioch,  II:  43 
Robert,  archbishop  of  Nazareth,  II:  154, 
185,  218 

Robert,  bishop  of  Ramlah,  I:  3  3  3 
Robert  II,  count  of  Flanders,  I:  95;  ar¬ 
rives  at  Constantinople:  honored  by 
Alexius  I,  138;  biography,  i38«;  ad¬ 
vice  to  count  of  Toulouse,  145;  re¬ 
sumes  pilgrimage:  arrives  at  Nicaea, 
147,  156,  157;  at  Durazzo,  149;  siege 


INDEX 


of  Artasium  [Artah],  195,  197  j  at 
Antioch,  207,  215,  230,  232,  244,  247, 
266,  289  j  scales  wall,  25 6  j  sets  fire 
to  fort,  268  j  command,  2865  to  march 
out  ahead  of  main  army,  2885  puts 
enemy  to  flight,  293  j  at  Maara,  310^ 
at  Laodicea,  3  20i  abandons  siege  of 
Arka,  329  j  sent  to  Ramlah,  332  j  camp 
at  Jerusalem,  3495  enters  city,  369 j 
at  Ramlah,  395;  returns  to  own  land, 

397 

Robert,  count  of  Normandy,  I:  95,  169  j 
arrives  at  Constantinople:  honored  by 
Alexius,  1485  biography,  storms 

bridge  on  road  to  Antioch,  1 9  8  j  at 
Antioch,  207,  230,  231,  232,  244,  247, 
289  J  command,  286,  288  j  to  march  out 
ahead  of  main  army,  2885  puts  enemy 
to  flight,  2935  at  Maara,  310  i  on 
march  to  Jerusalem,  315,  3i6j  aban¬ 
dons  siege  of  Arka,  3295  camp  at 
Jerusalem,  349 j  enters  city,  369;  re¬ 
turns  to  own  land,  397}  finds  Henry 
king:  demands  kingdom:  dies  in 
prison,  398 

Robert,  count  of  Perche,  II:  185 
Robert,  master  of  the  Knights  of  the 
Temple,  II;  185 

Robert,  murderer  of  bishop  of  Acre,  11: 

385)  386 

Robert,  son  of  Gerard,  I:  287 
Robert,  son  of  Tostan,  I:  134 
Robert  de  Rozieres,  I:  195 
Robert  de  Sourdeval,  I;  134,  11:  210 
Robert  Guiscard,  duke  of  Apulia,  I:  86, 
96,  135;?,  II:  33,  60 
Robert  Mansel,  II:  306 
Robert  of  Anzi,  I:  134,  175,  185 
Robert  of  Bassavilla,  count  of  Sicily,  II: 

238,  247  J  seized  land  of  Apulia,  250 
Robert  of  Paris,  I:  171 
Robert  of  St.  L6, 1:  530 
Robert  of  Sorrento,  prince  of  Capua,  11: 

238,  247,  250,  251 
Robert  the  Burgundian,  II:  104 
Roger  I,  king  of  Sicily,  surnamed  Bursa, 
I:  i33«,  496;  II:  59 

Roger  II,  king  of  Sicily,  I:  496  i  angered 
at  Baldwin  I^s  treatment  of  countess 
of  Sicily,  514;  struggle  for  power  in 
Sicily,  H:  3 1 ;  sets  sail  for  Africa,  3  5  j 
claims  on  Antioch,  59“^®  5  receives 
Hugh,  count  of  Jaffa,  75  j  gives  him 
county  of  Gargan,  76;  plans  to  waylay 
Raymond  of  Poitou,  78  j  takes  patriarch 


547 

of  Antioch  prisoner,  1155  honors  him, 
T 1 8 

Roger,  prince  of  Antioch,  succession  to 
principality:  condition,  I:  4925  called 
to  aid  in  battle  against  Mawdud,  493; 
blames  king  for  disaster,  494  i  asks  aid 
of  king  and  Tughtigin  against  Bursuq, 
5015  forces  Turks  to  flee,  503  j  warned 
of  Il-Ghazi’s  approach,  528;  plunges 
army  into  destruction,  529J  death,  530J 
character,  531 

Roger,  bishop  of  Lydda,  I;  536,  556,  II: 

87 

Roger,  canon  of  church  of  Banyas,  11:  310 
Roger  de  Barneville,  I:  96,  149,  157,  1985 
valor:  death,  262,  266 
Roger  des  Moulins,  II:  456 
Rohard,  castellan  of  citadel  of  Jerusalem, 
II:  126,  378,  401 
Rohard  of  Jaffa,  II:  261,  401 
Rohard  of  Nablus,  11:  76,  206 
Roland,  cardinal-priest  of  church  of  St, 
Peter,  ordained  pope  under  name  Alex¬ 
ander  H:  281 

Romain  de  Puy,  conspires  against  king, 
H:  70 

Roman  Catholic  Church,  preparatory 
negotiations  for  union  with  Greek  Or¬ 
thodox  Church,  I:  20  j  dangerous  schism 
arises,  II:  61-70  j  circumstances  which 
gave  rise  to  controversy,  68  j  legate  sent 
to  investigate  trouble  in  church  at  An¬ 
tioch,  iioj  Ralph,  patriarch,  refuses  to 
acknowledge  see  of  Antioch  as  subject 
to  church  of  Rome,  1 1 5  j  papal  legate 
dies  at  Acre,  1 1 7  j  legate  summons  patri¬ 
arch  and  bishops  to  synod  at  Antioch, 
1 1 8  j  legate  deposes  Ralph,  1 2 1 ;  Mar- 
onites  return  to  unity  of,  458  j  jealousy 
caused  by  difference  in  sacraments  of 
Greek  Orthodox  Church  and,  462;  ef¬ 
fect  of  Manuel’s  approval  of  union 
with  Greek  church,  465 ;  see  also  under 
names  of  fofes 

Romania,  ill  fortune  of  pilgrims  in,  I: 
433,  442 

Romanus  III,  Byzantine  emperor,  I:  69 
Romanus  IV  Diogenes,  Byzantine  em¬ 
peror,  I:  77,  78 

Romanus,  bishop  of  Tripoli,  II:  436 
Rome,  general  synod  at  (Third  Lateran 
council),  I:  20,  2  6,  11:  436,  438 
Rorgo,  bishop  of  Acre,  H:  185 
Rosetta,  city,  11:  327 
Rosinolo,  count  of,  I:  134 


INDEX 


548 

Rotrou,  count  of  Perche,  I:  95,  149,  287, 
II:  49,  346 

Rudolph,  pseudo-king  of  Saxony,  I:  389 
Rugia,  chiefs  meet  at,  I:  3123  combat  be¬ 
tween  Fulk  and  Pons,  11  •  55 
Rupen  III  [Rupinus],  Armenian  chief, 
n:  4573  Bohemond  III  arranges  ex¬ 
change  of  Tarsus  with,  491 

Saint  Anna,  convent  of,  I:  46 1 
Saint  Elias,  Greek  monastery,  defended  by 
monks,  II:  495 
Saint  George,  order  of,  II:  87 
Saint  Simeon,  monastery  of,  Nureddin’s 
unrestrained  license  at,  11:  199 
Saint  Simeon,  port,  I:  309,  II:  179 
Saladin,  I:  43,  II:  332,  335  j  invasion  of 
Jerusalem,  19,  24;  uniting  Muslim 
world,  23  ;  resumed  hostilities,  25  j  cap¬ 
ture  of  Jerusalem,  26;  appeals  to  Shir- 
kuh,  338 j  guarded  from  insults,  342 j 
succeeds  Shirkuh  as  sultan  of  Egypt: 
character,  358,  405  j  slays  caliph  and 
his  children,  seizes  wealth  and  power, 
359  5  invades  our  land,  lays  siege  to 
Daron,  371  j  halts  before  Gaza,  374J 
atrocities  of  Turks  under:  returns  to 
his  own  land,  375  j  besieges  Montreal, 
3  8  8  J  lays  waste  entire  country  beyond 
Jordan,  389  j  seizes  Damascus  and  other 
parts  of  region,  404,  409  j  all  king¬ 
doms  about  us  obey,  408  j  had  risen 
against  Nureddin’s  son,  his  rightful 
lord,  408  j  lays  siege  to  Bostrum,  409  j 
seizes  Aleppo  and  citadel  of  Hims:  re¬ 
quests  count  not  to  interfere  with  his 
progress:  returns  hostages,  410 j  Hum¬ 
phrey  of  Toron  accused  of  friendship 
with,  41  oj  makes  peace  with  son  of 
Nureddin,  departs  for  Egypt,  4255  in¬ 
vades  Eg)’^pt,  426  J  takes  position  before 
Ascalon:  arrogance,  4275  put  to  flight, 
430 }  bodyguard,  43  ij  returns  stricken 
by  divine  hand,  4335  invades  land  of 
Sidon,  440  i  defeats  Christians,  takes 
many  prisoners,  442  j  attacks  Tiberias, 
446;  concludes  truce  with  Baldwin  IV 
on  equal  terms:  lays  waste  land  of 
Tripoli,  447  5  truce  with  Raymond  III 
of  Tripoli,  4485  fears  Sicilian  fleet, 
458  i  revokes  treaty  with  king,  467; 
imprisons  shipwrecked  Christians,  468  j 
assaults  Buria,  carries  people  into  cap¬ 
tivity,  4695  seizes  cave  in  Sawad,  470  j 
invades  our  land,  4725  battle  at  For- 


belet,  474  J  summons  fleet  from  Egypt, 
lays  siege  to  Beirut,  4755  devastates 
land,  raises  siege,  4795  in  Mesopotamia, 
480}  increase  of  power  viewed  with 
great  alarm,  486,  4915  acquires  Aleppo 
under  agreement,  4895  encamps  near 
Scythopolis,  4935  detached  bands  range 
over  district,  494  flF.;  encampment  at 
Tubania,  4945  remains  without  opposi¬ 
tion  in  vicinity  of  our  army:  takes  Petra, 
498  i  raises  siege,  504 
“Saladin  tithe,”  model  for,  II:  489^ 
Saljuqs,  origin,  I:  73 
Salome,  11:  28 
Samaria,  I:  340 

Samosata,  Baldwin  lays  siege  to,  I:  192  j 
citizens  conspire  to  slay  ruler,  193  j 
sold  to  Baldwin,  194J  given  to  Greeks, 
II:  209 

Samsadolus,  I:  309 
Sandstorm,  11:  317 
Saphet,  castle,  II:  473 
Sardona,  besieged,  I:  532,  11:  24 
Sarmata,  refugees  in,  surrender  to  II- 
Ghazi,  I:  531 
Satalia,  11:  178 

Sawad  [Suita],  Nureddin  besieges,  11: 
272}  Saladin  seizes  cave  in,  4705  Chris¬ 
tians  take  cave  by  siege,  482 
Sawar,  II:  43/z 

Saxons,  I:  208}  refuse  to  endure  yoke  of 
Roman  Empire,  389 

Sayf  al-Din  [Seifedin],  care  of  Egypt 
committed  to,  II:  404 
Scandalium,  fortress,  I:  5145  district,  11: 

5 

Scandinavians:  Danes  under  Svein  annihi¬ 
lated  by  T urks,  I:  2 1 7  f. ;  Danes  and 
Norwegians  arrive  in  Syria,  486}  aid 
in  siege  of  Sidon,  487 

Scythopolis,  II:  473  j  Saladin  encamps 
near,  493 

Second  Crusade,  II:  163  if, 

Seiher  de  Mamedunc,  II:  393 
Seleucia,  bishoprics,  II:  64 
Semlin  [Malevilla],  treatment  of  pilgrims 
at,  I:  98J  revenge,  995  captured,  100; 
Godfrey’s  army  reaches,  120 
Sephorie,  Amaury  I  assembles  army  at,  11: 
383}  a  custom  of  his  ancestors,  384, 
49 1 J  our  forces  concentrate  at  fountain, 

49i>  493j  494)  498 
Serbia,  revolt,  II:  348 

Sergiopolis,  bishoprics,  H:  65 

Serlo  of  Apamea,  oflFers  protection  to 


INDEX 


Patriarch  Ralph,  11:  1 1 9  j  is  deposed : 
dies,  120 

Seruj,  seized  by  Baldwin,  I;  1945  Balas 
demands  return  of,  307 
Severiis,  emperor,  U:  i 
Seylon,  I:  483 

Shams  al-Dula  [Semsedolus]  marches  out 
against  Baldwin  IV,  11;  413 
Shawar,  sultan  of  Egypt,  driven  out  of 
office  by  Dirgham:  begs  aid  of  Nured- 
din,  II:  3035  defeats  Dirgham:  be¬ 
comes  sultan,  305,  310J  enters  into 
agreement  with  Amaury  I:  sends  Shir- 
kuh  out  of  country,  3055  terrified 
at  sudden  appearance  of  Amaury:  mar¬ 
vels  at  loyalty  of  Christians,  315;  re¬ 
news  treaty  with  king,  3 1 8  j  approves 
pact  with  Shirkuh,  341 ;  triumphant 
entry  into  Alexandria,  3423  again 
implores  Nureddin’s  aid,  350 j  over¬ 
whelmed  by  outrages  of  Christians, 
352 j  sum  offered  for  ransom  of  kin 
and  withdrawal  of  troops,  353;  with¬ 
draws  from  agreement:  seeks  aid  of 
Turks,  354  J  murdered,  sons  put  to 
death,  3575  succeeded  by  Shirkuh,  357 
Shayzar,  II:  935  siege  of,  94  j  citizens 
beg  for  a  truce,  965  situation,  266; 
besieged  and  taken,  267;  destined  for 
Thierry,  count  of  Flanders:  Prince 
Renaud  raises  difficulties :  enterprise 
abandoned,  268;  destroyed  by  earth¬ 
quake,  370J  taken  by  Saladin,  405,  409 
Shiites,  I:  66,  II:  323 
Shirkuh  [Siraconus],  II:  272  j  sent  into 
Egypt:  character,  appearance,  303  j  de¬ 
feats  Dirgham:  attacks  Balbis:  driven 
out  of  Egypt,  305,  310J  strongholds 
surrendered  to,  3 1 2  ^  goes  into  Egypt 
with  a  mighty  force :  enlists  aid  of 
caliph  of  Bagdad,  3135  Amaury 
marches  forth  to  meet,  3175  seizes  is¬ 
land:  troops  perish,  326J  flees  into 
desert,  327  j  seizes  Alexandria,  334? 
confers  with  Hugh  of  Caesarea  about 
peace,  3395  treaty  with  Amaury,  340 j 
sent  again  into  Egypt,  352}  seizes 
Egypt,  kills  Shawar,  356}  made  sultan, 
3  5  7  i  slain :  succeeded  by  Saladin,  358 
Sibylla,  countess  of  Flanders,  lands  at 
Beirut,  II:  49,  264;  influenced  election 
of  Amalrich  to  patriarchate,  271 
Sibylla,  sister  of  Baldwin  IV :  marriage 
to  William  of  Montferrat,  I:  18;  mar¬ 
riage  to  Guy  de  Lusignan,  21,  II:  4465 


549 

parentage,  children,  5  3  j  brought  up 
in  convent,  399;  king  demands  annul¬ 
ment  of  marriage  to  Guy,  507 
Sicily,  attacked  by  Africans,  II:  34-35 
Sidon,  I:  331  j  siege  of,  486 j  described, 
4875  surrenders:  granted  to  Eustace 
Grenier,  488}  bishoprics,  II:  66;  Sala¬ 
din  invades,  440 
Siegmar  of  Malines,  I:  273 
Sigurd,  I:  3,  486  ff. 

Siloam,  fountain  of,  I:  348,  352 
Simeon,  patriarch  of  Jerusalem,  I:  82, 

376«: 

Simon  of  Tiberias,  II:  218 
Sisium,  II:  275 
Smoke  screen,  I:  290 
Sophronius,  bishop,  I:  62 
Stephania,  abbess,  II:  301 
Stephanie,  widow  of  younger  Humphrey, 
given  as  wife  to  Milon  de  Plancy,  II: 
401 

Stephen,  patriarch  of  Jerusalem,  I:  525; 
character :  claims  against  king,  II:  39; 
death,  40,  43 

Stephen,  king  of  England,  I:  386 
Stephen,  archbishop  of  Tarsus,  II:  1 19 
Stephen,  bishop  of  Metz,  II:  184 
Stephen,  chancellor  of  king  of  Sicily,  II: 

346,  347 

Stephen,  count  of  Blois,  rejects  King 
Amaury’s  plan  to  make  him  his  son- 
in-law:  falls  into  an  ambush,  II:  384 
Stephen,  count  of  Burgundy,  I:  431,  442, 

443>  444 

Stephen,  count  of  Chartres  and  Blois,  I: 
95)  148,  158,  169;  biography,  i48«; 
at  Antioch,  207;  infamous  act,  239; 
visits  emperor  of  Constantinople,  274- 
75;  memory  abhorred,  279;  undertakes 
a  fresh  crusade,  430,  442,  443;  killed, 

444 

Stephen  d’Aumale,  count,  I:  95,  149,  287 
Stephen  of  Saone,  count,  II:  384 
Stralicia,  I:  121,  122 
Sugar,  II:  6 

Sukman  Ibn  Ortuq,  I:  459^ 

Sunnites,  I:  65,  II:  323 
Sunstroke,  deaths  by,  II:  475 
Svein,  son  of  king  of  Danes,  killed,  I;  21 7 
Swabians,  I:  208 
Symon,  son  of  the  duke,  I:  484 
Syracuse  seized  by  Africans,  II:  35 
Syria,  seized  by  Arabs  under  Omar,  son 
of  Catab,  I:  60 ;  invaded  by  Chosroes, 
61;  under  yoke  of  servitude,  63;  cru- 


550 


INDEX 


Syria  {Continue^ 

saders  overrun  northern  part,  1 87-224  j 
begin  siege  of  Antioch  (j.?;.),  195  ff.  j 
province  of  Coelesyria,  2005  Christians 
of,  recommend  shore  road  to  Jerusalem, 
330  j  prince  of  Egypt  marches  into,  3935 
put  to  flight,  397  i  army  of  Egyptians 
invades,  464}  earthquake,  500, 11:  370^ 
troubles  in  northern:  reign  of  Baldwin 
II,  I:  517-565  lands  and  extent,  11:  45 
troubles  in  northern:  reign  of  Fulk, 
47-935  seized  by  Saladin,  489 

Syrians,  privileges  granted  to,  in  Jeru¬ 
salem,  I:  5385  betray  Pons,  11:  825  in 
Phoenicia  return  to  unity  of  Catholic 
Church,  4585  characteristics,  471 

Syria  Sobal,  Baldwin  IV  in,  11:  470 

Taj-al-Muluk  Buri  [Tegelmeluch],  king 
of  Damascus,  captures  Banyas,  11:  74 

Tancred,  I:  43,  96,  1345  puts  Alexius’ 
army  to  flight,  1365  moves  his  legions 
into  Bithynia,  1375  genealogy,  137^5 
at  Nicaea,  1575  leaders  separate,  1695 
barely  escapes  death,  1715  separates 
from  main  army,  1755  lays  siege  to 
Tarsus,  1785  his  standard  raised  over 
tower,  1795  torn  down  by  Baldwin, 
1805  retires  to  Adana,  1815  takes  pos¬ 
session  of  Mamistra,  1815  combat  with 
Baldwin,  1855  invades  Cilicia,  1865 
universal  praise  of  valor,  1875  at 
Artasium,  1975  to  build  and  guard 
fort  at  Antioch,  2365  scales  city  wall, 
2565  causes  heads  of  victims  to  be  cut 
off,  2665  command,  2875  hurries  to 
Bohemond’s  aid,  2925  aids  in  rout  of 
Qilij  Arslan,  2935  at  Maara,  3105  on 
march  to  Jerusalem,  315,  3165  charges 
against  count,  322,  3235  abandons  siege 
of  Arka,  3295  kills  shepherds,  takes 
cattle,  3375  camp  at  Jerusalem,  349, 
3585  disagreement  with  count  of  Tou¬ 
louse,  3585  enters  city,  3695  carnage 
and  plunder  in  Temple,  3715  at  Nablus, 
3955  Tiberias,  Galilee,  and  Haifa  be¬ 
stowed  upon,  3995  establishes  churches: 
called  to  principality  of  Antioch,  3995 
Baldwin  distrusts,  4245  mindful  of 
wrong  done  him  by  Baldwin:  gives  up 
Tiberias  and  Haifa,  retires  to  Antioch, 
4285  receives  pilgrims,  4335  asked  to 
hasten  to  Jaffa,  4415  receives  Apamea 
and  Laodicea,  449  5  Bohemond  resigns 
principality  of  Antioch  to,  45 1  j  in  siege 


of  Haran,  4565  Edessa  placed  under 
care  of,  459  >  Cecilia  destined  bride  of, 
4605  attacks  Ridwan,  463  5  compels  him 
to  flee,  4645  goes  to  relief  of  Edessa, 
4735  Baldwin  du  Bourg  and  Joscelin 
stir  up  war  against,  474?  valiant  re¬ 
sistance  against  Turks,  4^9?  leaves 
principality  to  Roger,  son  of  Richard, 
492,  5315  buried  in  portico  of  church 
of  the  Apostles,  493 
Tanis,  I:  515 

Tantais,  Turkish  satrap,  offers  to  sur¬ 
render  Rostrum  to  Baldwin  III,  II:  146, 
147 

Taranto,  11:  247 

Tarsus,  Tancred  lays  siege  to,  I:  1785 
taken  by  Baldwin:  pilgrims  die  before 
gates,  1825  fleet  from  West,  1835 
bishoprics,  II:  645  seized  by  Thoros, 
2755  Bohemond  III  arranges  exchange 
of,  with  Rupen,  491 

Taticius,  becomes  associated  with  Chris¬ 
tian  leaders,  I:  1505  advice  to  citizens 
of  Nicaea,  1655  leaves  army,  218 
Tax,  method  of  collecting  in  Jerusalem, 

II:  487 

Tekoah,  our  army  defeated  at,  11:  103 
Temple,  military  order  of  the,  see  Knights 
Templars 

Thaddeus,  apostle,  II:  144 
Thebans,  11:  330 

Thebeth,  lord  of  Mosul,  Aleppo  be¬ 
queathed  to,  II:  457 
Theobald,  cardinal-priest,  11:  22 
Theobald  II  of  Chartres,  II:  185,  360 
Theodora,  niece  of  Emperor  Manuel, 
weds  Baldwin  III,  II:  2735  king’s  devo¬ 
tion  to,  2755  Acre  given  to  as  dowry: 
abducted  by  Andronicus,  345 
Theodora,  wife  of  Bohemond  HI,  II:  453 
Theodora  Calusina,  11:  453 
Theodosiopolis,  bishoprics,  II:  65 
Theodosius,  patriarch  of  Constantinople, 
II:  450 

Theophilus,  I:  200 
Theophylact  [Trifulus],  II:  287 
Theopolis,  Antioch  called,  I:  200 
Theotwin,  bishop  of  Porto,  II:  184 
Thessaly,  Latin  atrocities  in,  11:  466 
Thierry,  count  of  Flanders,  married  to 
Sibylla,  daughter  of  Fulk,  II:  495  pil¬ 
grimage  to  Jerusalem,  1025  at  council 
of  Acre,  1855  at  Damascus,  1935  lands 
at  Beirut  with  Sibylla,  2645  to 

Antioch  with  Baldwin  III,  2655  king 


INDEX 


destines  Shayzar  for:  refuses  to  swear 
fealty  to  prince  of  Antioch,  268  j  de¬ 
cides  to  return  home,  277  j  arrives  in 
Syria,  3085  goes  to  aid  of  Antioch,  310 
Thomas,  apostle,  II:  144 
Thomas,  nephew  of  Thoros,  placed  in 
possession  of  uncle’s  domain,  II:  386 j 
driven  out  by  Malih,  387 
Thomas  a  Becket,  archbishop  of  Canter¬ 
bury,  slain,  II:  376 

Thomas  de  La  Fere,  I:  96,  112,  i73>  2^7) 

369 

Thoros  I,  Armenian  prince,  I:  41 6  j  raids 
upon  Cilicia,  II:  253  j  joins  Christians 
in  besieging  Shayzar,  266  j  seizes  Ci¬ 
licia;  Emperor  Manuel  takes,  by  sur¬ 
prise,  275  J  an  understanding  is  brought 
about:  takes  oath  of  liege  fealty  to 
emperor,  278  j  advice  disregarded,  with¬ 
draws  from  battle,  308 j  death:  Malih 
(5.«y.)  takes  possession  of  domains,  386 
Thoros,  ruler  of  Edessa,  I:  190?^,  1915 
dethroned  and  killed,  193 
Tibenin,  I:  469 

Tiberias,  bestowed  upon  Tancred,  I:  3991 
relinquished:  given  to  Hugh  de  Falken- 
berg,  428  i  region  laid  waste,  538  j  army 
to  assemble  at,  11:  106  j  camp  near,  147  ; 
attacked  by  Saladin,  4465  he  encamps 
at  Cavan,  473 
Titus,  I:  341 
Toron,  I:  469 
Tortona,  besieged,  II:  237 
Tortosa  [Antarados],  seized,  I:  3195  cap¬ 
tured  and  given  over  to  count  of  Tou¬ 
louse,  433,  442,  454  J  bishoprics,  II:  66 
Toulouse,  count  of,  see  Raymond  IV  of 
St.  Gilles  J  Alphonse,  count  of  Toulouse 
Trachonitis,  II:  151,  412 
Tripoli,  prisoners  at,  send  word  that  Arka 
should  be  besieged,  I:  3 1 8  j  battle  pro¬ 
posed  by  governor  of,  328  j  he  is  de¬ 
feated,  3295  obtains  treaty  at  great 
cost,  329;  Mount  of  the  Pilgrims  built, 
454;  siege  continued  by  William  Jor¬ 
dan,  462  J  Bertram  becomes  count  of, 
475  J  rivalry  between  William  Jordan 
and  Bertram  for  possession  of,  476  j 
Baldwin  I  besieges  and  captures,  477  j 
Montferrand  fortress  besieged  by  Zangi, 
II:  56 J  bishoprics,  66 j  Count  Pons 
(y.<r/.)  slain,  succeeded  by  Raymond  II 
(y.v.)  :  Damascenes  invade  land,  82  j 
extent  of  country,  1825  Baldwin  III 
calls  a  general  council  at,  2 1 3  j  king 


551 

and  Melisend  try  to  reconcile  count  and 
wife:  Raymond  killed,  214;  nobles 
swear  allegiance  to  countess,  2145  earth¬ 
quake,  370}  laid  waste  by  Saladin,  447 
Troyes,  council  of,  I:  525,  II:  40 
Tubania,  Saladin  established  at  springs 
of,  II:  494}  famine  in  our  army,  496} 
event  worthy  of  record,  498}  count  of 
Jaffa’s  conduct  of  affairs,  501 
Tughtigin  [Doldequinus],  king  of  Da¬ 
mascus,  I:  496,  501 }  joins  Egyptians, 
523}  invades  land  of  Antioch,  528} 
flight,  534}  lays  waste  land  of  Tiberias, 
538}  arrives  at  Tyre,  II:  13,  18}  pro¬ 
posals  of  peace,  1 9 }  alliance  with 
Bursuqi,  24}  marches  out  to  meet  our 
army,  2  7 }  attack  upon  foraging  party, 
4 1 }  betrayed  by  magistrate,  loses 
Banyas,  107 

Turbessel,  I:  490,  545 }  Emperor  John 
encamps  before,  II:  123}  Joscelin  II 
establishes  residence  at,  140}  sultan  of 
Iconium  lays  siege  to,  200 }  given  into 
power  of  Greeks,  209 
Turcopoles,  II:  331,  477 
Turkomans,  I:  72,  74,  528}  captured  by 
Baldwin  III  in  defiance  of  treaty,  11: 

255 

Turks,  condition  of  Christians  under  rule 
of,  I:  70,  79 }  origin  and  ancestry  of 
race,  7 1 }  in  Persia,  7 1 }  ordered  out 
of  country:  elect  Saljuq  king,  73}  con¬ 
quer  Orient,  invade  Egypt,  subjugate 
Jerusalem,  74}  sovereignty  of  Jeru¬ 
salem  wrested  from,  333 
Tyre,  city  of  refuge  for  Latins:  base  of 
operations  for  siege  of  Acre,  I:  39} 
camp  near,  3  3 1 }  fortress  built  over¬ 
looking,  469,  514}  failure  of  siege,  49 1 } 
agreement  between  barons  of  kingdom 
and  doge  of  Venice  on  siege  of,  550 } 
treaty,  552}  grants  to  Venetians,  555} 
siege  and  capture  of,  II:  1-21}  de¬ 
scribed,  I,  8}  environs,  5}  history,  7} 
status  and  condition  of  citizens,  8 }  con¬ 
ferred  upon  Fulk,  51 }  bishoprics,  64} 
place  among  suffragans  of  church  at 
Jerusalem,  65 }  assigned  to  Baldwin  III 
in  division  of  kingdom,  205 }  Frederick, 
archbishop  of,  dies,  402}  William  II 
succeeds  him,  41 1}  archbishops,  see 
Frederick}  Fulcher}  Peter}  Ralph,  the 
king’s  chancellor}  William  1}  William 
II 

Tyre,  cave  of,  seized  by  Shirkuh,  II:  312 


552 


INDEX 


Tyre,  diocese  of,  in  hands  of  Christians, 
n;  19 

Ubaydullah  [Abdallah],  II:  324 
Umar,  see  Omar 

Urban  II,  pope,  I:  3783  reception  of 
Peter  the  Hermit,  85 ;  crossed  Alps  into 
France,  875  sermon  on  behalf  of  pil¬ 
grimage,  8  8  ff.  5  enthusiasm  aroused  by, 

93 

Usamah  ibn-Munqidh,  I:  16,  II:  96^, 

252W 

Uthman,  II:  323 
Valenia,  I:  322 

Valley  of  Moses,  fortress,  II:  144 
Varennes,  count  of,  II:  176 
Venetians,  treaty  with  princes  of  Jerusalem 
in  matter  of  siege  of  Tyre,  I:  552  (^see 
also  Domenigo  Michielij  Fleet,  Vene¬ 
tian)  j  privileges  granted  to,  in  Jeru¬ 
salem,  553  i  in  Acre,  554  j  lawsuits: 
grants  in  Tyre  and  Ascalon,  $55  i  third 
of  Tyre  assigned  to,  11:  21;  join  our 
forces,  496 

Victor  III,  pope,  I:  86 
Victor  IV,  antipope,  Octavianus  consti¬ 
tuted  pope  under  name  of:  schism  arises 
in  church,  11:  281,  285 

Walter  de  Dommedard,  I:  287 
Walter  de  Falkenberg,  castellan  of  St. 

Omer,  II:  205,  213,  218 
Walter  de  Quesnoy,  II:  310 
Walter  de  Verra,  I:  331 
Walter  du  Mesnil  [Maisnilio],  11:  393 
Walter  of  Caesarea,  II:  7 1  j  challenges 
Hugh,  count  of  Jaffa,  72 j  at  council 
of  Acre,  1855  prowess  in  battle,  497 
Walter  of  Garland,  I:  157 
Walter  the  Penniless,  in  Hungary,  I:  97; 

reaches  Constantinople,  99  j  slain,  109 
Wieselburg  [Meseburg],  pilgrims  reach, 
I:  1135  besieged,  114 
William,  patriarch  of  Jerusalem,  succeeds 
Stephen:  character,  11:  435  effort  to 
prevent  Fulcher  from  going  to  Rome, 
63}  letters  of  Innocent  II  to,  63,  65  j 
controversy  with  Ralph,  patriarch  of 
Antioch,  64 j  causes  of  dispute,  68  j 
mediates  between  King  Fulk  and  Hugh, 
count  of  Jaffa,  73;  summoned  to 
Montferrand,  875  goes  to  relief  of 
king,  88 J  at  siege  of  Banyas,  iioj  at 
synod  of  Antioch,  1 1 8  j  crowns  Baldwin 


III  and  Melisend,  139J  dies,  succeeded 
by  Fulcher,  i6i 

William  I,  king  of  Sicily,  enmity  between 
Pope  Hadrian  IV  and,  II:  23 6  j  orders 
siege  of  Benevento,  2385  defeats  Greek 
forces  in  Apulia,  250;  dies,  312 
William  H,  king  of  Sicily,  Amaury  I 
and  bishops  appeal  to,  11:  360,  3775 
sends  fleet  to  Alexandria:  suffers  enor¬ 
mous  loss,  399 

William  I,  archbishop  of  Tyre,  appoint¬ 
ment  to  office,  II:  355  character,  365 
pallium  conferred  upon,  37  j  death,  62 
William  II,  archbishop  of  Tyre,  I:  35 
first  comprehensive  history  of  crusades, 
4;  life  and  writings,  4-265  contributors 
to  reconstruction  of  career,  5  5  influence 
on  later  writers,  37-445  love  of  country, 
55  >  g'rowth  as  an  historian,  347^5 
answer  to  Amaury  I  on  resurrection,  II: 
2995  sent  to  Constantinople,  3475  goes 
to  Rome,  369;  tutor  to  Baldwin  IV, 
397-985  succeeds  Ralph  as  king^s 
chancellor,  4045  indictment  of  con¬ 
temporaries,  4065  confirmed  as  arch¬ 
bishop  of  Tyre,  4115  officiates  at  funeral 
of  William  of  Montferrat,  4165  dele¬ 
gate  to  synod  at  Rome,  4365  library, 
438^^5  returns  from  Constantinople, 
449  5  greatest  disappointment  of  life, 
45i«5  wearied  by  disasters,  resolves  to 
abandon  pen,  5055  urged  to  continue 
work,  506 

-  works,  I:  26-28  5  account  of  Third 

Lateran  Council,  265  Gesta  Aituilrici 
regisy  15,  27,  28,  335  Gesta  H'tersolymt- 
tanorum  regunty  15,  i6,  27,  29,  30, 
33,  405  Gesta  orientalium  frincifumy 
16,  26,  27,  30,  40,  65 
William,  bishop  of  Acre,  embassy  to 
princes  of  West,  II:  3605  accompanies 
Amaury  I  to  Constantinople,  378  5  mur¬ 
dered,  3855  succeeded  by  Joscius,  386 
William,  bishop  of  Beirut,  II:  185 
William,  bishop  of  Orange,  I:  94,  95,  177, 
312,  381 

William,  brother  of  Godfrey,  I:  387 
William,  brother  of  Tancred,  I:  171 
William,  count  of  Forez,  I:  95,  158 
William,  count  of  Nevers,  II:  347 
William,  duke  of  Apulia,  II:  3  2 
William,  nobleman,  captures  wife  of 
Yaghi  Siyan,  I:  309 

William,  son  of  Henry  I  of  Englapd,  II: 

50 


INDEX 


William,  viscount  of  Melun,  surnamed  the 
Carpenter,  I:  112,  124,  267 
William  Amanjeu,  I:  95,  287 
William  Aversa,  II:  45 
William  de  Barris,  11:  274 
William  de  Bury,  lord  of  Tiberias,  I:  536, 
553)  55^)  kingdom  administered  by, 
547  j  at  siege  of  Tyre,  11:  145  estate 
near  Tyre,  20  j  mission  to  King  Fulk, 
38,  51  i  reckless  behavior  of  foraging 
party  under,  41  j  refugee’ at  Montfer- 
rand,  87 

William  de  Grandmesnil,  I:  267,  274,  277, 
279 

William  de  Mandeville,  count,  II:  419 
William  de  Montpellier,  I:  95,  287 
William  de  Sabran,  I:  356,  370 
William  de  Saone  [William  de  Sehunna], 
H:  53,  54 

William  Embriacus,  I:  358 
William  Jordan,  succeeds  Raymond,  count 
of  Toulouse,  I:  4625  opposes  claims 
of  Bertram:  cities  conceded  to,  4755 
death,  476 

William  Long  Sword,  son  of  Geoifrey 
Martel,  II:  49 

William  of  Cumliaco,  I:  3 1 5 

William  of  Poitou,  duke  of  Aquitaine,  I: 

430,  433)  442)  443)  11:  48,  59,  179 
William  Rufus,  king  of  England,  I:  398 


553 

William  the  Elder,  marquis  of  Montfer- 
rat,  11:  184 

William  the  Younger,  marquis  of  Mont- 
ferrat,  marriage:  death,  I:  18 j  son  of, 
recognized  as  heir  to  Baldwin  IV,  24, 
25,  II:  50  1 5  arrives  in  Syria,  marries 
sister  of  Baldwin  IV :  receives  Jaffa 
and  Ascalon,  4155  appearance,  char¬ 
acter  :  genealogy :  death,  416 

Yaghi  Siyan  [AoxianusJ,  Antioch  con¬ 
ferred  upon,  by  Malik  Shah,  I:  204  j 
fortifies  city:  musters  troops,  205  j  edict, 
23 1 J  causes  destruction  of  his  forces, 
233  J  belief  in  Firuz,  250  j  killed,  259  j 
wife  captured  and  restored,  309 
Yaruk,  governor  of  Ramlah,  I:  66 

Zacharias,  bishop  of  Jerusalem,  I:  62 
Zahir  [Daher],  caliph  of  Egypt,  I:  69 
Zangi  [Sanguis],  prince  of  Aleppo,  II: 
43^ J  lays  siege  to  Montferrand,  56, 
85)  87,  89}  makes  overtures  of  peace: 
fortress  surrendered  to,  9 1  j  aspires  to 
conquer  Damascus,  105  j  invades  land 
as  far  as  Rasaline:  withdraws  before 
our  army,  1065  failure  to  aid  Banyas, 
1105  lays  siege  to  Edessa,  140J  killed: 
succeeded  by  Nureddin  145 

Zeophir,  I:  483 


