TITLE: Deeds Done Beyond The Sea Volume II
IDENTIFIER: william-of-tyre-deeds-done-beyond-the-sea-volume-ii
URL: https://archive.org/download/william-of-tyre-deeds-done-beyond-the-sea-volume-ii/William of Tyre Deeds Done Beyond the Sea Volume II_djvu.txt

A History of 
DEEDS DONE BEYOND 


THE SEA 
ue 


Number XXXV of the 
RECORDS OF CIVILIZATION 
SOURCES AND STUDIES 
AUSTIN P. EVANS, £ditor 


& 


In Two Volumes: Volume II 


A F11story of 
DEEDS DONE BEYOND 


THE SEA 
we 
By WILLIAM 
Archbishop of Tyre 
we 
VOLUME TWO 


& 


Translated and Annotated by 
EMILY ATWATER BABCOCK 


and 


A. C. KREY 


& 


NEW YORK : MORNINGSIDE HEIGHTS 
COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY PRESS 


1043 


— 
peer 
bo ke 
Ey 
cathe 
an re 
Vas 


CopYRIGHT 1943 


CoLUMBIA UNIVERSITY Press, NEw York 


Foreign agent: OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS, Humphrey Milford, 
Amen House, London, E.C. 4, England, anv B. I. Building, Nicol 
Road, Bombay, India 


MANUFACTURED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 


RECORDS OF CIVILIZATION 
SOURCES AND STUDIES 


EDITED UNDER THE AUSPICES OF THE 


DEPARTMENT OF HISTORY, COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY 


Editor 
AUSTIN P. EVANS, pu.p. 


Professor of History 


Advisory Board 
DINO BIGONGIARI, Da Ponte Professor of Italian 
ROBERT HERNDON FIFE, t.u.p., Gebhard Professor of the 


Germanic Languages and Literatures 
CARLTON J. H. HAYES, uirt.p., Seth Low Professor of History 


ROGER SHERMAN LOOMIS, s.uirr., Associate Professor of 
English 


ROBERT MORRISON MaclIVER, titt.p., Lieber Professor of 
Political Philosophy and Sociology ° 


DAVID S. MUZZEY, pu.p., Gouverneur Morris Professor Emeritus 
of History 


JAMES T. SHOTWELL, tu.p., Bryce Professor Emeritus of the 
History of International Relations; Director of the Division of 
Economics and History, Carnegie Endowment for International 
Peace 


LYNN THORNDIKE, t.u.p., Professor of History 
WILLIAM L. WESTERMANN, t.u.p., Professor of Ancient History 


Book XIII. 
“Boox XIV. 
Book XV. 
Book XVI. 
Boox XVII. 
Book XVIII. 


Book XIX. 
Book XX. 


Book XXI. 


Book XXII. 
Book XXIII. 
ABBREVIATIONS 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 


INDEX 


CONTENTS 


Volume Two 


Capture of Tyre; Extension of Royal Influence to 
Other Latin States 


Fulk of Anjou as King of Jerusalem: Troubles in 
Northern Syria 


Emperor John Seeks to Extend His Influence over 
the Latin States 


Joint Rule of Baldwin III and His Mother Meli- 
send: The Second Crusade 


The Capture of Ascalon Offsets the Failure of the 
Second Crusade 


Latin Jerusalem at Its Height under Baldwin III: 
The Lure of Egypt 


Amaury I: The Struggle for Egypt, First Stage 


The Struggle for Egypt: Alliance with Emperor 
Manuel 


Baldwin IV, the Leper, Forced to Assume Rule of 
Jerusalem 


Conflict of Interests 


Could Jerusalem Be Saved by Raymond of Tripoli? 


Map 


The Regions of William of Tyre 


47 
94 
136 
184 


235 
295 


344 


397 
446 
505 
512 
513 
523 


THE THIRTEENTH BOOK BEGINS 


CAPTURE OF TYRE; EXTENSION OF ROYAL 
INFLUENCE TO OTHER LATIN STATES 


1. The antiquity and renown of Tyre is described. 


Tue city of Tyre dates from very remote times, according to the 
statement of Ulpian, a man learned in the law who was born there. In 
the Digest under the heading “De censibus,” he writes: “It is well 
known that certain colonies have Italian rights, as, for example, the 
magnificent colony of Tyre, in Syria of Phoenicia, my birthplace. This 
city, with its commanding position, great antiquity, and prowess in 
arms, held tenaciously to the treaty which she had made with the Ro- 
mans. The divine Severus, our emperor, granted Italian rights to this 
city as a reward for its signal loyalty toward the republic and the empire 
of Rome.” ! 

To this city, if we hark back to ancient stories, belonged King Agenor 
and his children, Europa, Cadmus, and Phoenix. It is from the latter, 
as the Phoenicians claim, that the whole region derives its name. The 
other son, Cadmus, founded the city of Thebes and was also the in- 
ventor of the Greek alphabet. Thus he bequeathed a distinguished 
name as an inheritance to his descendants. The remaining child, a 
daughter, gave her name to the third part of the globe, which is called 
Europe.” 

The citizens of Tyre were noted for keenness of mind and vivacity 
of disposition. They were the first who tried to designate by suitable 
characters the separate elements of the spoken word. They also claim 
the distinction of being the first of mankind to build treasure houses 
for the memory and to bequeath to posterity through the visible sym- 
bols of thought a knowledge of writing and speech. This fact is stated 
in histories of ancient times, and Lucan, the distinguished historian of 
the civil wars, mentions it as follows: “The Phoenicians were the first, 

1 Corpus juris civilis, Digest, L. Xv. 1. 


2 These statements hark back to the Polyhistor of Solinus and to the Metamorphoses 
of Ovid, with both of which William was familiar. 


2 CAPTURE OF TYRE 


if report may be trusted, who ventured to mark the length of tones 
by rude signs.” 3 

Tyre was also the first to make known the wonderful purple color 
made from the powdered conch and the precious murex. This color, 
famous there even today, is called Tyrian from the name of the city 
itself. 

From here also are said to have come Sychaeus and his wife, Elisa 
Dido, who founded in the diocese of Africa that wonderful city Car- 
thage, the rival of the Roman empire. They called it the Punic king- 
dom, Phoenician as it were, in remembrance of the land from which 
they had come. For the Carthaginians, ever mindful of their origin, 
always desired to be called Tyrians. Thus, in the first book of Maro 
we read, “There was an ancient city inhabited by colonists from 
Tyre”; + and also, “Trojan and Tyrian alike shall be treated by me 
with no discrimination.” ® 

In the beginning, Tyre had two names: Sor,°® in Hebrew, the name 
more generally used now, and Tyre. The latter name seems to be of 
Greek origin (it is, being interpreted, Angustia, or straits). This was 
certainly taken from the name of the founder, for, according to very 
ancient traditions, it is clear that Tyras, the seventh son of Japhet, the 
son of Noah, founded this city and gave it his own name. How famous 
was the renown of this city in early times may be readily inferred from 
the words of Ezekiel, to whom the Lord said: “Now, thou son of man, 
take up a lamentation for Tyrus; and say unto Tyrus, O thou that 
art situate at the entry of the sea, which art a merchant of the people 
for many isles . . . O Tyrus, thou hast said, I am of perfect beauty. 
Thy borders are in the midst of the seas, thy builders have perfected 
thy beauty. They have made all thy ship boards of fir trees of Senir: 
they have taken cedars from Lebanon to make masts for thee. Of the 
oaks of Bashan have they made thine oars; the company of the 
Ashurites have made thy benches of ivory, brought out of the isles 
of Chittim. Fine linen with broidered work from Egypt was that which 
thou spreadest forth to be thy sail; blue and purple from the isles of 
Elishah was that which covered thee.” 7 

Isaiah also has written of Tyre: “Pass ye over to Tarshish; howl, 


3 Lucan Pharsalia 111. 221. * Virgil Aeneid 1. 12. 5 Virgil Aeneid 1. 574. 

° Or “Sur,” which is used by the Arabs in our own time. Much of this antiquarian 
material was collected by Fulcher. 

7 Ez. 27:2-7. 


CAPTURE OF TYRE 3 


ye inhabitants of the isle. Is this your joyous city, whose antiquity is of 
ancient days? her own feet shall carry her afar off to sojourn. Who 
hath taken this counsel against Tyre, the crowning city, whose mer- 
chants are princes, whose traffickers are the honorable of the earth?” 8 

Hiram, who aided Solomon in building the temple of the Lord, was 
king of Tyre, as was also Apollonius, whose deeds are of widespread 
renown. To this city also belonged Abdimus, son of Abdaemon. He it 
was who with marvellous subtlety solved the sophistries of the many 
riddles and parables which Solomon used to send to Hiram, king of 
Tyre. In the eighth book of the Antiquities of Josephus one may read: 
“Menander, who translated the Antiquities of the Tyrians from the 
Phoenician into the Greek tongue, also mentions these two kings as 
follows: ‘On the death of Abibalo his son Hiram succeeded to the 
throne. He lived fifty-three years and reigned thirty-four. At that 
time Abdimus, son of Abdaemon, was in prison, he who used to solve 
the riddles which the king of Jerusalem sent.’ And again farther on 
we read, ‘Moreover, Solomon, the king of Jerusalem, had sent to 
Hiram, king of Tyre, certain riddles which he begged him to solve, 
with the understanding that if Hiram was unable to do so, he would 
pay a certain sum of money as a forfeit. And when Hiram acknowl- 
edged that he could not solve them and was about to suffer great 
pecuniary loss, the riddles which had been propounded were solved by 
a certain Abdimus, a Tyrian. This man in turn proposed other riddles 
with the condition that if Solomon could not guess them he, in his 
turn, must pay a large forfeit to King Hiram.’ ” ® Possibly this is the 
man who in popular and fabulous stories is called Marcolfus, of whom 
it is said that he used to solve the enigmas of Solomon and in return 
propounded others of equal difficulty for the king to guess. 

This same city still guards the body of Origen, as may be proved 
by the testimony of one’s own eyes. Jerome, writting to Pammachius 
and Oceanus in the letter which begins, “The schedules which you have 
sent” states the same thing: “It is now about a hundred and fifty years 
since Origen died at Tyre.” 1° 

To refer to scriptural history also, this is the native city of that 
admirable Canaanite woman whose great faith when she pleaded for 
her daughter, who was troubled by an evil spirit, the Saviour com- 


8 Is, 23: 6-8. ® Josephus Azz. vill. 5. 
10 Jerome Ad Pammachium et Oceanwm. 


4 CAPTURE OF TYRE 


mended, saying, “O woman, great is thy faith.” 11 She left a memorial 
of wondrous faith and praiseworthy patience to the daughters of her 
fellow citizens, for she was the first to teach them to pray to Christ the 
Saviour with the gifts of faith, charity, and hope, according to the 
words of the prophet who said, “and the daughter of Tyre shall be 
there with a gift.” 1° 

Tyre is the metropolis of all Phoenicia, which has always held the 
first rank among the provinces of Syria, both because it is rich with 
blessings of every description and also because of its large population. 


2. The lands and extent of Syria. 


Ir should be observed that the name Syria is used, sometimes in a 
broad sense as applying to the whole province, and again in a more 
limited way to designate only a part of the same. At times also, with the 
help of an additional word, it denotes some particular province. Thus 
Greater Syria contains many provinces within its boundaries. Begin- 
ning at the Tigris river, it extends as far as Egypt and from Cilicia 
to the Red sea. The first province of the lower part between the Tigris 
and the Euphrates is Mesopotamia, so called because it lies between 
two rivers. In the Greek language a river is called potamos, in the 
Latin fluvius. And because this is a part of Syria, it is often called in the 
scriptures Mesopotamia of Syria. 

The next largest province of this same Syria, after Mesopotamia, 
is Coelesyria, which contains the noble city of Antioch with all its de- 
pendent cities. The two Cilicias, both of which are parts of Syria, lie 
next to this on the north. To the south it borders on Phoenicia, dis- 
tinguished among the divisions of Syria. This country was for many 
years one single province, but now it is divided into two parts. The 
first of these is Phoenicia Maritima. Its metropolis is Tyre, the city of 
which we are now speaking, with its fourteen dependent cities. It ex- 
tends from the river of Valenia which flows by the castle of Margat, 
to the Pierced Rock now known as Districtum, near the very old city 
called Ancient Tyre. The cities which lie within this province are as 
follows: on the south, the first is Porphyrion, also called Haifa, and in 
the vernacular Caifas. The second is Ptolemais, also known as Acre. 
The third, to the east, is Banyas, which is Caesarea Philippi. The 


11 Mat. 15: 28. 12 Ps. 45:12. 


CAPTURE OF TYRE 5 


fourth, on the north, is Sarepta; the fifth is Sidon; the sixth is Beirut; 
the seventh, Jubail; the eighth, Botrium [Botron]; the ninth, Tripoli; 
the tenth, Artusia; the eleventh, Arka; the twelfth, Arados; the thir- 
teenth, Tortosa; and the fourteenth, Maraclea. 

The other Phoenicia is called Phoenicia Libanica. The capital of this 
is Damascus. It is sometimes called Syria also, as, for example, “the 
head of Syria is Damascus.” !* This Phoenicia was also later divided 
into two parts: Phoenicia of Damascus and Phoenicia of Emisena. 

The two Arabias are also parts of Syria. The capital of the first is 
Bostrum and that of the second is Petra of the Desert. Syria Sobal with 
its capital Sobal is also a part of Greater Syria. 

The three Palestines likewise form a part of Syria. The first, prop- 
erly called Judea, has as its capital the city of Jerusalem; the capital of 
the second is maritime Caesarea; and of the third, Scythopolis, also 
called Bethsan. The site of this latter city is now occupied by Nazareth. 

The last province of Greater Syria, toward Egypt, is Idumea. 


3. Describes the environs of Tyre and the advantages which 
it offers. 


Nor only was Tyre extremely well fortified, as has been stated, but 
in addition it was famous for its unique beauty of location and the fer- 
tility of its soil. Although lying in the sea itself, entirely surrounded 
by the waves like an island, yet it had before its gates extensive arable 
fields, excellent in every respect, while a level plain of rich and pro- 
ductive soil stretched out from the city itself and furnished the people 
of Tyre with abundant supplies. 

Although this area may seem small compared with that of other 
regions, yet its great productivity compensates for its limited extent, 
and its exceeding fertility makes it equal to acres of boundless extent. 
Nor is it, in fact, contained within narrow limits. On the south it ex- 
tends toward Acre to the place now called the District of the Scan- 
dalium, four or five miles distant from Tyre, while in the other direc- 
tion it stretches out toward Sarepta and Sidon for about the same 
distance. At its narrowest extent it is about two miles wide, at its 
widest about three. There are many springs in this plain from which 
flow clear and salubrious streams, whose cooling waters afford delight- 
ful refreshment in hot weather. 


13 Ts, 7:8. 


6 CAPTURE OF TYRE 


The most celebrated of these and the one best known to the world 
is believed to be the one of which Solomon speaks in the Song of Solo- 
mon: “A fountain of gardens, a well of living waters, and streams from 
Lebanon.” +4 

These waters have their origin in the lowest part of the plain and 
do not rise in the mountains as do many other springs. They seem in 
fact to gush forth as from the very depths of the abyss. Yet they have 
been artificially raised into the upper air by the care and skill of man, 
so that they water abundantly all the surrounding region and in their 
beneficent course render the plain available for many purposes. By 
means of an admirable structure of stonework rivalling iron in its 
strength, the water has been raised and conducted aloft to the height 
of ten feet. Thus, the spring which in its natural low position was of 
little use, when elevated by artificial means contrary to nature, has be- 
come a benefit to the whole surrounding country and pours forth its 
waters in abundance for the production of crops. 

As one draws near to examine this remarkable work, the outer tower 
looms up prominently but no water is visible. On reaching the top, 
however, one sees that a great reservoir of water has been brought to- 
gether here which is distributed thence to the adjacent fields by means 
of aqueducts of equal height and massive structure. For the convenience 
of those who wish to ascend to the top of the tower, a staircase of solid 
stone is provided, the incline of which is so gradual that even those on 
horseback can ride without difficulty to the top. 

All the country round about derives immense benefits from these 
waters. Not only do they supply gardens and delightful orchards 
planted with fruit trees, but they irrigate the sugar cane also. From 
this latter crop sugar (zachara) is made, a most precious product, very 
necessary for the use and health of mankind, which is carried from here 
by merchants to the most remote countries of the world. 

A very fine quality of glass, also, is marvellously manufactured out 
of sand which is found in this same plain. This is carried to far distant 
places and easily surpasses all products of the kind. It offers a material 
suitable for making most beautiful vases which are famous for their 
transparency. In this way, also, the fame of the city is spread abroad 
among foreign peoples and the profit of the merchants is increased 
manifold. 


14Ca. 4:15. 


CAPTURE OF TYRE 7 


Tyre possessed not only all these rich resources, but in addition, it 
had the advantage of incomparable fortifications, which will be spoken 
of in the following pages. Because of its many advantages and its strong 
defenses, Tyre was most precious and agreeable to the prince of Egypt, 
who was practically the most puissant of all [Oriental potentates]. The 
entire country from Laodicea in Syria to the Libyan desert was under 
his absolute control. He regarded Tyre as the bulwark of his kingdom 
and as the seat of his empire. He had therefore carefully provided it 
with food and arms and had garrisoned it with stalwart warriors, for 
he believed that if he could keep the head uninjured, all the other 
parts of the body would remain safe. 


4. Relates how in earlier time it had often been besteged. 


On the sixteenth of February, therefore, as we have said above, our 
two armies arrived before the city of Tyre and blockaded it as far as 
was possible. But, in the words of the prophet, this city lay “at the entry 
of the sea,” 1° and was surrounded by water on all sides except for a 
strip of land equal to the distance that an arrow could be shot. Ancient 
writers say that it was once really an island entirely separated from the 
mainland. They state that when Nebuchadnezzar, the powerful As- 
syrian prince, was besieging it, he wished to connect it with the land 
but did not finish the work. The prophet Ezekiel mentions this siege 
as follows: “Behold, I will bring upon Tyrus Nebuchadnezzar king of 
Babylon, a king of kings, from the north, with horses, and with chariots, 
and with horsemen, and companies, and much people. He shall slay 
with the sword thy daughters in the field: and he shall make a fort 
against thee, and cast a mount against thee, and lift up a buckler against 
thee,” and so on.1® 

Josephus also mentions this siege in the tenth book of the Antiquities, 
as follows: “Diocles also mentions this king in the second book of the 
Colonies; and Philostrates has said in his histories of India and Phoe- 
nicia, that this king besieged Tyre for three years and ten months at 
the time when Jotabel was ruling over Tyre. After this man, Alexander 
of Macedon connected Tyre with the land and then seized the city by 
force of arms.” 17 

Josephus speaks of this siege in the eleventh book of the Antiquities 


18 Ez, 27:3. 16 Ez, 26: 7-8. 17 Josephus Ant. X. 11. 


8 CAPTURE OF TYRE 


also, saying: “So Alexander came to Syria and took Damascus, and, 
after subjugating Sidon, he besieged Tyre.” ** And further on: “Be- 
cause he persevered vigorously in the siege he took that city and after 
he had taken it, he went on to the city of Gerasa.” And again: “After 
besieging Tyre for seven months and Gerasa for two, Sanballat died.” 

Before this time, Salmanassar had also besieged it and had invaded 
the whole of Phoenicia. Of him also, Josephus speaks in the ninth book 
of the Antiquities saying: “For he made an expedition against Tyre in 
the reign of Eluleus. Menander, who wrote the history of the times 
and translated into Greek the Antiquities of Tyre, also speaks of this, 
as follows: ‘Eluleus reigned thirty-six years. On the revolt of the 
Scythians he sailed to them and reduced them to submission, but Sal- 
manassar, king of the Assyrians, rose against them a second time and 
invaded all Phoenicia. But after he had made peace with all of them, 
he retired. Then the cities of Sidon and Arka and Ancient Tyre and 
many others deserted Tyre and surrendered to the same king of the 
Assyrians. And since Tyre had not submitted, the king again proceeded 
against her, the Phoenicians furnishing him with sixty ships and eighty 
galleys with oars. The Tyrians sailed against them in twelve ships, 
and, having scattered the enemy’s fleet, they took five hundred pris- 
oners, whereby the prestige of Tyre was greatly increased. But the 
king of Assyria returned. He placed guards over the river and the 
aqueducts of the city and thus prevented the Tyrians from obtaining 
water. This condition of affairs lasted five years during which time 
they had to drink from wells which they dug. These things were writ- 
ten in the archives of Tyre concerning Salmanassar, king of As- 
syria.’ ?? 2° 


5. The city is described and the status and condition of the citi- 
zens explained. 


Tuis city, as we have said, is like an island, for it is surrounded by a 
stormy sea, dangerous because of hidden rocks of varying height. It 
is hazardous, therefore, for pilgrims and others unacquainted with the 
locality to approach Tyre by water. For unless they have a pilot who 
is familiar with the surrounding sea they cannot reach the city without 
danger of shipwreck. 


18 Josephus Anz. XI. 8. . 19 Josephus Ant. 1X. 14. 


CAPTURE OF TYRE 9 


On the sea side, Tyre was surrounded by a double wall with towers 
of goodly height at equal distances apart. On the east, where the ap- 
proach by land lies, it has a triple wall with enormously high and mas- 
sive towers so close together that they almost touch one another. There 
was a broad mole also, through which the citizens could easily let in 
the sea from both sides. On the north, its entrance guarded by two 
towers, was the inside harbor which lay within the walls of the city. 
The outer shore of the island received the first violence of the waves 
and broke the force of the raging sea. Thus a safe harborage for vessels 
was formed between the island and the land, which was entirely shel- 
tered from all winds except that from the north. 

Into this harbor the fleet was directed and stationed in a sheltered 
place. The army was already in possession of the orchards near the 
city and had established the camp in a circle round the town. This 
position prevented the citizens from going in and out and compelled 
them to remain within the walls. 

The city was subject to two lords: the caliph of Egypt held two 
parts of it as overlord and had granted the third part to the king of 
Damascus, because he was near at hand. He trusted that the latter 
would not molest it but would, on the contrary, assist the citizens in 
dangerous crises. 

There were in Tyre many noble citizens of great wealth. Through 
their constant trading voyages to most of the provinces along the 
Mediterranean sea, these merchants had brought back vast riches and 
a great amount of foreign merchandise to swell the resources of the 
city. Moreover, rich and distinguished citizens from Caesarea, Acre, 
Sidon, Jubail, Tripoli, and other coastal cities which had now fallen 
under our power, had fled to Tyre to seek the protection of its fortifica- 
tions. These people had bought homes for themselves in the city at a 
high price. For it seemed inconceivable that a city so strongly fortified 
could, under any circumstances, fall into the hands of the Christians. 
Then, as now, it was regarded as a matchless bulwark, an incomparable 
tower of strength, without an equal in the entire region.”° 


20 It is difficult to appreciate the fact, in view of his sympathetic account, that Wil- 
liam is here speaking of Muslim merchants. The description of Tyre and its surround- 
ings is that of an eyewitness, and the account of the siege is derived largely from 
eyewitnesses. None of William’s written sources is nearly so full or vivid. The divi- 
sion of ownership between the Egyptians and the Damascenes was an emergency ar- 
rangement to procure the help of Damascus, according to Qalanisi (H. A. R. Gibb, 
trans., The Damascus Chronicle, p. 170), and had been made just before the siege. 


10 CAPTURE OF TYRE 


6. The blockade is established and the leaders assigned to special 


positions therein. The city is besieged in hostile manner. 


Arter placing the baggage in order and making all other arrange- 
ments to the best possible advantage, the Christians drew up all their 
ships on dry land near the harbor, with the exception of one galley 
that was kept ready for any emergency which might arise. They then 
dug a deep ditch from the sea outside to that within, thus enclosing 
and protecting the entire army. From the large stores which the Vene- 
tians had brought with them, suitable material for building engines 
was brought, and workmen were summoned to build machines of 
various kinds. 

The patriarch and the nobles of the realm, acting in the place of 
the king, called together carpenters and skilful builders, provided the 
necessary materials, and directed them to build a tower of great height. 
From the top of this, the fighters could engage in close combat with 
the defenders in the towers on the walls and could overlook the entire 
city. Machines capable of hurling huge stones which would shatter 
the walls and towers and carry consternation to the hearts of those 
within the city were also ordered built. 

The doge and his company, in emulation of the king’s party, also 
built similar machines and set them up in strategic positions. They 
carried on the work with the utmost diligence and pressed on without 
flagging. Their enthusiastic efforts gradually hemmed in the citizens 
more and more, while the engines never ceased to work havoc upon 
the place. Constant attacks and skirmishes gave the defenders no chance 
to rest. The latter, however, anxious to defend themselves, strove 
to repulse the attacks of the Christians and, in turn, to inflict injury 
on their adversaries. They, too, built machines within the city from 
which they launched huge rocks that fell without intermission upon 
our towers. The fear inspired by these flying stones enabled the foe 
to become masters of that particular section, for none of the Christians 
dared to remain in that vicinity. Even those whose lot it was to guard 
the engines ventured to approach them only at the utmost speed, nor 
could they remain within except at extreme peril. From their stations in 
the high towers, the enemy, armed with bows and ballistae, poured 
forth showers of javelins and arrows; and meanwhile a never-ceasing 


CAPTURE OF TYRE it 


torrent of huge rocks hurled from within the city pressed the Christians 
so hard that they scarcely dared to thrust forth a hand. 

Nevertheless, our people in the siege towers returned blow for blow 
with equal fury and repelled force by force. Thus the defenders upon 
the walls and in the towers were compelled to put forth such intense 
efforts that, though often relieved during the day, they were unable 
to endure the burden of the conflict. Meanwhile, those who were man- 
ning the machines, instructed by experts in the art of throwing missiles, 
continued to hurl great stones with such effect that the towers and 
walls were nearly demolished by the force of the blows. Dust rose in 
clouds from the shattered stones and loosened mortar and formed a 
screen between the fighters, so that it was imposible for the defenders 
on the walls and towers to see the Christians. Whatever flying missiles 
passed beyond the ramparts and towers crashed with force into the city 
and reduced to minute fragments great buildings and their inhabitants. 

In the country outside, both cavalry and infantry forces fought with 
manly courage in almost daily skirmishes against the enemy who sallied 
forth from the city to engage them. Frequently it happened that our 
men challenged those within the city to battle, and again it was the 
citizens who took the initiative in attacking the besiegers. 


7. The Damascenes in the city fight with fiery courage, but the 
citizens themselves are somewhat remiss. 


Tuus day by day in a doubtful contest the Christians and the towns- 
people continued to try each other’s mettle, now by attacks from the 
machines and now by fighting around the gates, for each side was exert- 
ing itself to the utmost to provoke the other. At this juncture, Pons, 
count of Tripoli, who had been summoned by the princes of the realm, 
arrived with a noble retinue. His coming seemed to double the strength 
of the Christians and to reanimate their courage. To the enemy, on 
the other hand, it brought fear and a sense of the futility of resisting. 

There were in the city seven hundred knights of Damascus, whose 
example inspired the citizens with courage to resist, for the latter, 
though noble, were weak and effeminate in character and not at all ac- 
customed to warfare. These Damascenes, by their example, tried to 
animate the townspeople to resistance and to furnish them the aid 
they so sorely needed. Nevertheless, even they finally lost interest 


12 CAPTURE OF TYRE 


and wisely declined the burden which they could not carry alone. For 
they saw that our strength was daily increasing and our efforts succeed- 
ing, while the resources of the besieged were gradually lessening and 
their forces were daily imperilled. Although they did not advise the 
citizens to surrender, still they did not encourage them to place much 
reliance on their strength. 

Then, as now, there was but one entrance to the city and a single 
gate. As we have said before, the entire city was almost an island, sur- 
rounded by water on all sides, except at a certain narrow place through 
which was the approach to the gate. At this point, various engagements 
both of cavalry and infantry were continually going on, as is usual 
under such circumstances. 


8. The people of Ascalon march to Jerusalem to attack the city. 
But on the return they meet with harsh treatment from the 
CHIZENS. 


Tus, then, was the situation at Tyre. In the meantime, the people of 
Ascalon perceived that the kingdom was stripped of its troops and 
that the entire strength of the land was fully occupied in the siege of 
Tyre. Accordingly they at once took advantage of the opportunity. 
Crossing the intervening plain with all their forces, they hurried toward 
the mountains on which Jerusalem was built. They expected to find 
the Holy City almost deserted and hoped to carry off as prisoners any 
of the inhabitants who might incautiously venture forth. Their arrival 
was entirely unexpected, and they killed about eight of the townspeople 
who were taken unaware in their fields and vineyards. 

But the Christians, though few in number, were yet glowing with 
faith and afire with righteous zeal for their country, their wives, and 
their children. They seized their arms and, issuing forth from the 
city, rushed as with one mind against the foe. For the space of three 
hours the two hostile forces gazed upon one another. The Christians 
dared not attack their adversaries, for their forces were foot soldiers 
only, while the Ascalonites, for their part, realized that it was impos- 
sible without great danger to remain long in that position. Nor was it 
safe so near the city to engage a courageous and obstinate people who 
were determined to resist to the utmost. Accordingly they prepared 
to beat a hasty retreat. The Christians followed them cautiously for 
a short distance and succeeded in killing forty-two men, besides captur- 


CAPTURE OF TYRE 13 


ing four knights and seventeen horses. Then, having successfully ac- 
complished their purpose, they turned back to Jersusalem in entire 
safety.?? 


9. Tughtigin, king of the Damascenes, arrives to relieve the 
siege. The Christians march against him. He abandons his 
purpose in terror. 


In the meantime, the Tyrians, wearied by repeated vigils, constant 
skirmishes, and endless hardships, began to come forth to fight less 
often and performed their allotted duties less vigorously. They were 
amazed beyond measure that a city to which crowds of people flocked 
almost daily both by land and by sea, a city which was usually filled 
to repletion with all sorts of merchandise brought thither by both routes, 
should be reduced to such straits that neither citizens nor strangers 
could enter or leave it. Moreover, the food supply was giving out, and 
scarcely any provisions now remained. After taking counsel together, 
therefore, they wrote to the caliph of Egypt and also to the king of 
Damascus to inform them of the desperate situation that prevailed. 
Most earnestly they begged their lords to hasten to their aid, for 
affairs at Tyre were now almost hopeless. They set forth the persever- 
ance of the enemy, whose strength was increasing day by day; they 
described their own weakness, the lack of food supplies, and their in- 
tolerable situation. This action roused their spirits somewhat, and while 
awaiting the hoped-for aid they encouraged each other to keep up the 
usual resistance. Many who were so dangerously wounded that they 
were unable to fight themselves yet urged the others with all their 
might to resist. 

Word was presently received that Tughtigin, king of the Damas- 
cenes, moved by the letters and messages of the besieged, had left 
Damascus with an innumerable force of Turks and a large number of 
knights. He was now encamped in the vicinity of Tyre on the banks 
of a river about four miles from the city. It was furthermore rumored 
that an Egyptian fleet, much larger than usual and equipped with more 
than the ordinary number of armed soldiers, would arrive within three 
days with reinforcements of men and the necessary food supplies for 
the Tyrians. The king of Damascus was said to be expecting still more 


21 This effort to distract the army from the siege of Tyre by an attack on Jerusalem 
is told by Fulcher, who was there at the time, and is copied by William. 


14 CAPTURE OF TYRE 


reserves. For that reason he had prudently deferred crossing the river 
and attacking the Christians until the fleet should arrive, in order that, 
while he was fighting with us, the naval force might have free and 
unhindered entrance to the city.?? 

When this news reached our camp, the leaders conferred together 
and, after careful deliberation, decided to divide the entire host into 
three sections. The entire cavalry forces and the mercenary infantry 
were to issue forth from the camp under command of the count of 
Tripoli and William de Bury, the king’s constable and administrator 
of the realm. If it should be necessary to fight with the Damascene, 
this division was to engage him with the help of the Lord. The doge 
of Venice and his forces were to set sail in the galleys, and, if they en- 
countered the fleet of the Egyptians, they were to try the fortune of 
war and, as valiant warriors, put the enemy to the test of the sword. 
The third division consisted of the people who had come thither to take 
part in the siege from all the cities of the realm and the greater part 
of the Venetians. To this contingent was assigned the duty of guarding 
the machines and movable towers. They were to see to it that the fighters 
in the siege engines did not slacken their efforts, that the hurling ma- 
chines continued their usual assaults, and that the fighting before the 
gate was not interrupted. 

This plan seemed good to all, and it was deemed expedient that it 
be put into immediate execution. Accordingly, the count of Tripoli and 
the king’s constable with all the cavalry squadrons rode out of the 
camp against the enemy. They advanced two miles, yet the foe did 
not venture to appear. Nevertheless, it was evident that Tughtigin 
had originally placed his camp by the river with heart and soul intent 
on crossing the stream. But when he learned through reports that our 
army had adopted such prudent plans, he decided that it would be 
dangerous to risk an encounter with men so wise and valiant. Accord- 
ingly, he ordered the trumpet to sound the summons calling his men 
together and gave the command to return home. 

The doge arranged his fleet in battle formation and sailed down to 
Alexandrium which is about six miles from Tyre. This city is generally 
known today as Scandalium. Here he learned that the king of Damascus 
had returned home. As there was no sign of the Egyptian fleet which 


22 The participation of the Damascenes in the effort to defeat the besiegers is in gen- 
eral confirmed by Qalanisi (Gibb, Chronicle, pp. 170-72). 


CAPTURE. OF PYRE 15 


he was expecting, he again drew up the galleys on the shore, and all 
returned to the camp to press forward the siege more vigorously than 
ever. 


10. The townspeople set our machines on fire. Our troops put up 
a vigorous resistance. The leaders send to Antioch for a man 
skilled in the art of throwing missiles. 


One day it happened that some young men of Tyre bound themselves 
together by a solemn pledge and determined to steal into our camp 
to set fire to our machines and movable towers. In this way they hoped 
to win the esteem of their fellow citizens and acquire undying fame in 
the eyes of posterity. In pursuance of this plan, they stealthily left the 
city and succeeded in setting fire to an engine which was of great use 
to us. The act was seen by the Christians, however, who immediately 
flew to arms and tried to quench the flames by pouring on quantities of 
water. An admirable deed was wrought there which is worthy of record. 
A certain young man of unusual character and courage saw that the 
machine was on fire. He mounted to the top and kept pouring on water 
as fast as it was brought to him by others. The defenders who were 
stationed in the towers with bows and ballistae noticed him at once and 
immediately directed all their efforts toward him. But, although his 
position made him a target, as it were, for their arrows, yet their 
efforts were in vain. Not a single wound did he receive during the 
whole day. But the young men who had set the fire were caught by 
our soldiers and to a man perished under the avenging sword in the 
sight of their friends. 

Presently the Christians noticed that a machine within the city was 
aiming enormous stones so accurately against our siege towers that 
both were being seriously injured. Since there was no one in camp 
who possessed the expert skill necessary for aiming and hurling the 
mighty missiles, they sent to Antioch for a certain Armenian named 
Havedic, who was said to be very proficient in that art. He came im- 
mediately and displayed so much skill in directing the machines and 
hurling the great stone missiles that whatever was assigned to him as 
a target was at once destroyed without difficulty. As soon as he reached 
the army, he was granted an honorable salary from the public treasury, 
so that he might maintain himself in his customary magnificence. He 
applied himself earnestly to the work for which he had been summoned 


16 CAPTURE OF TYRE 


and showed so much skill that the war seemed to be carried on with 
renewed strength. In fact it assumed the aspect of a new war in the eyes 
of the Tyrians, whose woes were greatly increased by his coming.”* 


11. Balak is slain at Hierapolis. The news causes great joy in the 
Christian army, and the siege of the city is pressed on with 
even more vigor. 


Wuite these events were happening at Tyre, Balak, the powerful 
Turkish satrap in whose chains the lord king was still held, was besieg- 
ing the city of Hierapolis. During the progress of the siege, he sum- 
moned the governor of the city to him with conciliatory but crafty 
words. The latter, a simple and credulous man, trusted Balak’s words 
and at once repaired to his presence. But even as he stood before him 
Balak ordered him to be beheaded. 

Now when the elder Joscelin,?* count of Edessa, learned that Balak 
was besieging a city in his own neighborhood, he feared that if the 
present ruler were driven out, another, far more dangerous to him, 
might be placed there. He therefore assembled a large force from the 
land of Antioch and from his own domains as well and hastened against 
the satrap’s army. After locating the enemy, he drew up his own lines 
in battle formation and made a sudden attack. The foe had been routed 
and forced to flee, when Joscelin happened to fall in with Balak him- 
self. Entirely unaware that this was the commander of the army, he 
slew him with the sword, threw him to the ground, and cut off his 
head. This was clearly the fulfillment of Balak’s dream. For he who 
cuts off a man’s head and puts an end to both his sight and his life may 
be said with truth to have torn out his eyes.?5 

Joscelin was a man of foresight and very wide experience. He im- 
mediately charged a young man to carry the head of the prince to the 
army, that it too might rejoice over the news of this good luck. The 
messenger was directed to go by way of Antioch, that the townspeople 
as well as the troops might be informed of this great success. The ar- 
rival of the youth rejoiced the hearts of all and raised the happiness 
of the Christians to the highest point. 


28 Fulcher does not mention this expert artillery service, but William’s account is too 
specific to be denied, 

24 William’s awareness of both Joscelin II and Joscelin III led to the qualification 
of Joscelin I, for which the reader is not.yet ready. 

25 See Book XII, chap. 19. 


CAPTURE OF TYRE 17 


Pons, count of Tripoli, with his following was present in the camp. 
He was ever obedient to the patriarch and the other leaders as one 
of the lowest servants and always showed himself modestly zealous 
for the public welfare. That he might show his respect for the count 
who had sent the messenger and also because of the importance of the 
mission, he raised the young man to knighthood and conferred upon 
him the arms of that rank.?® 

When those who were with us on the expedition heard of this act 
they raised their hands to heaven and began to praise, bless, and glorify 
God who “4s terrible in His doing toward the children of men.” ?7 
Then, indeed, were our troops fired with more ardent enthusiasm. 
With courage and strength renewed, they pressed on still more ear- 
nestly the work which they had undertaken and, by keeping up con- 
tinual skirmishes, refused to allow the beleaguered city any respite. 
The citizens, on the other hand, were suffering desperately from fam- 
ine, for their provisions were now entirely exhausted, and since no hope 
of aid supported them, they began to relax their efforts somewhat. 

One day a noteworthy event happened. Some young men of the 
city, expert swimmers, ventured out from the inner harbor to the one 
outside and succeeded in reaching the galley which, as we have men- 
tioned before, was always lying on the sea outside ready for any 
emergency. They had brought with them a rope which they fastened 
firmly to the vessel. They then cut the moorings and began to tow the 
boat after them to the city. But the lookouts guarding the towers saw 
the attempt and gave the alarm. Our men, roused by the summons, 
hurried to the shore. Before they could decide what to do, however, 
the youths had already towed the vessel inside the city harbor. The 
galley was manned by five men who had been assigned to guard it. 
One of these was killed, but the other four leaped into the sea and 
swam safely to shore. 


12. While the Christian army is engaged in the siege, the people 
_of Ascalon again invade the country around Jerusalem. 


Tue Ascalonites, like persistent gnats, were ever on the alert to injure 
the Christians. They were well aware that the flower of the army was 
still engaged in the siege of Tyre, and that, consequently, the whole 


26 This is an early instance of such reward for such service. at Ps 6625. 


18 CAPTURE OF TYRE 


land was without defenders, exposed to the incursions of the enemy. 
Accordingly, they once more assembled their forces and went up to 
the hill country of Judea. There they made a sudden attack on a place 
called Bilin,?* about five or six miles to the north of Jerusalem, better 
known today as Mahumaria. They took the town by force and put 
most of the inhabitants to the sword. The old men, however, with the 
women and children, retreated to the tower and thus escaped death. 

The Ascalonites spread unchecked over all the adjacent country. 
They slaughtered or took captive all whom they encountered, for no 
one hindered them in their mad course as they raged according to 
their own good pleasure against all who dwelt in that vicinity. 


13. The citizens struggle with grievous famine. They prepare to 
surrender. Tughtigin hastens to their aid but in vain. The 
city capitulates to the Christian army. 


Meanwulte, the Tyrians, driven beyond endurance by the terrible 
straits of famine, began to consider other plans. Gathering in groups 
they began to discuss how to put an end to the miseries which they 
were suffering. Far better would it be, they thought, to surrender the 
city to the enemy, and thus liberated, flee to other cities of their nation, 
than to waste away through hunger at Tyre—to look on, helpless to 
aid, while their wives and children perished of starvation. 

After the situation had been discussed by groups in this way, the 
matter was finally carried by unanimous consent to the elders and 
governors of the city and to the people in general. The entire city as- 
sembled in a public meeting where the facts were laid before them and 
carefully considered. The opinion was unanimous that conditions so 
terrible must be brought to an end and peace obtained, no matter at 
what risk or on what terms. 

In the meantime, the king of Damascus had learned of the mis- 
fortunes of the Tyrians and was moved by their desperate plight. He 
summoned his allies from every direction and went down to the sea, 
where he had been before. Again he encamped near the river close 
to Tyre. When the Christians heard of this, they rightly feared the 
purpose of his coming and again drew up their lines in battle forma- 


28 Fulcher and the documents of the time call this place Birrum or Bire (see H. Hagen- 
meyer, ed., Fulchert Carnotensis historia Hterosolymitana, p. 731, note 4). 


CAPTURE OF TYRE 19 


tion, in anticipation of an engagement before the gates. Yet they did 
not swerve from their purpose and continued to press on the siege 
without interruption. 

The king of Damascus now sent wise and discreet men as envoys 
to the chiefs of our army, namely, the patriarch, the doge of Venice, 
the count of Tripoli, William de Bury, and the other lords of the 
realm, They bore proposals of peace couched in conciliatory language. 
After much discussion and many disputes, an agreement was reached 
between the two parties: the city was to be surrendered to the Christians 
on condition that those citizens who wished be allowed to depart freely 
with their wives and children and all their substance, while those who 
preferred to remain at Tyre should be granted permission to do so and 
their homes and possessions guaranteed to them.?® 

But the common people and those of the second rank among the 
Christians, on learning the character of the negotiations which the bar- 
ons were considering, became very angry that the city should be sur- 
rendered on such terms, for, in that case, they would be deprived of 
the plunder and spoils which would fall to their lot were the place 
taken by force. Accordingly, utterly disagreeing with the wishes of 
their superiors, they unanimously determined to seize upon the results 
of their labors under the necessity of war. The saner will of the more 
prominent men finally prevailed, however; the city was taken over and 
an opportunity of leaving without hindrance was given to the towns- 
people, as provided in the pact. 

Then, in sign of victory, the king’s standard was raised on the tower 
over the city gate; in like fashion, the banner of the doge of Venice 
was placed over the one called the Green tower; while from the tower 
of Tranaria floated gloriously the colors of the count of Tripoli. 

Long before the city was taken or even besieged, however, the greater 
part of the diocese of Tyre had already passed into the hands of the 
Christians. All the hilly country near the city, extending nearly to 
Lebanon, both strongholds and fields, was held in peaceful possession 
by a very powerful nobleman who lived in the mountains. Humphrey 
of Toron, father of the younger Humphrey who has since been made 


29 Qalanisi accords Tughtigin credit for the extremely favorable terms granted to 
the Muslim inhabitants of Tyre. He also states that only the extremely old or the rich 
remained in Tyre, but there is reason to believe that a considerable number remained 
(see Gibb, Chronicle, pp. 171-72). 


20 CAPTURE OF TYRE 


the royal constable,®° held in undisputed right all the lands as far as 
the fourth or fifth milestone from Tyre. In these same mountains, he 
possessed a castle, strongly fortified both by its location and by artificial 
means, and fron it he often made sudden sallies against the citizens 
of Tyre. Moreover, the lord of Tiberias, William de Bury, the royal 
constable, and Joscelin, count of Edessa, who had been his predecessor 
as lord of Tiberias, also held large estates in these mountains, from 
which they often laid dangerous and unexpected pitfalls for Tyre. To 
the south also, on the shore six or seven miles from Tyre, near a clear 
and beautiful spring, King Baldwin of precious memory, the predeces- 
sor of Baldwin II, had built a castle called Scandalium.*+ For a long 
time, Tyre had suffered greatly from recurring attacks proceeding 
from these points and consequently was less able to resist the im- 
portunity of the Christians. 

The venerable Odo is said to have died on this expedition. He had 
been ordained metropolitan of the church at Tyre while the city was 
still in the power of the enemy and is said to have been consecrated by 
the patriarch of Jerusalem. 


14. After the surrender of the city, the townspeople go out to 
visit the camp. The Christians take possession of the city. 


TueEn the townspeople, worn out by the long siege, emerged from the 
city and hastened to our camp. They were eager to relieve their weari- 
ness and to see what manner of men these Christians might be. For as 
if made of iron, so patient in hardships and so trained in the practice 
of arms were they that, in a few months, they had reduced Tyre to the 
extremity of destinitien and had compelled that splendid city, with its 
magnificent fortifications, to submit to the hardest of terms. It gave 
them great delight to examine the form of the machines, to gaze at 
the height of the movable towers and the variety of weapons; they 
admired the position of the camp and even desired to know the names 
of the leaders. Every detail was investigated with the utmost care, 
that an accurate and trustworthy narrative might be compiled for 


posterity. 


3° Humphrey of Toron, the younger, was constable of the kingdom of Jerusalem 
from 1152 to 1179. This statement clearly indicates that William wrote this passage 
before 1178, perhaps before 1174, for Humphrey was already dead when wee re- 
sumed writing toward the end of 1180. 

31 See Book XI, chap. 30. 


CAPTURE OF TYRE 21 


When the Christian forces entered the city, they too, in their turn, 
marvelled. They admired the fortifications of the city, the strength 
of the buildings, the massive walls and lofty towers, the noble harbor 
so difhcult of access. They had only praise for the resolute perseverance 
of the citizens who, despite the pressure of terrible famine and the 
scarcity of supplies, had been able to ward off surrender for so long. 
For when our forces took possession of the place they found only five 
measures of wheat in the city. And although at first the common people 
felt it hard that the city should surrender under the terms named 
above, yet afterwards they rejoiced. For the great efforts which they 
had put forth were commended, and they realized that an achievement 
worthy of remembrance forever had been attained largely through their 
efforts and at their expense. 

The city was now divided into three parts, two parts being assigned 
to the king and the third to the Venetians in accordance with the pro- 
visions previously made. Then all with joy and gladness returned, each 
to his own land. This city was taken and restored to the Christian name 
on June 29, in the year 1124 of the Incarnation of our Lord, which 
was also the sixth year of the reign of Baldwin, the second king of 
Jerusalem.*? 


15. The king is released from captivity. He invests Aleppo, but, 
after an engagement with the enemy, he raises the siege. He 
returns to Jerusalem. Pope Calixtus dies. Honorius is chosen 
in his stead. 


For about eighteen months or a little longer, King Baldwin of Jeru- 
salem had been held prisoner by the enemy. On August 29 of this same 
year, on promise of paying a fixed sum of money and giving hostages, 
he was released and returned to Antioch under the protection of the 
Lord. It is said that the sum fixed for his ransom was one hundred thou- 
sand micheles, a kind of money chiefly used in those countries in trans- 
actions of commerce and in buying and selling in the markets.?* 

The king returned to Antioch, much perplexed as to the means of 

32 Tt seems strange that William should have erred in the date of the capture of his 
archiepiscopal city. The astronomical statement of Fulcher yields July 7, 1124, with 
which most of the Arabic sources, including Qalanisi, agree (see H.F., p. 735, note 7; 
Gibb, Chronicle, p. 172). 

88 The date of Baldwin’s release is correctly stated, but the interval of his cap- 


tivity was about sixteen, rather than eighteen, months. The sum of the ransom is 
variously stated by different writers (H.F., p. 750; see also Book XI, note 44). 


22 CAPTURE OF TYRE 


raising money for the ransom pledged and of redeeming his hostages. 
He consulted some of his wise men on the best method of procedure 
and was advised to besiege Aleppo. That city was then struggling under 
a lack of supplies and was almost without inhabitants. The citizens, 
when hard pressed by a siege, might easily be brought to restore the 
hostages or to pay a sum equal to that which he had agreed to give for 
his own ransom. The king agreed to the project. He summoned all 
his cavalry from the entire realm, surrounded the city with the usual 
blockade, and began siege operations. Thus the citizens could neither 
go in nor out and were forced to depend upon their scanty stock of food. 

Thereupon, the people of Aleppo sent out repeated letters to the 
princes of the Orient, and above all to those beyond the Euphrates, to 
inform them of the critical situation. They stated that unless aid came 
at once the city would soon fall. The princes, filled with the solicitude 
for an allied city, at once assembled troops and united their forces to 
render aid. They crossed the Euphrates and advanced in all haste to 
relieve the city from the perils of siege. The relieving force consisted 
of seven thousand cavalry, besides those in charge of the baggage and 
impedimenta and the servants who rendered to their liege lords the 
obedience which they owed. 

Perceiving that the enemy was arriving with such vast forces, the 
king and those with him deemed it wiser to retreat and thus secure 
their own safety and that of the army rather than incautiously to risk 
an engagement with the foe’s superior forces. Before the hostile army 
reached the city, therefore, the Christians had retired to one of their 
fortified castles called Cerep. From there they proceeded together to 
Antioch where they separated. The king with his own following re- 
turned to Jerusalem. He was received with high honor by the entire 
body of clergy and people, and his presence, long desired, for he 
had been absent about two years, was most welcome both to the city 
fathers and to the common people.*# 

That same year, Pope Calixtus II, of precious memory, departed 
from this life. He was succeeded by Lambert, bishop of Ostia, a native 
of Bologna, who is known as Honorius. Lambert was elected over his 
competitor, Theobald, a cardinal-priest of title St. Anastasia. As the 

** Baldwin II reached Jerusalem April 3, 1125, after an absence from Jerusalem 


of more nearly three years, though in this error William is following Fulcher’s state- 
ment (see H.F., p. 757). 


CAPTURE OF TYRE 23 


election had not been conducted in strict canonical order, however, 
Honortus resigned at the end of twelve days, and in the presence of 
his brethren voluntarily laid aside his miter and mantle. 

But at this evidence of humility, the brethren, bishops and priests, 
cardinals and deacons, feared for the future, lest some innovation be 
introduced into the Church of Rome. They therefore remedied the 
errors made in the original election and a second time elected Honorius 
as pope. They then fell at his feet and showed him the customary 
obedience as shepherd and pope over all.*° 


16. Bursequinus, a Turkish prince, lays waste the lands of Anti- 
och, The king proceeds against him. A battle is fought. The 


enemy is defeated. 


Wuite the king was still at Jerusalem, he was informed by frequent 
messengers that Bursequinus [Bursuqi],*° a powerful Oriental poten- 
tate, with a mighty host gathered from the countries of the East, had 
crossed the Euphrates and was now in the territory of Antioch. Since 
there was no one to hinder him, he was overrunning the land according 
to his own good pleasure. Whatever he found outside the cities and 
fortified places he consigned to the flames, and he allowed his soldiers 
to pillage the whole country. The leading men of Antioch had tried 
to resist him, but, after several unsuccessful attempts, they realized 
that they could do nothing. They therefore made known their straits 
to the king, who long ago had been charged with the care of the 
principality, and besought him to come to their aid without delay. 
Burdened as he was with the dual responsibility of the kingdom and 
the principality, the king nevertheless felt little anxiety about the realm 
although he was bound to it by closer ties. For, often called upon to 
act in the difficulties of the principality, he had devoted nearly all his 
efforts and means to its welfare during a period of ten years. It was 
while thus engaged that he had been taken prisoner and for almost 
two years had suffered the indignity of the enemy’s chains and dun- 
geons. In the kingdom, on the contrary, protected by the divine hand, ° 


35 Election of Honorius II occurred in the midst of local political interference, 
which all regretted. It was corrected as William here indicates. 

36 Bursuqi was not a relative of Bursuq but a mamluk in his service. He was, how- 
ever, known by that name. The possessive form of the name is used in this translation 
to distinguish him from his patron. 


24 CAPTURE OF TYRE 


he had met with no misfortune, for God, the Comforter of His chosen 
kings, had in all things guided him to prosperity and success. Eager 
faithfully to carry out his promises, however, he assembled all available 
troops and marched in haste to Antioch. 

Meanwhile, Bursuqi, a very powerful prince who had much experi- 
ence in war, had formed an alliance with Tughtigin, king of Damascus, 
and before the arrival of the king, who, as he knew, had been sum- 
moned by the people of Antioch, the two laid siege to a fortress called 
Kafartab. By dint of many attacks, they compelled the besieged to sur- 
render on condition that their lives should be spared. Then, in the hope 
of obtaining other like successes, Bursuqi crossed Syria Minor and laid 
siege to the stronghold of Sardona. For several days he put forth great 
efforts against this place, but, finally convinced that he could not suc- 
ceed, he turned his attention to blockading the famous town of Ezaz, 
which was not as strongly fortified. 

He was engaged in setting up his engines, making ready the ap- 
paratus of war, and testing out his strength for the destruction of the 
besieged, when the king arrived, accompanied by the count of Tripoli 
and the count of Edessa. They had come with large forces, at the com- 
mand of God, to render immediate aid to the besieged. As they ap- 
proached the enemy, the Christians formed into three divisions. The 
first, on the right wing, was composed of the chief men of Antioch; the 
second, which formed the left wing, was placed under the command 
of the two counts, each with his own army; while the center was held 
by the king. Their force consisted of eleven hundred cavalry and two 
thousand infantry. 

As the Christians advanced, Bursuqi ee with certainty that 
like wise men they were prepared for an immediate engagement. As 
he could not honorably decline battle, he also drew up his forces— 
which were said to number fifteen thousand knights—in twenty bat- 
talions. When the two armies had been thus disposed in military forma- 
tion, they advanced precipitately upon each other with more than 
ordinary violence. Sword clashed against sword with equal ardor, caus- 
ing terrible carnage and death in many a form. “For in conflicts of this 
nature, resentment inspired by sacrilege and scorn of laws always acts 
as an incentive to bitter hatred and enmity. War is waged differently 
and less vigorously between men who hold the same law and faith 
than it 1s between those of diverse opinions and conflicting traditions. 


CAPTURE OF TYRE 25 


For even if no other cause for hatred exists, the fact that the combatants 
do not share the same articles of faith is sufficient reason for constant 
quarreling and enmity.” 

So the two armies engaged in furious combat with each other. Our 
side finally prevailed, however, for the God of mercy, who can easily 
overcome many with a few, was on our side; He who hath said con- 
cerning His chosen people, “How should one chase a thousand, and 
two put ten thousand to flight, except their Rock had sold them, and the 
Lord had shut them up?” 37 The enemy was routed and the Christians 
triumphed most gloriously, for the victory was granted them from on 
high. It is said that the infidels lost two thousand men in that battle, 
but our people, only twenty-four.*® 

Bursuqi, covered with confusion and fear (for the expedition had 
turned out far otherwise than as he had anticipated), now crossed the 
Euphrates and returned to his own land. His retreat, however, was not 
attended by the same haughty assurance which characterized his ad- 
vance. 

The king paid his ransom with a large sum of money, collected in 
part from the spoils of the enemy and in part through the generosity 
of his friends and loyal adherents. In return, his five-year-old daughter, 
whom he had given as hostage, was sent back to him. He then took 
leave temporarily of the people of Antioch and returned in safety to 
Jerusalem, a conqueror. That same year he built a fortress in the moun- 
tains above the city of Beirut and called it Mt. Glavianus. 


17. The king defeats the people of Ascalon and the Egyptians 


who had come to assist them. 


THE period of temporary peace and truce, which had been concluded 
between the king and Tughtigin in consideration of a sum of money, 
had now passed. Accordingly, the king assembled all the knighthood 
of the realm and invaded the land of Damascus. He overran that coun- 
try without hindrance, destroyed some places in the surrounding fields, 
and carried away as prisoners some of the people. Then, laden with a 
vast amount of plunder, the richest spoils of the enemy, he returned 
home safe and sound. 
37 De. 32: 30. 


38 This battle was fought June 11, 1125 (see H.F., p. 767). These numbers, also 
given by Fulcher, may indicate relative losses but cannot be accepted as literally true. 


26 CAPTURE OF TYRE 


Three days had hardly passed, however, and the troops had not yet 
been demobilized, when news came that an Egyptian army in magnifi- 
cent array had arrived before the city of Ascalon. The Egyptians were 
accustomed to send yearly four fresh expeditions to that city, that the 
strength of the Ascalonites might be continually renewed.* Thus they 
were enabled to sustain the ever-present conflicts with the Christians 
and the continual losses so incurred. The new arrivals were generally 
eager to try an encounter with our forces, for they desired to test our 
strength and at the same time to give conclusive proof of their own 
valor. It frequently happened in these skirmishes that many were cap- 
tured or even slain by the sword, for the Egyptians were not acquainted 
with the country and had not attained full experience in warfare. The 
citizens, older and more experienced, prudently avoided encounters 
with our men, although they occasionally pursued them rather indif- 
ferently if the Christians took to flight. 

When this information arrived, the king, rather continuing than 
renewing his campaign, hastened thither. As soon as he arrived, he 
selected a place well adapted for the purpose and, with some of the 
strongest and most valiant of his followers, placed himself in ambush. 
Some of the light-armed cavalry were sent on with orders to rove here 
and there over the country in order to irritate the people of Ascalon 
and draw them out in pursuit. 

At sight of the Christian forces roaming freely about on the out- 
skirts of the city, the citizens could not restrain their wrath over such 
bold presumption. Eagerly they seized arms and, regardless of con- 
sequences, issued from the city in separate detachments. Our men of 
their own accord turned their backs and fled. The Ascalonites, still 
utterly without caution, pursued the retreating foe until the place was 
reached where the king with his picked knights was lying in ambush. 
He did not disdain the offered opportunity. With the help of his com- 
rades who sustained him loyally, he rushed out, stopped the infidels, 
and cut them off as they tried to retreat to the city. A fight at close 
quarters followed; the Christians attacked the infidels vigorously with 
their swords, and before the latter could regain the city in safety forty 
of their number were slain. The rest escaped into the town but could 
scarcely believe themselves safe even when they were within the walls. 

89 The Egyptians had practiced this policy of changing the garrison at Ascalon for 


many years. According to Wiet, the changes took place twice each year and did not 
involve a complete change of garrison each time. 


CAPTURE OF TYRE 27 


The wailing and lamentation which arose from within the city was so 
unprecedented that it was evident that those who had fallen were among 
the bravest and noblest of their people. 

Then the king ordered that his men be recalled by the sound of 
trumpet and roll of drum. With heartfelt joy he made camp near the 
city and there as victor passed the entire night in peace. He then re- 
turned safe and sound to Jerusalem. 


18. The king invades the land of the Damascenes. Tughtigin 
marches out against him. Battle is joined. Our army returns 
in triumph. 


In January of the following year (which was 1126 of the Incarnation 
of our Lord and the eighth of the reign of this same King Baldwin) 
the king and the lords gave orders that all the people, from the least 
even unto the greatest, be assembled. Through every city of the realm 
these orders were proclaimed by the voice of the herald. Thus within 
a few days, the entire military strength of the kingdom was levied 
and the entire body concentrated near the city of Tiberias, prepared 
to invade the land of Damascus. 

As soon as the troops had assembled at the place appointed, the 
military signals were given, the baggage was arranged, and the ranks 
formed in order of march. They then traversed the country of Decapolis 
and entered the country of the enemy. Thence they crossed a narrow 
valley called Cavea Roab and arrived at the plain of Medan. This 
plain is of wide extent with unobstructed view. Through it, between 
Tiberias and Scythopolis, formerly called Bethsan, runs the river Dan 
on its way to unite with the Jordan. Some think—and the name itself 
supports their theory—that it is this river which furnishes the last 
syllable of the name Jordan; for the waters which descend into the 
sea of Galilee and flow out thence to the confluence of this same river, 
are called Jor. But when the two streams of the Jor and the Dan mingle 
the river so formed is called the Jordan. On the other hand, Bede and 
certain others of our learned men whose authority is not to be disputed, 
say that both streams have their origin near Caesarea Philippi, which 
lies at the foot of Mt. Lebanon.*° One of these rivers is called Jor and 

#0 Bede did not include this book, Libellus de situ Hierusalem sive de locis sanctis, 


in the list of his works, perhaps because he felt himself to be only a copyist. His copy, 
however, became famous as a guidebook for pilgrims. It was a somewhat abridged 


28 CAPTURE OF TYRE 


the other Dan. From the union of the two is formed the flood of 
Jordan, which then descends as one stream into the sea of Gennesaret, 
which is the sea of Galilee. From this it again emerges as one river, 
and after flowing for almost a hundred miles through the famous 
valley, it empties into the lake of Asphalt, which is also known as the 
sea of Salt. 

Crossing this plain our army came to the village which is called 
Salome. Then, as today, it was entirely peopled by Christians. Our 
men spared it, therefore, and treated the inhabitants like brethren. 
From there, with battalions arranged in good order and all the forces 
assigned to suitable places, they hastened on to a place called Mergi- 
safar. It was here, according to the story, that Saul, the persecutor of 
the Church of God, that ravening wolf, heard the voice of one saying, 
“Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?” #! and so on. It seemed indeed 
divinely ordained that the army of the faithful should have arrived 
at that place on the anniversary of the day when these things are said 
to have occurred: namely, when from a persecutor of the Church, Saul 
was converted to a chosen vessel of the Lord. 

At Mergisafar the assembled host remained for two days.*? Op- 
posite them and not far away they beheld the camp of the enemy. On 
the third day, the two forces met in battle. Careful preparation for 
fighting had been made by each side, and now, with troops marshalled 
in battle array, both infidels and Christians fought fiercely. Since both 
sides advanced to the conflict with equal force, the result of the battle 
was for a long time doubtful. In accordance with his usual custom, the 
king pressed the enemy hard. Calling his valiant men by name, he 
cheered them to the onslaught by word and example and promised 
them assurance of victory. In return, they strove valiantly as best they 
might to imitate their leader. Endued with the fervor of faith, they 
fell upon the enemy with drawn swords and endeavored to avenge at 
one and the same time not only their own wrongs but also those that 
had been committed against the Lord. 


version of the description of the Holy Land which Adamnan made from the recital of 
Arculf, the Frankish bishop who was shipwrecked on the western coast of Britain on 
his return from the pilgrimage. Bede’s version was the one most frequently cited. 

41 Ac. 9: 4. 

4° The place of this battle in the last week in January, 1126, is spelled Marj al-Suffrar 
by Gibb. The fluctuations of fortune during the battle are confirmed by Qalanisi 
(Gibb, Chronicle, pp. 175-77). 


CAPTURE OF TYRE 29 


Tughtigin, on his part, inspired his men with no less ardor by his 
words and roused their fighting spirit by his promises. He reminded 
them that they were fighting a just war for the sake of their wives 
and children; nay, more, they were striving for liberty, an even nobler 
task, and for the defense of their fatherland against robbers. Cheered 
by these words, they pressed on with courage not less and with strength 
not unequal to ours. 

Inspired by the example of the king and the knights, the infantry 
forces launched a fierce attack upon the enemy’s ranks and pressed 
them hard. They instantly dispatched with the sword any wounded or 
fallen infidel whom they chanced to find and thus prevented all pos- 
sibility of escape. They lifted up those who had been thrown down 
and restored them to the fray. They sent the wounded back to the 
baggage train to receive care. Others devised a scheme which is be- 
lieved to have been most destructive that day to the enemy’s hordes; 
they turned their attention to wounding the horses of their adversaries 
and thus rendered the riders easy victims to the Christians who were 
following. 

The king, followed by some of his valiant and illustrious knights, 
hurled himself like a lion against the serried ranks of the foe. De- 
struction on the right and on the left attended his progress, a massacre 
terrible even in the eyes of the conquerors. Our annals, even to the 
present time, contain no account of such a desperate and uncertain 
battle. Although the conflict was prolonged from the third to the 
tenth hour, it was scarcely possible to decide even in the eleventh 
hour which side had won. Finally, by divine favor at the intercession 
of the great teacher of the Gentiles, the infidels were put to flight. They 
had suffered a massacre which will be memorable forever, for more 
than two thousand of their number are said to have fallen on that day. 
When a count was taken of the Christian forces, both cavalry and in- 
fantry, it was found that only twenty-four knights and eighty foot 
soldiers had been lost. 

Thus victory was conferred on the Christians from on high, and 
the king held the field as conqueror. With great joy and thanksgiving, 
he led his army thence and began the return march to his own land. 
On the way, he found a tower to which ninety-six Turks had retreated 
in the hope of saving their lives. He attacked this vigorously, seized 
the fugitives, and put them to death by the sword. A little farther on, 


30 CAPTURE OF TYRE 


another tower was taken by assault, but since it was surrendered with- 
out difficulty, the privilege of life was granted to the twenty Turks 
who had been sent there to protect it. The Christians undermined this 
tower and it was soon so completely wrecked that it fell to the ground 
with a mighty crash. 

Then, after obtaining several victories worthy of remembrance for- 
ever, the troops returned in exultation to their own country. 


19. The count of Tripoli seizes the city of Raphania. Henry, 


emperor of the Romans, dies. Lothair reigns in his stead. 


AxzoutT this time, Pons, count of Tripoli, determined to besiege Ra- 
phania, a city near his own dominions, for he perceived that this could 
be easily accomplished. In order to carry out his plan more effectively 
he sent numerous letters and messages to the king of Jerusalem, beg- 
ging that he would come and help him. The indefatigable king, ever 
ready to participate loyally in any enterprise for the common welfare 
of the Christians, at once repaired thither with an honorable escort. 
On his arrival, he found the count fully prepared for the campaign. 
Machines and everything necessary for besieging a city, including pro- 
visions sufficient for several days, were taken with them from Tripoli; 
the infantry was sent on ahead, and the two leaders conducted their 
own troops to the vicinity of their proposed activity. 

On reaching the place, they at once placed a blockade around it, 
a maneuver which effectually prevented the citizens from going in 
or out. Because of its natural situation and the small number of in- 
habitants, Raphania was poorly fortified. Moreover, it had become so 
exhausted by repeated attacks that it was unable to hold out very long. 
For Count Pons had built a fortress in the mountains near his own 
lands, and the constant attacks made by the garrison from that place 
had reduced the city to dire straits, in fact almost to the last extremity. 
Accordingly, after the siege had been carried on vigorously for eighteen 
days, the citizens were forced to surrender. They were granted the 
privilege of departing freely with their wives and children and were 
promised security. 

Raphania is one of the dependent cities of the province of Apamea 
in which it is situated. It was taken on the last day of March. After 
the surrender the king returned to Jerusalem and there celebrated 
Easter with much devotion. 


CAPTURE OF TYRE 31 


About the same time, Henry, emperor of the Romans, died.4? In 
his stead reigned Lothair, duke of Saxony, a man commendable in 
every respect. Lothair afterwards went down into Apulia with a large 
army and took forcible possession of the entire country as far as Farum. 
He compelled Count Roger, who had seized Apulia by force, to flee 
into Sicily and placed as ruler in Apulia a wise and discreet man called 
Renaud. After the emperor had departed, however, Roger returned 
to Apulia. He fought with Renaud, slew him, and regained the duchy. 
Later he became king of Sicily and of the entire province of Apulia. 


20. Bursugi again invades the land of Antioch. He is finally 
stabbed by his own men and dies. The Egyptian fleet pro- 
ceeds to Syria. There it suffers defeat and is forced to return 
without completing the campaign. 


Wuite the king was still lingering at Tyre, a messenger arrived in 
haste from Antioch. He brought the news, both by letter and word 
of mouth, that Bursuqi, that unspeakable persecutor of our faith, had 
entered Coelesyria with a large force of cavalry. Since there was no 
one to oppose him, he was besieging cities and burning places every- 
where on the outskirts according to his own good pleasure. At the 
same time, he was carrying off the people as his prisoners and reducing 
women and children to slavery. 

The king distrusted the Egyptians and had no doubt that they would 
soon arrive with the immense fleet which they had prepared. Yet, at 
this news, “like the wise physician who hastens to apply his remedies 
when he perceives that the disease is becoming worse,” he at once laid 
aside all other cares and hastened thither to cope with the most pressing 
need. But as soon as Bursuqi learned of this movement, he at once 
raised the blockade which he had carefully placed around the noble 
fortress of Cerep and retired to the most remote part of the enemy’s 
country. Before the king arrived, however, Bursuqi had seized by 
force a certain town of no great renown and had captured some women 
and their children. The men of the besieged town had with much dif- 
ficulty and danger escaped the hand of the enemy. They had chosen to 
seek safety alone rather than to be caught in the wretched bonds of 

43 Henry V died May 23, 1125. Fulcher, who was writing in Jerusalem, probably 
learned of it from pilgrims at the Easter festival following and inserted it in his 


account, which William follows. The further information about Lothair’s policy in 
southern Italy was added by William, but from what source is unknown. 


q2 CAPTURE OF TYRE 


captivity with their wives and children. Some time later, however, the 
wicked Bursugi, a son of perdition, was stabbed to death by his servants 
and other members of his household.* Thus by his own acts he brought 
upon himself the natural consequences of his wickedness and reaped the 
fruit of his impiety. 

This, then, was the situation in the lands of Antioch. Meanwhile, 
as rumor had forecast, the Egyptian fleet of twenty-four galleys was 
sailing along the shore, seeking an opportunity to inflict injury upon 
some of our cities, and had reached Beirut. They were ever on the 
alert, also, as if emerging from ambush, to surprise and seize any 
Christians who might be passing without due caution or approaching 
Syria. Finally, however, their water supply gave out and they were 
compelled to land near a river to seek means of satisfying their thirst. 
Thereupon, the citizens of Beirut issued forth and, with the help of 
others from the neighboring towns, drove them with violence from the 
stream. This action utterly deprived the Egyptians of the opportunity 
of using the water. Making vigorous use of their weapons, the towns- 
people forced the enemy back to the ships, whither they were forced 
to retire with a loss of one hundred and thirty men who had fallen 
by the sword. 


21. Bohemond the Younger arrives at Antioch. The king re- 
stores the lands which belonged to the prince by ancestral 
right and gives him his own daughter Alice to wife. 


In the following autumn,** the younger Bohemond, prince of Taranto, 
son of the older Bohemond, made an alliance with his paternal uncle, 
William, duke of Apulia, and concluded a treaty with him in regard to 
the future succession, by which it was stipulated that the one who died 
first was to be succeeded by the other in entirety. A fleet of ten galleys 
and twelve other vessels suitable for carrying the baggage and equip- 
ment as well as arms and provisions had been made ready. With this 
Bohemond started for Syria, for he felt confident of the good faith of 

44 Bursuqi was killed in late November or early December, 1126, according to 
Qalanisi (Gibb, Chronicle, p. 177). 

*5 Bohemond II arrived in September, 1126. The fact that the marriage of Bohe- 
mond II and Alice, daughter of Baldwin II, occurred so soon after his arrival sug- 


gests the probability that negotiations had been going on for some time and the mar- 
riage was a real condition to Baldwin’s relinquishment of Antioch. 


CAPTURE OF TYRE 33 


the king, who had promised that, when he came to claim the heritage 
left him by his father, it would not be refused. 

When the king learned that the fleet of the prince had safely entered 
the mouth of the Orontes river, he went forth with the great lords of 
the land to meet him. And as soon as Bohemond had entered Antioch, 
Baldwin with all kindness restored to him the city and the whole land, 
the burden of which he himself had borne with watchful care and 
anxiety for eight years. | 

After the principality had been thus restored, all the leading men 
and the chiefs of the land, in the presence of the king and at his behest, 
swore fealty to Bohemond in his own palace. Then through the offices 
of certain friends of both parties, the king gave Bohemond his second 
daughter Alice in marriage. This alliance was arranged under condi- 
tions approved both by the king and the prince, that the friendly rela- 
tions and esteem between them might be increased. 

Bohemond was about eighteen years old. He was rather tall and of 
fine figure. He had blond hair and well-made features. His whole bear- 
ing plainly showed the prince even to those who did not know him. 
His conversation was agreeable and easily won the favor of those who 
listened to him. He was of a generous nature and, like his father, truly 
magnificent. In respect to high lineage according to the flesh, he was 
second to none. His father, Bohemond the Elder, was the son of the 
illustrious Robert Guiscard, a man whose name will live forever. 
His mother, Constance, a daughter of Philip, the excellent king of 
the Franks, was a woman conspicuous among illustrious women for 
her admirable and noble character.*® 

The nuptials were celebrated according to custom and the princess 
with due ceremony united to the prince in the bonds of lawful mar- 
riage. Then the king, relieved of the greater part of his burden, re- 
turned to Jerusalem safe and sound. 

In the following year, Bohemond laid siege to the fortress of Ka- 
fartab, which had been subjugated several years before by the strong 
hand of the enemy. Military forces were summoned from the entire 
principality, and the engineers were ordered to build the machines 
necessary for storming a stronghold. The place fell a short time after 
siege operations were begun. Bohemond spared none found therein, 


*6 Book XI, chap. 6. 


34 CAPTURE OF TYRE 


but slew all, regardless of the bribes offered by those who endeavored 
thus to secure life and safety. Such were the first fruits of his youthful 
prowess which this noble and distinguished prince offered as proofs of 
his natural ability. 


22. A serious enmity arises between Bohemond II and Joscelin, 
count of Edessa. The king hurries thither and settles the 
strife. The Africans make a fierce attack on Syracuse, a city 


of Sicily. 


Berore long, a serious enmity arose between this prince and the elder 
Joscelin, count of Edessa. The reasons for this are unknown, at least to 
us, but they were assuredly hateful in the eyes of God, for contrary 
to the honorable custom and laws of our times, Joscelin called to his 
aid bands of infidel Turks, an act which established a vicious precedent 
for his descendants.‘? Aided by them, he ravaged the land of Antioch 
with fire and sword and forced its inhabitants, true servants of Christ, 
to bow beneath the yoke of unmerited servitude. This conduct seems 
all the more extraordinary and deserving of divine censure, because 
it is said to have happened while Bohemond, ignorant of what was 
going on, was fighting in the service of Christ against the enemies of 
the Lord. Hence the aforesaid Joscelin merits the execration of all 
to whom this story, fraught with hate and indignation, comes. 
Rumors of this trouble reached the king and caused him much 
anxiety. He was concerned, in the first place, lest this discord might 
afford the enemy a favorable opportunity to molest the Christians, 
because, according to the word of the Lord, “Every kingdom divided 
against itself is brought to desolation.” #8 In the second place, both 
parties were closely related to him by blood, for the one was his cousin, 
the son of his mother’s sister, and the other was his son-in-law, to whom 
he had recently given his daughter in marriage. Accordingly, he set 
out in haste for Antioch to try to bring about a reconciliation. With 
the devoted and loyal codperation of Bernard, the patriarch of Antioch, 
he was successful in establishing most cordial relations between the 


47 The alliance of Christian leaders with Turks was no new policy, for William 
has recounted earlier instances. Either this marks a resumption of writing after a con- 
siderable interval during which he forgot those earlier instances, or he has in mind 
the later careers of Joscelin II and Joscelin III. This quarrel occurred in the summer 
of 1127. 

48 Lu. 11:17. 


CAPTURE OF TYRE 35 


two lords. Luckily for the king’s purpose, the count in the meantime 
had contracted a serious illness. It was while he was suffering from 
this and in great danger of death that he repented of his evil deeds 
and made a vow that if God would grant him life and health, he would 
give satisfaction to the prince, become reconciled to him, and pay right- 
ful homage. And this came to pass. For after Joscelin was fully re- 
covered, the two were reconciled in the presence of the king and the 
patriarch. Good will in full measure now existed between them. Josce- 
lin swore fealty to him and observed it thereafter as in duty bound. 
After thus happily ending this affair, the king returned to Jerusalem. 

Just about this time, Count Roger of Sicily is said to have set sail 
for Africa with a fleet of forty galleys which he had caused to be pre- 
pared with great care. The news of his coming had preceded him, how- 
ever, and the people of that province, forewarned, had prudently taken 
precautions, so that he might have no opportunity of injuring them. 
On the contrary, with zeal equal to his own, they armed all their galleys 
and swiftly gave chase. The Christians were forced to flee without 
accomplishing their object, for the pursuit was continued to the very 
shores of Sicily. On arriving there with eighty galleys, the enemy made 
an unexpected attack upon Syracuse. This ancient and noble city had 
become enervated from long-continued peace, and, in its fancied se- 
curity, was wholly without apprehension of such danger. It at once 
succumbed. Without regard to age or sex, the Africans massacred a 
large number of citizens, while the few who were spared had to suffer 
a slavery worse than any form of death. The bishop of the place with 
a few clerics escaped with much difficulty by fleeing to the country out- 
side the city.*® 


23. The first archbishop of the Latins at Tyre is appointed. 


In the following spring, which was the fourth year after Tyre had 
been restored to the Christian faith, the king and the patriarch met 
with the leading men of the realm at the city of Tyre to choose an 
archbishop over the church there. William, the venerable prior of the 
church of the Sepulchre of the Lord, was finally appointed. He was 

#9 This episode, which has no direct connection with the affairs of the kingdom of 


Jerusalem, is another instance of William’s familiarity with the affairs of southern 
Italy. 


36 CAPTURE OF TYRE 


an Englishman by birth, and a man of most exemplary life and char- 
acter. 

At this point, we are entirely unable to restrain our lamentations; 
for, as the proverb says, “Where love is, there are the eyes; where 
sorrow abides there is the hand.” This matter weighs heavily upon us, 
and the pain it inflicts permits our heart no rest. For although we ad- 
mire the prudence of that time, yet we are perplexed and regard it 
rather as rashness. For those, who two years before this city was re- 
stored to Christian liberty had consecrated a bishop over them, after- 
wards, with dilatory and crass prudence neglected to provide a head 
for that same church until four years later. Consequently, during that 
time, the churches were broken up and the cathedral church, although 
it ought to have received attention first of all because it had the re- 
sponsibility of governing, was curtailed of its own members. Thus, 
like one accursed, it received the worser lot; for it is written, “Cursed 
is the man who causes his own portion to deteriorate.” 

Nevertheless, that predecessor of ours and all of us who have fol- 
lowed him in that same church have with justice escaped the effect of 
that curse.®° For it was not we who brought about the deterioration 
of our lot; on the contrary, we were forced to enter upon conditions 
that had been made worse by others. May the Lord spare those who 
so mishandled the church and not consign them to Gehenna. 

After receiving the gift of consecration from the patriarch of Jeru- 
salem, William, our predecessor of good memory, started for Rome 
to receive the pallium. This he did in direct opposition to the wishes 
of the one who had consecrated him, and in spite of the latter’s efforts. 
William was kindly received at Rome by Pope Honorius II, who 
granted his request and sent him back to his own land with much 
honor, the bearer of an apostolic letter. The tenor of this was as 
follows: 


“Honorius, the bishop, servant of the servants of God, to his brethren 
the venerable suffragan bishops, to the clergy, and to the people of 
Tyre, salutation and the apostolic blessing. 

“We have received with due affection on the occasion of his coming 
to us, your archbishop, our very dear brother William. Upon him, 

°° This is the first definite indication that he was writing after June, 1175, when 


he was made archbishop. Whether this material was inserted after 1180 or written 
during the period from 1175-1178 is not clear. 


CAPTURE OF TYRE 37 


elected according to canonical rules and consecrated by our venerable 
brother Gormond, patriarch of Jerusalem, we have conferred the 
dignity of the pallium, that is, the full pontifical powers. We believe 
that from him, by the aid of divine mercy, will come much fruit to 
your mother church at Tyre. Hence we deem it well to send him back 
to you with the favor of the apostolic see, as the bearer of our letter. 
We command you as a whole to receive him kindly and to render him 
in all humility subjection, obedience, and reverence as your own metro- 
politan and the bishop of your souls. . . .” 


“Honorius, bishop, servant of the servants of God, to his venerable 
brother Gormond, patriarch of Jerusalem, salutation and the apostolic 
blessing. 

“Having received your letter of brotherly affection, we have wel- 
comed with kindness our brother William, whom you have consecrated 
archbishop over the church at Tyre, and we have invested him with 
the dignity of the pallium, that is, with the fullness of the pontifical 
ofice. Moreover, we have commanded the suffragans of his church 
to render to him subjection, obedience, and reverence as to their own 
metropolitan. 

Given in the territory of Bari, July 8.” °* 


With the archbishop the pope sent also, as legate of the apostolic 
see, Giles, bishop of Tusculum, an eloquent and very learned man, 
whose famous letters to the people of Antioch are still extant. By Giles 
the pope sent a letter to Bernard, the patriarch of Antioch, in which 
he admonished the latter to restore to the lord of Tyre the suffragans 
belonging to that church, whom Bernard was withholding. Among 
other things, he said, “Wherefore, we command you by the apostolic 
letter and by our venerable brother Giles, bishop of Tusculum and 
legate of the apostolic see, that you restore to William the suffragans 
of the church at Tyre, that, unless they show the rightful submission 
to him within forty days after the reading of the letter which we have 
sent you, we suspend them from that time from the episcopal ofhce.” 

How it happened that William had been consecrated by the patriarch 
of Jerusalem and owed obedience to him, although from the time of 
the apostles even to that day it is certain that the church at Tyre was 


51 July 8, 1128, according to R. Réhricht (see Regesta regni Hierosolymitani, no. 
123). 


38 CAPTURE OF TYRE 


subject to the see at Antioch, will be related in a suitable place in the 
following history.*? 


24. The count of Anjou arrives at the invitation [of the king). 
Melisend, the king’s eldest daughter, is given to him in mar- 
riage. 


Axsour midspring of the following year Fulk, the magnificent and 
illustrious count of Anjou, landed at Acre. By the unanimous advice 
of all the princes, both ecclesiastical and secular, the king had invited 
him hither to wed the lady Melisend, his eldest daughter. He came 
attended by an honorable retinue of nobles and with a magnificence 
and pomp which surpassed that of kings. 

With Fulk came William de Bury, the royal constable, who, on 
the king’s release from captivity, had been sent with some other nobles 
to invite the count thither.®? On setting forth upon this mission, Wil- 
liam had been instructed to take a solemn oath by the soul of the 
king and of the princes of the realm that within fifty days after the 
said count reached the kingdom in safety he would be given the king’s 
eldest daughter in marriage, with the expectation of succeeding to the 
throne at Baldwin’s death. At soon as he landed, therefore, and even 
before the celebration of Holy Pentecost which was near at hand, the 
king gave him his eldest daughter in marriage, according to the terms 
of the agreement.®* At the same time he endowed the pair with the 
cities of Tyre and Acre, to be held by them during the king’s own life- 
time. These cities continued to be in their possession until the king’s 
death. 

Fulk showed himself a wise and discreet man. During Baldwin’s 
lifetime, he devotedly fulfilled all the duties of a son. He was faithful 
and active in attending to matters of the realm, and in his deference 
to the lord king he proved that he was not lacking in those qualities 
which ordinarily win friends. 

52 William’s implication that it was wrong to have the archbishopric of Tyre subject 
to Jerusalem suggests a point of view which he may have developed more strongly 
after 1180. He has already recounted the circumstances which led to this arrangement. 

53 This mission must have been sent some time later, for William de Bury was still 
in Palestine in 1126 (R. Reg., no. 115), perhaps not until 1127. The proposal had 
the approval of Pope Honorius, whose letter commending Fulk to Baldwin II is 


dated May 29, 1128 (R. Reg., no. 122). 
54 Just before June 2, 1129. 


CAPTURE OF TYRE 39 


25. Gormond, patriarch of Jerusalem, dies. Stephen is chosen in 
his place. Difficult questions arise between the king and the 
patriarch. 


Tuart same year, Gormond, patriarch of Jerusalem of precious memory, 
was besieging a fortress in the district of Sidon called Belthasem, which 
at that time was held by bandits. There he contracted the seeds of death 
and was stricken with a serious illness. He was carried to Sidon, where, 
as his illness increased, he finally paid the debt of mankind and went 
the way of all flesh. He had ruled over the church at Jerusalem for 
nearly ten years.°> In his place was chosen a man, noble according to 
the flesh indeed, but far more noble in life and character, Stephen, 
abbot of St. John of the Valley, in the city of Chartres. He was a native 
of Chartres and a kinsman of King Baldwin. Of knightly rank and 
mode of life, he had been before his conversion viscount of that city. 
Later, he renounced the world, put on the habit of religion in the 
monastery just mentioned, and finally, because of his merit, was made 
head of that church. In his youth he had been thoroughly instructed 
in the liberal arts. 

Abbot Stephen had come on a pilgrimage to Jerusalem for the sake 
of prayer and devotion and was waiting there to make the return pas- 
sage. It happened to be the very time when, after the obsequies of the 
Patriarch Gormond, the clergy and people were engaged in choosing 
a new shepherd. By common consent their choice fell upon Stephen, 
and he was elected. 

After his consecration, however, he began to raise troublesome ques- 
tions in opposition to the king. He alleged that the city of Jaffa be- 
longed by right to him and to the church of the Resurrection of the 
Lord. He even claimed that, after the capture of Ascalon, the Holy 
City itself should by right submit to the church in the same way. He 
was a man of lofty spirit and honorable character, unswerving in every- 
thing he undertook and zealously insistent upon his own rights.°® 


55 The reference to “the same year” is misleading. Gormond had become patriarch 
in 1118, his ten-year reign thus ending in 1128. This accords with other evidence 
(see R. Réhricht, Geschichte des Kénigreichs Jerusalem, 1100-1291, p. 184, note 8). 

58 The assertion of such claims by the patriarch against the king evidently meets 
with William’s approval. Compare the claims of Daimbert and William’s justification 
of them (Book IX, chaps. 17 and 18). 


40 CAPTURE OF TYRE 


Consequently, a serious enmity arose between him and the king; 
but his premature death, according to the story, put an end to this. 
For he died before he had completed a term of two years. Some think 
that he was poisoned, but we have no definite information as to that. 
It is said, however, that while he was lying on his deathbed the king 
came to see him and inquired how he was. His response was, “Sire, I 
am now in the condition which you desire.” 


26. In company with the prince of Antioch, the count of Tripolt, 
and the count of Edessa, the king invades the land of Damas- 
cus. He is compelled to retreat in disorder, however, with the 
loss of a part of the army. The patriarch Stephen dies. Wil- 


liam is chosen in his stead. 


In the following year, Hugh de Payens, the first master of the Knights 
of the Temple, and several other men of religion returned. They had 
been sent by the king and the chief men of the kingdom to the princes 
of the West for the purpose of rousing the people there to come to 
our assistance.>” Above all, they were to try to induce men of influence 
to come to help us besiege Damascus. Led by their persuasive words, 
many companies of noblemen had arrived in the kingdom. Accord- 
ingly, relying upon the powerful assistance of these newcomers, all the 
Christian princes of the East convened as by agreement. There were 
present King Baldwin; Fulk, count of Anjou; Pons, count of Tripoli; 
the younger Bohemond, prince of Antioch; and the elder Joscelin, 
count of Edessa. After taking counsel together, all these leaders levied 
military forces from every direction and summoned their allies. Then, 
in zealous emulation of each other, they marched in battle array to 
besiege the renowned and noble city of Damascus. It was their hope 
that they might take the city by fighting at close quarters, or by laying 
siege to it force it to surrender. Divine providence, however, with just 
though unseen judgment, blocked this great enterprise. Until they 
entered the land of Damascus, they had been attended by good fortune 
under the leadership of God. At a place called Mergisafar, however, 


5? Hugh de Payens, who had attended the council of Troyes in 1128, where the rule 
of the order of the Templars was approved, had recruited followers both for the order 
and for the needs of the kingdom (see Book XII, chap. 7). The sum total of the knights 
and other troops who came from the West with Hugh de Payens and with Fulk of 
Anjou must have been considerable to permit such an ambitious undertaking as the 
siege of Damascus. 


CAPTURE OF TYRE 41 


men of lesser rank separated from the main army. It was the customary 
duty of these men to spread here and there through the fields in search 
of the provisions and fodder necessary for the use of men and beasts. 
William de Bury with a thousand knights was in charge of this party. 
As is usual on such forays, the contingent separated into small parties, 
which began to roam recklessly over the country. They purposely kept 
apart from one another, that each band might claim for itself whatever 
it found and not share with the rest. Intent upon this and busy in devas- 
tating the fields, all bent on carrying away plunder for their own com- 
panies, these forces began to conduct themselves very imprudently and 
soon passed beyond the bounds of military discipline. 

News of this reckless behavior soon came to the ears of Tughtigin, 
the prince of Damascus.®® Well aware that these troops were unac- 
quainted with the locality, the prince hoped that by making a sudden 
attack with only his best and most experienced warriors, he might suc- 
ceed in destroying them. His hopes were realized. While they were 
incautiously roaming about in search of food, he made a sudden attack 
upon them and easily put them to flight, for they were intent upon 
other things and wholly unprepared for danger. Dispersed as they 
were through the fields, many fell by the swords of the infidel. The 
prince continued the pursuit until he had put to flight not only the 
rank and file but also the flower of the army who had been detailed to 
guard the foraging party. Many of these picked soldiers were also slain. 

When news of this disaster reached the army, the hearts of all were 
kindled with wrath. Eager to resent such a wrong and to seek revenge 
against the enemy, they snatched their weapons and, with resolute and 
fiery courage, prepared to move against the foe. But against the will of 
divine power, the purposes of man can make no progress. Suddenly a 
violent rainstorm accompanied by fog descended upon them from on 
high. The roads were rendered impassable by the downpour, and the 
fury of the tempest alone was such that it was hardly possible to hope 
to escape alive. Long before this, the dense clouds and the fog, the 
winds rushing from every direction, the constant thunder and light- 
ning had given unmistakable warning of the storm. But the mind of 
man, ignorant of the future, heeded not the divine forbearance which 
would have recalled them. On the contrary, the forces strove to pro- 


58 Tughtigin had died February 11, 1128. His son, Taj al-Muluk Buri, was now in 
charge of affairs. 


42 CAPTURE OF TYRE 


ceed against the will of God, a thing which is impossible. At length, 
they realized that the tempest had been sent upon them because of 
their sins. Reluctantly they were obliged to abandon their purpose. 
Conditions were now entirely changed. When they first set out, they 
were greatly feared by the enemy as a terrible menace. Now these 
same men were a burden to themselves. Merely to return in safety to 
their own land, would, they felt, be a great victory. The enemy, on 
the other hand, was now quite at ease and had even become superior. 

This disaster occurred eight days before the Ides of December (De- 
cember 6) in the year 1130 of the Incarnation of our Lord and the 
twelfth year of King Baldwin’s reign. It happened at almost the very 
place where four years before the king had obtained a notable and 
ever-memorable victory over the same enemy.®® 

Marvellous is it, O eternal Saviour, truly marvellous and far be- 
yond the conception of man, how Thou bringest low those who pre- 
sume on their own merits! Thou piercest the hearts of those who trust 
in man and in the arm of their own flesh by hurling Thy malediction 
against them as they indeed deserve. Thou seekest no helper or sharer 
in Thy glory. For Thou hast said, blessed God, “I will not give my 
glory unto another.” ®° “Vengeance is mine; I will repay.” ®! “I kill, 
and I make alive; I wound, and I heal: neither is there any that can 
deliver out of my hand.” ® Truly, O Lord, hast Thou spoken! For as 
long as the king committed himself entirely to superabounding divine 
grace and employed only the forces of his own realm, he often an- 
nounced unhoped-for victories over the enemy. When, however, he 
began to rely upon numbers and presumed on his power to exalt him- 
self by the work of men, when he began to multiply his allies and to 
trust in human valor, Thou didst withdraw Thy favor and didst aban- 
don him to his own resources. For, when he trusted in the aid of the 
Lord, he was wont, even with small forces, to triumph easily over the 
enemy; but now, even though accompanied by a multitude, he was 
forced to retreat discomfited. 

°° The date of this defeat was late in 1129. Qalanisi, who was presumably in Da- 
mascus at the time and wrote a lengthy account of it, placed it in November of that 
year instead of December 6, as William has it. It is strange that William omitted 
the highly interesting events which preceded the campaign. The Assassins had suf- 
fered a severe defeat at the hands of the Damascenes and had given Banyas to Baldwin 
as a means of saving it from Damascus. This omission illustrates William’s difficulty 
in carrying on historical research without written guides and with many distractions 


of public office (see Gibb, Chronicle, pp. 187-99; also R.K.J., pp. 186-87). 
60 Is, 48:11. 81 Ro, 12: 19. 82 De. 32: 39. 


CAPTURE OF TYRE 43 


So, at this time, the very heavens fought against them. Driven back 
by the storm sent from on high, they were unable to accomplish their 
purpose and could not avenge their comrades who had fallen by the 
sword of the enemy. 

After these unfortunate occurrences, our leaders separated, for it 
was evident that the work which they had undertaken could not be 
carried out successfully. Consequently, all returned home. 

During this time, Stephen, patriarch of Jerusalem, of precious mem- 
ory, died.** He was succeeded by William, prior of the church of the 
Sepulchre of the Lord. William was a plain, sincere man, handsome of 
appearance and commendable for his noble character, although but 
slightly versed in letters. He was Flemish by birth, a native of Malines. 
He proved very acceptable to the king, to the princes of the realm, and 
to the people in general. 


27. Bohemond, prince of Antioch, is killed in Cilicia, near 
Mamuistra. The king repairs to Antioch in haste. Bohemona’s 
widow tries to prevent her father from entering the city, but, 
by the efforts of the citizens, the state is entrusted to the king 
and the princess is exiled. 


Soon after Bohemond, prince of Antioch, the king’s son-in-law, re- 
turned to his own province from that campaign, Ridwan, prince of 
Aleppo,** a very powerful Turkish ruler, a son of Satan, invaded the 
land of Antioch. Bohemond, hoping thereby to keep him out of his 
own territory, hastened against him into Cilicia. Other reasons also 
relating to private and domestic affairs called the young prince thither. 
While encamped there in a broad plain called the meadow of the Man- 
tles, he was suddenly attacked by a great number of the enemy. His 
men deserted, and Bohemond was slain by the foe.°> He would have 
been a great prince, beloved of God, had not premature death and 
invidious fate snatched him from the world. This misfortune utterly 
overwhelmed the people of Antioch. Since he was young, they had 
felt that they might be safe for a long time under his rule, and conse- 
quently they had ventured to undertake more than was expedient. 

68 His death occurred late in the year 1130 (see R. Reg., no. 133). 

64 This is an error. Ridwan of Aleppo, who had been prominent during the siege 
of Antioch in 1098, had died in 1114. Zangi had acquired Aleppo, and it was now 
ruled by him directly or through a lieutenant named Sawar. 


65 The death of Bohemond II occurred in February, 1130. His headless body is 
said to have been found and given proper burial in Antioch. 


44 CAPTURE OF TYRE 


Again they renewed their lamentations, complaining that without the 
help of a prince they were in danger of falling a prey to the enemy; 
and again, after holding a council, they called on the king of Jerusalem. 

Baldwin was greatly disturbed at the news of this fresh calamity, 
for he feared that, deprived of a leader, some worse misfortune might 
befall the principality. Since he regarded nothing that happened to 
the Christian princes as alien to himself, he at once laid aside his own 
concerns and began to assume the burdens of others. Anything that he 
could do for a Christian people seemed worthy of his attention. Ac- 
cordingly, he proceeded to Antioch as speedily as possible. 

But as soon as his daughter [Alice] learned of her husband’s death, 
and, in fact, before she was aware of her father’s intention to come to 
Antioch, an evil spirit led her to conceive a wicked plan. In order to 
make her position more secure and to carry her plan into effect, she 
sent messengers to a certain powerful Turkish chief, called Sanguis 
[Zangi].°* By his aid she hoped to acquire Antioch for herself in per- 
petuity, despite the opposition of her chief men and the entire people. 
For Bohemond of happy memory had left an only daughter, who ap- 
parently did not stand high in the favor of her mother. Whether she 
remained a widow or remarried, Alice was determined to disinherit her 
daughter and keep the principality for herself in perpetuity. By one 
of her own servants she sent to the nobleman just mentioned a present 
of a snow-white palfrey shot with silver. The bridle and other trap- 
pings were likewise of silver and even the silken saddle cloth was white, 
so that uniformity prevailed throughout. By chance this messenger was 
intercepted on his way and, when brought into the presence of the 
king, confessed all the details of the plot. As the fitting consequence of 
his evil doings, he was put to death with extreme torture.®? 

On learning of the unfortunate events which have just been related, 
the king hurried to Antioch. When he reached there, however, he was 
refused admission to the city by his daughter’s orders. The pangs of 
conscience had laid hold on her and she feared her father’s decision. 

66 This is Zangi, whose father had been governor of Aleppo under Malik Shah. 
When the father was killed in 1094, Zangi, then ten years old, had been sent to Mosul. 
His military career began quite early and with good fortune. He became governor 
of Mosul in 1126-1127 and extended his sway to Aleppo in 1128. 

7 Some of the details of this story appear legendary. Alice’s efforts to bring about 
peace with Zangi even at the cost of the marriage of her daughter with a Muslim 


prince, provided she herself could continue to rule at Antioch, has confirmation in 
Arabic accounts, 


CAPTURE OF TYRE 45 


She accordingly entrusted the place to her accomplices and to those 
whom her money had corrupted, and made every effort to resist, that 
she might be free to exercise her tyrannical will. But the result proved 
to be far other than as she had planned. For there were God-fearing 
men in that same city who scorned the bold insolence of a foolish 
woman. Among these were Peter Latinator, a monk of St. Paul, and 
William Aversa. With the consent of others, they secretly sent mes- 
sengers to summon the king and, by a prearranged plan, placed Fulk, 
count of Anjou, at the gate of the Duke and Count Joscelin at the 
gate of St. Paul. The gates were then unbarred, and the king entered 
the city. 

When the princess learned of this, she at once retreated to the citadel. 
Later, however, in response to the summons of the wiser men of An- 
tioch and by the advice of those in whom she had full confidence, she 
presented herself before her father, prepared to obey his will. Baldwin 
was very indignant at her conduct, yet he was not without paternal 
feelings and was finally induced to give way to the pleading of those 
who made intercession for her. Antioch was surrendered to him, and, 
lest she might at some other time make a similar attempt, the king 
granted her the coast cities of Laodicea and Jabala. For her husband, 
in his last will, had destined these cities for her, because they had 
formed her dowry at the time of her marriage. 

When the king had thus arranged the affairs of Antioch, he entrusted 
it to the care of the principal men and returned to Jerusalem, where 
private matters called him. Before he left, however, he caused all, 
both great and small, to take the solemn oath that during his own 
time and thereafter they would faithfully keep Antioch and its de- 
pendencies for Constance, the minor daughter of Bohemond the 
Younger. For he feared the wicked malice of his own daughter, lest 
she should make a second attempt to disinherit her minor daughter. 


28. The king returns to Jerusalem. He is attacked by a serious 
illness from which he dies. He is buried with the other kings 
in the church of the Sepulchre of the Lord. 


On his return to Jerusalem, the king was attacked by a serious malady 
and perceived that the day of his death was at hand. Thereupon he 
laid aside his royal state and, as a humble suppliant in the sight of the 
Lord, went forth from the palace. He caused himself to be carried into 


46 CAPTURE OF TYRE 


the palace of the lord patriarch, because that was nearer to the place of 
the Lord’s resurrection. For he had full hope that the One who had 
overcome death in that place would make him a sharer in His own 
resurrection. He then summoned to him his daughter and his son- 
in-law and the boy Baldwin, who was now two years old.®* To them, in 
the presence of the patriarch and the prelates of the church and some of 
the nobles who happened to be present, he committed the care of the 
kingdom with full power. Then, as a devout prince, he bestowed upon 
them his fatherly benediction. 

After this, having assumed the garb of religion as a true confessor of 
Christ and professed the religious life, if he should live, he rendered up 
his spirit to Him who is the Father of spirits and by the will of God 
departed to receive his reward with the other princes who had gone 
before. He died on the twenty-first day of August, in the year of the 
Incarnation of our Lord 1131, and of his own reign the thirteenth. He 
was buried with his predecessors, those kings of pious memory, at the 
foot of Mount Calvary, before the place which is called Golgotha. His 
obsequies were celebrated with great pomp and ceremony by his people, 
with all the magnificence befitting a king. Even unto the present time, 
his memory is held in veneration by all, because of his exemplary faith 
and illustrious deeds. 

88 This is the future Baldwin III. William’s unusual phrase jam bimulo seems 


somewhat ambiguous, for unless Baldwin had been born in 1129 he could hardly have 
been two years old by August 21, 1131. 


HERE ENDS THE THIRTEENTH BOOK 


THE FOURTEENTH BOOK BEGINS 


FULK OF ANJOU AS KING OF JERUSALEM: 
TROUBLES IN NORTHERN SYRIA 


1. The lineage and character of Fulk, the third king of Jerusalem. 


WueEn Baldwin du Bourg, the second Latin king of Jerusalem, was 
called from this world, he was succeeded by his son-in-law, Fulk, count 
of Touraine, Maine, and Anjou, to whom, as we mentioned above, he 
had given his eldest daughter, Melisend, in marriage. This Fulk was a 
ruddy man, like David, whom the Lord found after His own heart. 
He was faithful and gentle, affable, kind, and compassionate, unusual 
traits in people of that complexion. In works of piety and the giving of 
alms, he was most generous. Even before he was called to guide the 
affairs of the kingdom, he was a powerful prince, according to the 
flesh, and very successful in ruling his own people. He was an expe- 
rienced warrior full of patience and wisdom in military affairs. He was 
of medium height and was already well advanced in age, a man of 
more than sixty years.+ 

Among other failings from which he suffered because of human 
frailty was that of a poor memory, so fleeting that he seldom remem- 
bered faces or names, not even those of his own domestics. If someone 
on whom he had recently conferred the high honor of his friendly 
favor appeared suddenly before him, he was obliged to inquire care- 
fully who he was. This often proved embarrassing to those who, pre- 
suming on their acquaintance with him, offered to act as mediators for 
others and found that they themselves needed a patron with him. 

His father, likewise called Fulk, surnamed Rechin, was the count 
of Touraine and Anjou. He married Bertelea [Bertrada], sister of 
Amaury de Montfort. They had two sons, the Fulk of whom we are 
speaking and Geoffrey Martel; also a daughter, Hermengarde,? who 


1It is possible, even probable, that William had seen Fulk. Actually Fulk was 
barely forty years old when he became king and only fifty-three when he died, but 
to a lad of ten he must have seemed a very old man. This impression remained with 
William, who thought of Fulk always as an old man. 

2 Fulk IV, le Rechin, had had three wives (A. Fliche, Le Régne de Philippe ler, rot 
de France, 1060-1108, pp. 44, 233) or four wives (L. Halphen, Le Comté d’Anjou 


48 FULK OF ANJOU AS KING 


married as her first husband William, count of Poitou. Spurned and 
cast off by him, she fled to the count of Brittany, to whom she clung 
with the affection of a wife. To this pair was born Conan, count of 
Brittany, who was called the Fat. 

After bearing these three children to her lawful husband, Fulk the 
Elder, Bertrada deserted him and took refuge with Philip, king of 
the Franks. He put aside his legitimate wife and took Bertrada as the 
sharer of his couch and the companion of his cares. Contrary to the law 
of the church and despite all the efforts of the bishops and nobles of 
his realm, he continued to keep her with him and later treated her with 
the affection of a husband.? By her, he had two sons, Florus and Philip, 
and a daughter, Cecilia, who was mentioned above. Cecilia married as 
her first husband Tancred, prince of Antioch, and, after his death, she 
espoused Pons, count of Tripoli. 

Fulk’s younger son and namesake married, after his father’s death, 
Guiberg [Eremberge], the daughter of Elia [Hélie], count of Maine.* 
She bore him two sons and two daughters. His mother brought about 
this marriage. In his youth, Fulk was serving as cupbearer at the court 
of his lord, the count of Poitou, when the news of the death of his 
elder brother arrived.’ The count immediately seized the young man 


au Xe siécle, pp. 169-70) before he married Bertrada. The last two had been repudi- 
ated by him and were still living when he married her. This marriage occurred 
probably in 1090, certainly no earlier than 1089. Her son, Fulk, could therefore 
have been born no earlier than 1089 nor later than 1092. She fled to, or was ab- 
ducted by, Philip at Orléans on the night of May 15, 1092 (Halphen), which might 
indicate that her son had been born no later than 1091. Mlle Chartrou, who has as- 
sembled all the available information on this problem (Joséphe Chartrou, L’Anjou de 
1109 @ 1151, p. 77), prefers either 1090 or 1092 as the date of his birth. Fulk was 
therefore no older than forty-one years and may have been only thirty-nine when 
he became king of Jerusalem. The other children mentioned by William were of the 
earlier marriages. The name of the daughter suggests that she, like Geoffrey, was the 
child of the second wife, Ermengarde de Bourbon. 

® Various stories arose to explain the separation of Bertrada from Fulk IV. Fliche, 
after examining all of them, concludes that it was her irresistible charm which led 
Philip to abduct her, repudiate his wife, Bertha, who had grown flabby, and marry 
Bertrada. The marriage took place very soon after the abduction in 1092. This viola- 
tion of the marriage sacrament was the chief cause for the excommunication of Philip 
(see Fliche, PAilippe Ier, pp. 40-77). 

* Her name was Eremberge rather than Guiberg, and through her Fulk received 
the inheritance of Hélie de la Fléche, count of Maine (see Fliche, Philippe Ier, p. 231). 

5 When his oldest son, Geoffrey, died in 1106, Fulk IV asked to have his other son, 
Fulk, then at the court of France with his mother, succeed him. William IX, duke of 
Aquitaine, leader of the crusade of 1101, happened to be at the court at the time and 
was entrusted with the task of taking young Fulk to his father. Instead, William kept 
Fulk for a year or more until his father agreed to give up some disputed border coun- 
try (see Fliche, Philippe Ter, pp. 232-35). 


FULK OF ANJOU AS KING 49 


and put him in prison. His object was to wrest from Fulk by force cer- 
tain castles located in his own domain which had long been held by 
Fulk’s father and brother by hereditary right, although in fief to him- 
self as count of Poitou. 

Long before this, his mother had separated from his father and had 
fled to the king of the Franks. When she learned of her son’s imprison- 
ment, her maternal feelings were aroused. She went to the king and, 
as a suppliant, implored him to order her son’s release from prison and 
to restore his paternal inheritance. She obtained her request and also 
succeeded in persuading the king to bestow upon Fulk in marriage the 
only daughter of Count Hélie, mentioned above, with her entire heri- 
tage. By Eremberge, Fulk had, as we have said above, two sons and 
two daughters. The eldest son, Geoffrey, succeeded his father as count, 
and to him Henry the Elder, the powerful king of the Angles, gave 
as wife his only daughter, Matilda, the widow of Henry, emperor of 
the Romans.® . 

By this marriage Geoffrey had three sons: Henry, who now wisely 
and vigorously administers the kingdom of England; Geoffrey, sur- 
named Plantagenet; and William, known as Long Sword. 

Fulk’s second son bore the name Heélie for his maternal grandfather. 
To him Rotrou, count of Perche, gave his only daughter in marriage. 
He promised that he himself would not remarry, but would, on his 
death, transfer to Hélie in all integrity her entire inheritance. Regard- 
less of this agreement, however, and of his lavish promises, he married 
a sister of Count Patritius, an English lord, by whom he had several 
children. Thus Hélie, contrary to his expectations, lost his wife’s in- 
heritance. 

Sibylla, one of Fulk’s daughters, married the noble and distinguished 
Thierry, count of Flanders.” Of this marriage was born Philip, who 


8 Matilda was the daughter of Henry I, king of England, whom William calls 
“Elder” to distinguish him from his grandson, Henry IJ, who ruled England in Wil- 
liam’s time. She had been sent to Germany before she was ten to become the wife of 
Henry V. Her English companions were dismissed, and she was brought up in the 
strict etiquette of the imperial court. Her marriage took place when she was twelve. 
She was a widow at twenty-three. She was much beloved in Germany, but her father 
wanted her to become his heir in England. Her ways were doubtless strange there, 
and she was always referred to as ‘“‘the empress” even after her marriage to Geoffrey 
of Anjou, ten years her junior and scarcely seventeen at the time of the marriage. 
Even her son, Henry II, was called Henry Fitz-empress (son of the empress). 

7 Sibylla had originally been married to William Clito, the natural son of Robert of 
Normandy, older brother of Henry I. The latter took the initiative in having this 
marriage annulled on the grounds of consanguinity. Fulk was very angry when the 


50 FULK OF ANJOU AS KING 


today holds the county of Flanders. The second daughter, Matilda, 
had been betrothed to Henry, son of the king of England. Before the 
marriage took place, however, her betrothed, while sailing to England, 
suffered shipwreck and was drowned. Matilda vowed perpetual celi- 
bacy, and in the abbey of Fontevrault she led a holy life until her 
death.® 


2. How, before he was summoned by King Baldwin, Fulk had 
visited Jerusalem on a pilgrimage; and how he was raised to 
the throne. 


Arrer the death of his wife and before he was summoned by the king, 
Fulk went to Jerusalem for the sake of prayer. There he devoted him- 
self nobly to the service of the Lord and gained, as he well deserved, 
the favor of all the people as well as that of the king. He lived on terms 
of intimate friendship with all the barons. For the space of a year, he 
maintained in the kingdom, at his own expense, an hundred knights.® 
At length he returned in safety to his own land, where he arranged 
marriages for his sons and daughters and put the affairs of his domain 
in splendid condition. Some years after his return, while he was admin- 
istering his affairs with wisdom and energy, an embassy arrived from 
the king of Jerusalem. 

Baldwin was anxious to arrange a marriage for his eldest daughter 
so that he might provide for the succession. Accordingly, after long 
deliberation, by the unanimous advice of the nobles and with the ap- 
proval of the people also, he had sent some of his chief men, namely, 


pope acceded to Henry’s request, burned the papal edict, and defied the pope. Excom- 
munication for himself and an interdict on Anjou, however, finally brought him to 
terms in 1125. Sibylla was to figure in the affairs of the Holy Land. 

8 The son of Henry I was named William. He was drowned in the famous tragedy 
of the White Ship, November 25, 1120, in which so many young nobles lost their lives. 
Fulk’s daughter, Matilda, was thought by some to have drowned with him. The con- 
vent of Fontevrault was a famous refuge for many a titled woman, and Henry II 
is known to have donated generously to its maintenance. 

® This first journey, according to Ordericus Vitalis, The Ecclesiastical History of 
England and Normandy, was undertaken after Fulk had made peace with Henry I 
and arranged the marriage of William and Matilda. He is thought to have left Anjou 
in the spring of 1120 and to have returned in the fall of 1121. While in the East he 
associated himself with the Templars and on his return arranged to give them an 
annual revenue of thirty livres of Anjou (see Ordericus Vitalis x11. 29). Mlle Char- 
trou says that he left shortly after April 25, 1120, and was back before January 29, 
1122. She refers to his grant of “thirty livres” to the Templars (Chartrou, L’Anjou, 


pp. 14-15). 


FULK OF ANJOU AS KING 51 


William de Bury and Guy de Brisebar, to invite Fulk to espouse his 
daughter and become the heir to the throne. 

The count accordingly arranged his own affairs and set the county 
in order. He then blessed his children and, in response to the call of 
the king, set forth on the journey, attended by a splendid retinue of 
his nobles.1° Within a few days after his arrival in the kingdom, the 
king gave him his oldest daughter to wife, as had been provided in the 
agreement, and conferred upon him as her dowry the two coast cities, 
Tyre and Acre. These Fulk held for nearly three years and continued 
to be called count as before. Then, on August 21, in the year 1131 of 
the Incarnation of our Lord, the king died. On September 14, the 
day of the exaltation of the Holy Cross, Count Fulk and his wife 
Melisend were solemnly crowned and consecrated, according to cus- 
tom, in the church of the Sepulchre of the Lord, by William, patriarch 
of Jerusalem, of happy memory. 


3. Joscelin the Elder, count of Edessa, though sick and lying 
on a litter, meets the enemy and puts them to flight. He then 
dies. Also concerning his son, Joscelin. 


Ar this time, Joscelin, count of Edessa, exhausted by a long illness, 
was lying on his bed awaiting the day of his death, which was imminent. 
In the year that had just passed, while he was in the country near 
Aleppo, a tower built of sundried bricks had fallen upon him. To facili- 
tate the capture of the place with some of the enemy who were shut 
up within it, he had ordered it to be undermined. But, since he did not 


10 The date of Fulk’s final departure for the Holy Land revolves around the date 
of his son Geoffrey’s marriage with Matilda, “the empress.” This marriage was 
mutually vital to the peaceful relations of Anjou with its formidable neighbor, 
Henry I of England. Fulk remained to see that marriage concluded and left shortly 
after it occurred. Historians of Western Europe—Stubbs, Ramsay, G. B. Adams, and 
even Luchaire—have been inclined to date that marriage in 1129, whereas historians 
of the crusades have as a rule preferred 1128, perhaps to permit Fulk’s marriage to 
Melisend at Jerusalem in 1129. Miss Norgate, however, reached the conclusion that 
the marriage of Geoffrey and Matilda took place in 1128 (Kate Norgate, England 
under the Angevins, p. 258). Mlle Chartrou, scrutinizing local records, fully sup- 
ports Miss Norgate, dating the betrothal of the pair at Rouen May 22, 1127, the 
knighting of Geoffrey by Henry I June 10, 1128, and the marriage June 17, 1128 
(Chartrou, L’ Anjou, pp. 20-23). Fulk formally took the cross at Le Mans on May 31, 
1128. He remained in the West for some months after the marriage, engaged in the 
settlement of his affairs, and, after a final visit to his daughter at Fontevrault at the 
beginning of 1129, he started for the East (Chartrou, L’Amjou, pp. 226-27). This 
accords with William’s account and definitely dates the marriage of Fulk and Melisend 
as in 1129. 


52 FULK OF ANJOU AS KING 


exercise due caution, he was himself caught in its sudden fall and al- 
most buried alive. His people rescued him with much difficulty, and 
he was found to be suffering from many fractures. For a long time he 
had been ill from his injuries, but as yet had succeeded in detaining his 
spirit, which was struggling to depart. One day a messenger arrived 
in haste. He brought the news that the sultan of Iconium had laid 
siege to Cresson, one of Joscelin’s fortresses.11 At this, the high-spirited 
man, feeble and weak of body but still strong of heart, at once ordered 
his son to be called. He bade him take all the forces of the country and 
go forth to meet the enemy valiantly in the place of his helpless 
father. The son, however, began to make excuses. He urged, as an 
objection, that the above-named sultan was reported to be advancing 
at the head of a great host, in comparison with which his own soldiers 
were but few. The father reflected with bitterness on his son’s pusil- 
lanimity, well understanding from his reply what manner of man he 
would be in the future. Then he himself ordered the army and all the 
people of the locality to be called out. When this had been done, he 
directed that a litter be made ready for himself. Regardless of his 
suffering and weakness, he placed himself upon it and advanced against 
the foe. He had accompanied the army in this manner for some distance 
when one of the great barons of the land, Geoffrey, surnamed the 
Monk, came to him with the information that the sultan, on hearing 
of his advance, had abandoned the siege of Cresson and beat a hasty 
retreat. 

On learning this, the count ordered the litter on which he was 
being carried to be placed on the ground. He then raised his hands 
toward heaven and, with tears and sighs, gave fervent thanks to God 
that in his last days the Lord, in His gracious mercy, had visited him 
with such favor; that he, though half dead and on the very verge of 
the grave, was still formidable to the enemies of the Christian faith. 
While in the very act of giving thanks thus, he rendered up to heaven 
his last breath. His son, who bore the same name but was far inferior to 
his father in glory, was left as the sole heir to all his property. 

The mother of Joscelin the Younger was a sister of Leo the Ar- 
menian, a very influential man among his own people.!2 Though small 

11 Qilij Arslan was forced to seek another capital after the crusaders took Nicaea 
in 1097. Iconium was finally selected and his successors were usually referred to as 


sultans of Iconium or Rum. 
12 This was Leo, brother of Constantine, whose daughter Arda had married Bald- 


FULK OF ANJOU AS KING 53 


of stature, Joscelin was stout of limb and very robust. His skin and 
hair were dark, his face broad and covered with scars from the disease 
called smallpox. He had bulging eyes and a prominent nose. Although 
of a generous disposition and distinguished for military prowess, he 
was yet given to excessive revelry and drunkenness. He was devoted to 
licentiousness and uncleanness of the flesh to the point of infamous 
notoriety. He married Beatrice, the widow of William de Saéne, a 
woman of noble rank but of still more noble character. By her he had 
a son, Joscelin the Third, and a daughter [Agnes], who became the 
wife, first of Renaud of Marash and later of Amaury, count of Jaffa, 
afterwards king of Jerusalem. Of this latter union was born Baldwin, 
the sixth king of Jerusalem, and Sibylla, his sister. But, through his 
lack of energy and in punishment for his sins, this Joscelin 1% lost the 
entire land over which his father had ruled so ably, as will be explained 
later. 


4. The people of Antioch appeal to the king; the wickedness of 


the princess is revealed. 


Durine the first year of Fulk’s reign, both the city and the entire land 
of Antioch were without the support of a prince, for Bohemond the 
Younger had died before King Baldwin, leaving as his heir an only 
daughter. The great men of the country, fearing that the province 
through lack of a protector might be exposed to the wiles of the enemy, 
appealed to the king. They begged him to assume the responsibility of 
Antioch and to take everything under his own care. The widow of the 
late prince, a daughter of King Baldwin and sister of Queen Melisend, 
was an extremely malicious and wily woman. With the help of certain 
accomplices in her designs, she was intriguing to wrong the principal- 
ity. Her plan was to disinherit the daughter whom she had borne to 
her husband and thus secure for herself the entire kingdom. Then, 
after obtaining possession of the principality, she intended to marry 
again according to her own pleasure. But immediately after the death 
of her husband, King Baldwin, who was then living, had frustrated 
these plans. He ordered her to be expelled by force from Antioch and 
admonished her to be content with the portion which her husband had 


win I. He succeeded his brother as ruler of the Armenians in 1123 and ruled until 


1135. 
13 Joscelin II (see Book XVI, chaps. 5, 16, and Book XVII, chap. 11). 


54 FULK OF ANJOU AS KING 


given her as dowry at the time of her marriage, namely, the two cities 
on the coast, Jabala and Laodicea. 

On the death of her father, Alice thought that a favorable time to 
carry out her original plan had come. By lavish gifts and promises she 
had secured certain powerful nobles as accomplices in her plot: namely, 
William de Sehunna, brother of Guarenton; Pons, count of Tripol1; 
and Joscelin the Younger, count of Edessa.1¢ This was the very thing 
which the nobles of the land had dreaded, and therefore they were 
striving with all their power to counteract her wicked intentions. Hence, 
as was mentioned above, they appealed to the king, that they might 
have his assistance and guidance in this matter. 


5. The count of Tripoli tries to oppose the king as he 1s hasten- 
ing to Antioch but is worsted. The affairs of Antioch are put 
in good condition. 


Tue king listened with much concern to the statement of the deputa- 
tion from Antioch in regard to the disturbance there. The situation 
seemed to him very serious. Accordingly, he at once responded to the 
call and proceeded on his way as far as Beirut. As the count of Tripoli 
refused to allow him to pass through his land, the king took with him 
Anselm de Brie, one of his own loyal noblemen, and went by sea to 
the Port of St. Simeon. There he was met by some of the noble and 
influential men of Antioch, who led him into the city and placed the 
whole country under his command. 

The count of Tripoli hastened after him to Antioch, that he might 
oppose whatever he did; for, although his wife was the king’s sister as 
has often been mentioned, rumor said that Pons had been bribed by 
the princess to assist her. He possessed in that vicinity two fortressses, 
Arcicanum and Rugia. These he held in right of his wife[Cecilia], 
widow of Tancred of pious memory, who on his deathbed had given 
them to her as her dowry. These Pons now fortified with arms and 
soldiers and used as bases from which to molest the king and his men. 
This roused great indignation among the people of Antioch, and they 
urged the king to march against the count to check his insolent aggres- 

14 The wiles of a foolish and power-loving Alice are insufficient to explain the sup- 
port of Pons and Joscelin II. Baldwin II as regent of Antioch and personal overlord 
of Joscelin I had indicated the possibility of a Latin empire under the king of Jeru- 


salem. Pons had resisted that. Now, when conditions again presented a similar oppor- 
tunity to Fulk, both Pons and Joscelin II resisted. 


FULK OF ANJOU AS KING 55 


sion. Mindful of the affront offered him on his journey when Pons 
refused to allow him to pass through the land of Tripoli, the king 
agreed to their request. He mustered as large a force as possible and 
proceeded toward his adversary. The forces met near Rugia. Both 
sides were drawn up in battle array, and a fierce combat ensued.1* For a 
long time the result was doubtful. Finally, however, the king gained 
the advantage and put the count and his men to flight. Many of the 
latter’s soldiers, exhausted by the fight, were captured and led in chains 
to Antioch. Eventually, however, through the earnest efforts of loyal 
advocates of peace, the king and the count were reconciled. The cap- 
tured knights were restored to the count, and the affairs of the land of 
Antioch seemed to have been put into better condition. Nevertheless, 
the wiser men of the province feared that after the king returned to his 
own land the country might be shaken by internal sedition, which 
would afford the infidels a better chance to attack it. They therefore 
earnestly implored him to remain longer among them. To this the 
king graciously consented, for he felt that through the mercy of God 
his own realm was rejoicing in a state of perfect security, while Antioch, 
where he was now sojourning, was in great need of a protector. 

Accordingly, with the advice and assent of the chief nobles, he set 
in order by his judicious management the affairs both of the city and of 
the adjacent lands. In order to bring everything into the best possible 
condition, he expended upon this task as much care as he gave to his 
own affairs, or rather far more. This course of action won for him the 
ever-increasing gratitude of all the citizens and also of the loyal party 
among the nobles. He remained at Antioch as long as the situation 
seemed to demand. Then, having placed all the affairs of that land in 
safe condition and arranged everything in good order, he returned to 
the kingdom, where his own responsibilities called him. The princi- 
pality was left in charge of a capable man of high birth, Renaud 
Masoier.7¢ 

15 These events must be dated in the summer of 1132. William offers very few dates 
for the events of the next two books. He has no contemporary written guides, and his 
own distractions with current affairs prevented him from pursuing systematic investi- 
gation. He was therefore more or less dependent upon oral tradition for the events 


of Fulk’s reign. 
16 Now constable of Antioch. He had been prominent in the campaign of 1119. 


56 FULK OF ANJOU AS KING 


6. The king is again summoned by the people of Antioch. Zangi 
lays siege to a fortress in the land of Tripoli. At the earnest 
request of his sister, the king relieves the place. 


Aw interval passed during which King Fulk was actively engaged in the 
affairs of the kingdom committed to him by God and, like Martha, was 
constantly occupied in carefully ministering to its needs. Then came a 
messenger from Antioch with the news that a vast host of Turks from 
the Persian gulf and the entire Orient had crossed the great river 
Euphrates and invaded the land of Antioch in large numbers. This 
news caused the king to fear greatly for the principality which had been 
given into his care. He was anxious about the safety of those dwelling 
there, especially because they had placed all their hope in him. He was 
also worried because he remembered the common saying, “When your 
neighbor’s house is burning, your own property is in danger too,” 17 
and he knew that the downfall of his neighbors would be fraught with 
danger to himself. Realizing that it was a noble work to minister to 
brethren in need, he summoned forces, both foot and horse, from all 
over the realm and prepared to march thither in haste. He had reached 
Sidon with his army when he was met by his sister, the Countess Ce- 
cilia, the wife of Count Pons of Tripoli. She brought the deplorable 
news that Zangi, prince of Aleppo, a powerful Turkish satrap, was 
vigorously besieging her husband in one of his castles, called Montfer- 
rand.1® Most urgently and persistently, as women will, she begged 
and besought the king to lay aside everything for the present which did 
not imperatively demand his attention and to hasten at once to re- 
lieve the desperate situation of her husband. The king, moved by her 
plea, put off temporarily the matter upon which he had set forth and 
directed his march toward the castle. With him went certain knights 
of the county who had not accompanied the count on his expedition. 
As soon as Zangi learned that the king was on his way to relieve Pons, 
however, he took counsel with his people and voluntarily abandoned 
the siege. He then returned with his legions to his own land. 


17 Horace Ep. XVIII. 84. 

18 Zangi made his first attack on Montferrand (Barin) in 1133. The capture of 
Banyas by the Damascenes, which took place before this, is not mentioned by William 
until Chapter 17. 


FULK OF ANJOU AS KING 57 


7. The king hastens to Antioch. He puts to flight the infidels 
who had assembled there. The citizens are enriched by the 
spoils taken from the foe. 


Tuus the count was freed. The king, relieved from that anxiety, now 
returned to his original purpose and proceeded by forced marches to 
Antioch, as he had at first intended. The people heard that he was on 
the way and went out to meet him. With the utmost joy they wel- 
comed their royal guest, for they hoped that through his energetic 
efforts they might be enabled to withstand safely the violence of the 
foe, now said to be close at hand. For numbers, however large, are of 
little avail without a leader, and numerous cohorts without a com- 
mander, like sand without lime, will hardly hold together. 

Meanwhile, frequent rumors and reports all pointed definitely to 
the fact that the infidels had crossed the Euphrates with a strong, 
well-equipped army. They had associated with their own forces others 
whom they had encountered on this side of the river, men who were 
well acquainted with the locality. They were now encamped near 
Aleppo, whence they were making sudden raids and laying waste the 
entire country. Furthermore, troops from all the neighboring territory 
had been concentrated at a place called Canestrivum.!® From there, by 
the advice of those who knew the country, they proposed to make sud- 
den forays with all their multitude upon the land. 

The king therefore levied the full strength of the principality and, 
with the knights who had come with him, left Antioch and encamped 
near the fortress of Harim. Here he waited for a few days, like a 
prudent man (for “impetuosity often ruins everything”), on the 
chance that the infidels, whose forces were said to exceed his own, 
might challenge him to fight or in some way disclose their intended 
plan of action. They did nothing of the kind, however, but quietly 
remained safe in their camp, perhaps waiting for larger reinforcements. 
Accordingly, Fulk made a sudden attack upon them. They were taken 
by surprise, and before they could seize their weapons he had fallen 
upon them with sword and lance. A few, thanks to their horses, suc- 

19 This is Qinnesrin (ancient Chalcis). Stevenson dates the battle January, 1133 


(W. B. Stevenson, Tre Crusaders in the East, p. 132), while Qalanisi dates it a year 
later (see H. A. R. Gibb, trans., The Damascus Chronicle, pp. 220-23). 


58 FULK OF ANJOU AS KING 


ceeded in escaping; the rest were slain. About three thousand of the 
enemy perished in that affair. The camp, filled with all kinds of com- 
modities and furnishings, was abandoned. 

Our victorious troops returned to Antioch in exultation. They were 
laden with marvellous spoils, even to the point of satiety, so that they 
desired no more. With them they brought a great variety of booty— 
slaves, horses, herds, flocks, and tents, in fact, riches of all kinds. 

From this time, the king enjoyed full favor with the people of 
Antioch, lords and common people alike. The princess hated him and 
resented his presence at Antioch, and, up to this time, some of the 
nobles who favored her cause by reason of the lavish gifts which she 
distributed had been opposed to him. Now, however, the hearts of all 
were completely won over to him. 


8. The patriarch of Jerusalem and the nobles of the realm build 
a greatly needed fortress and call it Castle Arnold. 


Tuus the king was detained in the land of Antioch, for, until a prince 
should be chosen there by common agreement, he had again under- 
taken the administration of that country, as if it were his own. Mean- 
while the Christians left in the kingdom, namely, the patriarch and the 
citizens of Jerusalem, putting their trust in the Lord, assembled in full 
strength at a place near the ancient Nobe, which today is generally 
called Bettenuble [Bait Nuba].?° There, on the slope of the hill at the 
entrance to the plain, on the road leading to Lydda and from there to 
the sea, they built a fortress of solid masonry to ensure the safety of 
pilgrims passing along that route. In the narrow mountain pass, among 
defiles impossible to avoid, pilgrims were exposed to great danger. 
Here the people of Ascalon were accustomed to fall upon them sud- 
denly. The work, when successfully accomplished, was called Castle 
Arnold. Thus, by the grace of God and also because of this fortress, 
the road became much safer and the journey of pilgrims to or from 
Jerusalem was rendered less perilous. 


7° Castle Arnold was about five miles north and slightly west of Bait Nuba on the 
road to Jaffa. 


FULK OF ANJOU AS KING 59 


9. By the advice of the king, Raymond, son of the count of 


Poitou, ts invited to marry Constance, the daughter of Bohe- 
mond. 


Tue fact that the king had obtained such a signal victory and was suc- 
cessfully managing the affairs of Antioch according to his own good 
pleasure gained for him a distinguished reputation. It seemed plain 
that he had been appointed by divine providence to administer the 
government of the two kingdoms and to ensure peace and safety for the 
people. 

Accordingly, the nobles of Antioch and particularly those who ar- 
dently desired to observe loyalty to the late Lord Bohemond and to his 
daughter, who was still a minor, came to consult him confidentially. 
Since he had a wide acquaintance with illustrious young nobles in the 
lands beyond the mountains, in the course of a friendly conversation 
they begged him to suggest the name of that one who, among so many 
princes, would be best fitted to wed the daughter of their lord, the 
heiress of her father’s estate. The king listened graciously to their 
request; he commended their loyal solicitude and began to consider the 
matter with them. After many names had been discussed, it was finally 
decided by general consent to invite for this purpose Raymond, son of 
Count William of Poitou, a noble youth of distinguished ability.?+ He 
was said to be at the court of Henry the Elder, king of the English, 
from whom he had received the arms of a knight. Meanwhile, Wil- 
liam, his elder brother, was governing Aquitaine by hereditary right. 
After weighing all aspects of the matter, they decided that the wisest 
course would be to send a secret embassy. Gerald, surnamed Jeberrus, 
a brother of the Hospital, was accordingly sent on this mission with 
letters from the patriarch and all the nobles.” 

It was feared that if Raymond were summoned with ceremony by 
envoys of higher degree, the princess, a woman full of malicious wiles, 
might interpose obstacles. It would be easy to hinder anyone from 
coming. For Roger, who was then duke of Apulia and who later became 
king, desired to succeed Bohemond, his kinsman, and was claiming 


21 Raymond was the son of William IX, duke of Aquitaine, who had led the crusade 
of 1101 and who also had held Fulk a captive in 1106. Apparently the captivity had 
not been unpleasant. 

22 This is an early instance of the use of members of the military orders in diplomatic 
missions. The practice was to become quite common, 


60 FULK OF ANJOU AS KING 


Antioch with all its possessions as belonging to him by hereditary right. 
Robert Guiscard, father of the elder Bohemond, and Roger, count of 
Sicily, surnamed Bursa, father of this King Roger, were own brothers, 
born of the same father and mother. The younger Bohemond, how- 
ever, son of the elder, was the father of the maiden whom the young 
Raymond was to be invited to marry.? It was necessary to use caution, 
therefore, in presenting the invitation, for if his rivals learned of the 
affair, violence or intrigue might be used to prevent his coming. When 
the matter had been arranged in this manner, the king went back to 


Jerusalem, followed by the good will of all. 


10. Bernard, patriarch of Antioch, dies. Ralph, archbishop of 


Mamistra, succeeds him amid much disturbance. 


Axout this time, Bernard, the first Latin patriarch of Antioch, an aged 
man of precious memory, sincere and God-fearing, went the way of 
all flesh, in the thirty-sixth year of his pontificate.?* After his death all 
the suffragans of that extensive see, bishops as well as archbishops, 
assembled according to custom, to provide suitably for the consolation 
of the church, thus bereaved of its pastor. While they were giving care- 
ful consideration to this important matter, as is the custom in such 
cases, one Ralph, archbishop of Mamistra, from Castle Domfront, on 
the confines of the dioceses of Normandy and Maine, was elected. He 
was a military man, very magnificent and generous, a great favorite 
both with the people and with those of knightly rank. He was chosen, 
it is said, by the vote of the people alone, without the knowledge of his 
brethren and fellow bishops, and was placed on the throne in the cathe- 
dral of the Prince of the Apostles. 

When this became known, those who had assembled for the purpose 
of placing a patriarch over themselves, by the will of God, at once 
dispersed. They feared the attack of the shouting, frenzied mob, but 
they refused to show obedience to one whom they themselves had not 
chosen. Notwithstanding this, Ralph took possession of the church and 
palace and at once assumed the pallium from the altar of St. Peter, 

23 The Normans of Sicily naturally felt a continuing lait upon Bohemond’s princi- 
pality of Antioch. Despite all the precautions, there is little evidence of any real inter- 
ference in the accession of Raymond of Poitou. Perhaps the fact that the title was 
oe through the daughter of Bohemond II was of some consolation to the Normans 
° ea The death of Bernard and the election of Ralph occurred in 1136. 


FULK OF ANJOU AS KING 61 


without regard for the church at Rome. In the course of time, he drew 
into his own communion some of the suffragans of the church. We 
have been informed by many that, if he had kept on good terms with 
the canons of the church and had not presumed in a spirit of pride to 
disturb their possessions, he might have passed his life there in peace. 
But as the proverb truly says, “It is difficult for things which have a 
bad beginning to come to a good end.” As punishment for his sins, 
Ralph became so overbearing because of his great riches that he es- 
teemed himself superior to all others and carried himself rather as a 
prince of Antioch than as the successor of Peter or Ignatius. Some of 
the elders of the church he removed by force; others he bound and 
threw into prison as if they had been guilty of capital crimes. Among 
his victims was a certain Arnulf, a learned man of noble birth, a native 
of Calabria; and likewise Lambert, an archdeacon of that same church, 
a man of wonderful simplicity and noble life, moreover a learned man. 
Like men of blood they were thrust into the dungeon of a certain 
fortress and lodged in a room filled with lime. There they were tor- 
tured for many days under the pretext of having conspired for the 
death of Ralph. By these and similar acts of savage cruelty committed 
against his subordinates he incurred universal hatred. Finally, con- 
stantly pricked by the stings of a guilty conscience, he felt that he 
was safe nowhere, not even among his followers and servants. 

But enough of this subject for the present; in the following chap- 
ters, at the fitting time and place, we shall speak of his end.?° 


11. Pope Honorius dies; Innocent is elected in his stead. A dan- 
gerous schism arises. William, archbishop of Tyre, dies; Ful- 
cher is put in his place. He goes to Rome to ask for the pal- 
lum and receives it. 


WHILE these events were transpiring in the Orient, Pope Honorius 
paid the debt ordained by fate and came to the end of his days. A 
meeting was held to select his successor, but the wishes of the cardinals 
were widely diverse. Since they were unable to agree, two candidates 
were chosen; Gregory, cardinal deacon of St. Angelo, who, after his 
consecration was called Innocent; and Peter, surnamed Leo, cardinal- 
priest of title St. Mary beyond the Tiber, which is called Fundens 
Oleum. The latter, after his consecration, was called Anacletus by 


25 Book XV, chaps. 16 and 17. 


62 FULK OF ANJOU AS KING 


those who had chosen him. Out of this division there arose a very 
dangerous schism which imperilled the churches of the city and caused 
the death of people in civil strife. In fact, it shook practically the entire 
world, and through the partisan zeal which it roused kingdoms were 
brought into conflict with one another.?° After many hardships and 
great dangers, Innocent was finally triumphant, for Peter, the rival 
pope, passed away first.?7 

About the same time, William, our predecessor, laid aside the burden 
of the flesh and departed to the Lord.?* He was the first Latin arch- 
bishop of Tyre after the liberation of the city (for one Odo, who had 
been ordained incumbent of this church while Tyre was still held by 
the enemy, died prior to the liberation of the city, as has been men- 
tioned), and was succeeded by Fulcher of good memory, an Aquitanian 
from the county of Angouléme. Fulcher was religious and God-fearing, 
possessed of little learning, but a faithful man and a lover of discipline. 
He had been abbot of the convent of Celles, presiding over his brethren, 
the regular canons. At the time of the schism mentioned above, which 
arose between Pope Innocent and Peter, son of Peter Leo, the legate 
of the apostolic see was Gerard, bishop of Angouléme. He favored 
Peter and consequently visited many annoyances upon the partisans of 
the other side. Fulcher, a man of revered life, could not endure this 
treatment. He took leave of his brethren and went to Jerusalem for 
the sake of prayer. He professed the regular life with constant at- 
tendance in the cloister of the church of the Sepulchre of the Lord 
and was finally called to the church at Tyre. 

For twelve years, he ruled that church vigorously and well and was 


°6 This double election to the office of pope occurred in 1130. Innocent II was 
chosen by a small number of the cardinals, Anacletus II by a majority. The latter was 
a member of the wealthy Pierleone family of Rome and was trained at Cluny. The 
cause of Innocent II was espoused by Bernard of Clairvaux, leader of the Cistercians. 
Ultimately Lothair of Germany, Louis VI of France, and Henry I of England were 
all won to support Innocent II, but Anacletus continued to claim the office and to hold 
Rome most of the time until his death in 1138. An extended account of this election 
is given by Gregorovius (see F. Gregorovius, 4 History of the City of Rome in the 
Middle Ages, Vol. IV, Part 11, chap. 3 passim; see also “Innocent II,” Catholic Ency- 
clopedia). 

*7 Anacletus II died in 1138, and though his cardinals chose a successor, they were 
persuaded to end the schism and recognize Innocent II. Bernard of Clairvaux was 
largely responsible for this decision. Innocent II ruled until 1143. 

78 The death of William I, archbishop of Tyre, may be dated 1134 or early 1135 at 
the latest by subtracting the twelve years of Fulcher’s incumbency from 1146 or Janu- 
ary, 1147, when the latter became patriarch of Jerusalem. 


FULK OF ANJOU AS KING 63 


the fourth incumbent before us, who now preside over that same 
church, not as deserving it by merit but solely by the will and long- 
suffering of the Lord. After he had received the gift of consecration 
from the hand of William, the patriarch of Jerusalem, Fulcher de- 
sired, after the example of his predecessor, to visit the church at Rome 
to receive the pallium. The patriarch and his accomplices, however, 
prevented him by intrigue and violence, so that he had great difficulty 
in escaping from their hands in order to go to the church at Rome, 
for the purpose above mentioned. This is plainly shown from the tenor 
of the following letter of Pope Innocent. He writes: 


“Innocent, bishop, servant of the servants of God, to his venerable 
brother, William, patriarch of Jerusalem, salutation and the apostolic 
blessing. Evangelical authority has declared that the headship of the 
whole church and of the ecclesiastical institution was conferred upon 
the blessed Peter, prince of the apostles, by divine privilege.” 


And below: 


“We are astonished that, after the church at Rome has labored so 
exceedingly for the liberation of the church of the East, and, by pour- 
ing out the blood of many sons, has inspired to her service the hearts 
of both clergy and laymen, you have by no means cared to give a 
fitting response to that mother church. For you did not deem it suf- 
ficient that you had dared to disturb our venerable brother Fulcher, 
archbishop of Tyre, when he came, according to the custom of his 
predecessors, to receive the pallium from the church at Rome, but 
in addition you showed yourself unkind, difficult, and exceedingly 
harsh toward him on his return from us. To such an extent did you 
carry this treatment that you refused to restore to him the ancient 
dignity of the church at Tyre; and to do him justice according to our 
mandate, within three months after the receipt of our letter, for the 
losses suffered by him, either at Haifa or at Porphyrion. In any case 
it would be unjust that the honor which should be shown him by the 
church at Antioch, if in her obedience, should be taken away by you 
or by your successors. Moreover, you are said to conduct yourself too 
arbitrarily toward those who are subject to that church. Therefore, 
by our apostolic authority, we command that, as you desire to be 
cherished by the pious zeal and solace of that same mother church, 


64 FULK OF ANJOU AS KING 


and as you wish to be aided in your necessities by her patronage, you 
love and honor the said archbishop and presume not to disturb him 
in any way. On the contrary, do not defer showing him full justice in 
all matters concerning which he has made complaint against you, and 
that within forty days after you receive this present writing. Further- 
more, do not presume to do anything contrary to the statutes of the 
canons against those subject to him. Otherwise you may have cause 
to fear lest we withdraw from your obedience both him and his suf- 
fragans and retain them in our own hand. 

Given at the Lateran, December 17.” ?° 


12. The church at Rome commands Fulcher to be obedient to 
the patriarch of Jerusalem, and that he hold the same rank in 
that church which he formerly held over the people of Anti- 


och. 


On his return from the church at Rome, Fulcher received the com- 
mand that, while the matter as to which of the two patriarchs he should 
submit to in perpetuity was under consideration, he should be obedient 
to the patriarch of Jerusalem, according to the directions given to his 
predecessor; and he was directed to hold in the church at Jerusalem 
the same dignity which his predecessors had held in the church at 
Antioch as long as they had been subject to it. 

It is certain that among the thirteen archbishops who, from the 
days of the apostles, had been subject to the see at Antioch, the arch- 
bishop of Tyre had occupied the first place, so that he was called Proto- 
thronus in the Orient. In the list of the suffragan bishops who were 
under the jurisdiction of the church of Antioch, one may read as 
follows: 


First see, Tyre, under which are thirteen bishoprics; 
Second see, Tarsus, under which are five bishoprics; 
Third see, Edessa, under which are ten bishoprics; 

Fourth see, Apamea, under which are seven bishoprics; 
Fifth see, Hierapolis, under which are eight bishoprics; 
Sixth see, Bostrum, under which are nineteen bishoprics; 
Seventh see, Anavarza, under which are nine bishoprics; 
Eighth see, Seleucia, under which are twenty-four bishoprics; 


*° This letter, here dated December, has been assigned to January 17, 1139 (see 
R. Réhricht, Regesta regni Hierosolymitani, no. 187). 


FULK OF ANJOU AS KING 65 


Ninth see, Damascus, under which are ten bishoprics; 

Tenth see, Amida, under which are seven bishoprics; 

Eleventh see, Sergiopolis, under which are four bishoprics; 
Twelfth see, Theodosiopolis, under which are seven bishoprics; 
Thirteenth see, Hims, under which are four bishoprics; 
Independent metropolitans, eight; 

Archbishops, twelve.®° 


From the rescript of the letter of Pope Innocent sent to the same 
William, patriarch of Jerusalem, it is evident that the church at Tyre 
held the first place among the suffragans of the church at Jerusalem, 
and that she was obedient to it solely by the command of the pope. 
It reads as follows: 


“Innocent, bishop, servant of the servants of God, to William, patri- 
arch of Jerusalem, salutation and the apostolic blessing. 

“Tn as much as the gracious munificence of God has greatly exalted 
the church at Jerusalem in your times, so much the more ought you 
to show yourself kindly toward your brethren and to honor with mutual 
love those who render obedience to you. Therefore, we direct you, 
dear brother, to love and honor with brotherly kindness our venerable 
brother Fulcher, archbishop of Tyre, who by thé command of the 
holy church of Rome, is obedient unto you. See to it with all care 
that you do not bring upon him any trouble, or that under pretext of 
this submission to you and the church of Jerusalem, which, indeed, 
has been imposed upon him by the favor of the apostolic see, the noble 
and renowned church at Tyre suffers any detriment to its rights and 
dignity. For it is not fitting that the honor which would be shown 
to it by the church at Antioch, if it were obedient to her, should be 
taken away by you or your successors. 


Given at Albano, July 17.” 3} 


13. The pope commands Fulcher’s suffragans to obey him, and 
to this end he dispatches several letters. 


On his return from Rome, Fulcher recovered, although with some 
difficulty, his suffragan bishoprics which until that time had been under 
30 This traditional organization of the Christian church in the East was established 


by the council of Chalcedon in 451. 
31 Dated July 17, 1138 (see R. Reg., no. 176). 


66 FULK OF ANJOU AS KING 


the authority of the patriarch of Jerusalem: namely, Acre, Sidon, and 
Beirut. The others, that is, Jubail, Tripoli, and Tortosa, which held 
the other bishoprics under jurisdiction of that same church as if they 
belonged to them by proprietary right, were retained by the patriarch 
of Antioch by force. He gave as an excuse that he was not subject to 
the archbishop, although he did not deny that these bishoprics were 
under the jurisdiction of the latter. In order that this might be pre- 
vented and that these bishoprics might return to their own mother 
church at Tyre, Pope Innocent wrote to the bishops of the above- 
named churches and also to the patriarch of Antioch, as follows: 


“Innocent, bishop, servant of the servants of God, to his venerable 
brothers, Gerard of Tripoli, R. of Tortosa, and H. of Jubail, bishops, 
salutation and the apostolic blessing. You must know, dear brothers, 
that the status of the church is rendered more illustrious when the 
ranks that have been established therein are kept intact and the rever- 
ence due to each prelate is shown without contention or contradiction. 
It is fitting that each one who has submitted himself to the church 
should consider the proper reverence and honor which is due to his 
superiors, if such there be; for if this reverence is wrongfully and un- 
justly withheld, the principle of unity to which, for the sake of promot- 
ing stability, ecclesiastical discipline has reduced everything by the 
most careful organization of all things within the church, will at once 
disappear. Therefore, lest the honor and dignity of your churches be 
threatened or made void on account of undue contention or rebellion 
we command and direct you, by this apostolic letter, that you show 
the obedience which you owe to our venerable brother Fulcher, arch- 
bishop of Tyre, as to your metropolitan. For, in virtue of our apostolic 
authority, we restore you and your churches to the church at Tyre, 
which is your metropolis, and, in like manner, we absolve you from 
the oath of fidelity by which you have been bound to the patriarch of 
Antioch. But if you neglect to obey our commands and within three 
months after the receipt of this letter do not return to the obedience 
of our brother named above, by the authority of God we shall hold 
ratified the sentence which the archbishop shall promulgate against 
you, according to canonical laws. 

Given at the Lateran, January 17.” 


32 Dated January 17, 1139 (see R. Reg., no. 184). 


FULK OF ANJOU AS KING 67 


In order that the patriarch of Antioch, who had held these bishoprics 
for a long time and who was very powerful, might not hinder them 


from carrying out his orders, the pope wrote to that patriarch in these 
words: 


“Innocent, bishop, servant of the servants of God to his venerable 
brother Ralph, patriarch of Antioch, salutation and the apostolic bless- 
ing. 

“It is written in the institutions of the holy canons that each one must 
be content with his own territories and not seek to usurp the rights of 
others. Human and divine laws alike forbid us to do unto our neighbor 
that which we would not wish done to ourselves. Since this is so, we 
command you, dear brother, not to hinder the suffragans of the church 
at Tyre from showing the obedience and reverence due to their metro- 
politan, our venerable brother, the archbishop Fulcher. Furthermore, 
to withdraw from metropolitans the obedience of their suffragans is 
against canonical rules. We desire, therefore, that between prelates and 
their subordinates their own rights and the established order be main- 
tained without contradiction. 

Given at the Lateran, January 17.” ** 


Not only did the lord pope write thus to these prelates, but he also 
wrote in like manner to those bishops who had been retained by the 
patriarch of Jerusalem and who, through fear of him, refused to obey 
the apostolic command. He directed them to lay aside all excuses, and 
to show obedience at once to the lord of Tyre. These letters read as 
follows: 


“Innocent, bishop, servant of the servants of God, to his venerable 
brothers, Baldwin of Beirut, Bernard of Sidon, and John of Acre, 
bishops, salutation and the apostolic blessing. 

“The holy fathers desired that there should be in the church differ- 
ent ranks and orders that, as inferiors showed submission and reverence 
to their superiors, unity might result from this very diversity, and the 
administration of each office might be carried on to the best advantage. 
But we are annoyed and greatly astonished to learn that, although long 
since we commanded you by apostolic letters to show obedience and 
reverence to our venerable brother Fulcher, archbishop of Tyre, your 
metropolitan, you have disdained to do this and have offered excuses 


33 Dated January 17, 1139 (see R. Reg., no. 185). 


68 FULK OF ANJOU AS KING 


and unsatisfactory explanations. For, assuredly, rebellion is as the sin 
of witchcraft, and stubbornness, as the crime of idolatry.** 

“And so we command you, and in virtue of our apostolic authority 
again we direct you, henceforward to cast aside all excuses and to obey 
in every respect our brother Fulcher. We forbid you, under pretext of 
the obedience which you are rendering to another primate, to withhold 
from him one tittle of the submission and reverence which you owe to 
him as your metropolitan. Furthermore, if you continue to be obsti- 
nate, we shall ratify, by the authority of the Lord, the sentence which 
this same archbishop has pronounced, or shall pronounce, against you 
according to canonical laws. And if, because you have obeyed this, our 
brother, the patriarch of Jerusalem, shall give any judgment against 
you, we decree that that same sentence shall be without force, and we 
declare it to be worthless. 

Given at the Lateran, January 17.” 3° 


14. The circumstances which gave rise to the controversy be- 
tween the two patriarchs are explained, and the defense of 
each is given. 


Tue fact that, while the archbishop of Tyre held by right fourteen 
suffragan bishops, the pope wrote to six only, needs some explanation. 
At this time, the city of Banyas, which is Caesarea Philippi, had no 
bishop, and these six sees held the other bishoprics under their jurisdic- 
tion. The see of Sidon held Sarepta as it even yet holds it; Tripoli held 
the bishoprics of Botron, Arka, and Artasium; and the see of Antara- 
dos, which is also known as Tortosa, held the bishoprics of Arados and 
Maraclea. Three of these six, namely, Tortosa, Tripoli, and Jubail, 
were retained by the patriarch of Antioch under his own jurisdiction. 
When these cities just named were taken by the Christians, the patri- 
arch consecrated bishops in them. His intention was that when the 
metropolis of Tyre should be freed and its archbishop, according to 
the former arrangement, showed the obedience owed to him as patri- 
arch, he would, without difficulty, restore them to the archbishop of 
Tyre, as indeed he was bound to do by right. But the cities just men- 
tioned were in the county of Tripoli, where, as there was no interfer- 
ence from the king, the patriarch of Antioch could do this freely. 


8417 Sa. 15: 23. 35 Dated January 17, 1139 (see R. Reg., no. 186). 


FULK OF ANJOU AS KING 69 


In the other three, however, Beirut, Sidon, and Ptolemais, which is 
Acre, the patriarch of Jerusalem consecrated bishops, with the inten- 
tion of transferring them to his own jurisdiction when the metropolis 
of Tyre should be captured and he himself should consecrate there an 
archbishop. For he assumed that, contrary to the former custom, the 
archbishopric of Tyre ought to owe allegiance thereafter to himself. 
In this matter he relied on the letter of Pope Paschal, in which he 
seemed to have granted to Baldwin, the first king of Jerusalem, and 
to Gibelin, the third patriarch of Jerusalem, that the bishops of all 
cities which the lord king and his armies had already acquired or might 
thereafter acquire should be subject to the patriarch of Jerusalem. 
This was related before when we were treating of the reign of Bald- 
win, the first king of Jerusalem.*¢ 

Accordingly, since the whole province of Tyre was freed before the 
metropolis itself, the two patriarchs divided the diocese between them. 
The church of Antioch held and still holds subject the part which was 
outside the kingdom of Jerusalem, from the place which is called Pas- 
sus Pagani, while the patriarch of Jerusalem held subject that part 
which was on this side and within the limits of the kingdom. At length, 
through the mercy of God, the metropolis of Tyre was freed, and in 
the fourth year after its liberation, the patriarch of Jerusalem, as we 
have said, consecrated an archbishop there and restored to him the 
suffragans which he had retained under his own jurisdiction. 

But during the time that the patriarch of Jerusalem had Tyre under 
his own care, it became so weakened and utterly reduced that of the 
churches within the circuit of the city itself only one was preserved for 
the future archbishop.®* This result proved the truth of the proverb: 
“For those who demand it, even though they may be undeserving, 
many shoe latchets are made from the leather of others.” For even 
to the present day, the two lords just mentioned contend for our very 
vitals, strong unto our injury and enriched at the expense of our pov- 
erty. And the church, with her members torn asunder, through whose 
unity, by the consent of the seven holy universal councils, she had 

36 This cross reference to the reign of Baldwin I may imply that all of this archival 


material relating to church organization was inserted into the history at one time, 
perhaps in 1182. 


37 The churches in the quarter allotted to the Venetians were subject to Venice and 
therefore exempt from jurisdiction of the archbishop of Tyre. There is no clear indica- 
tion of how the remaining churches likewise became exempt. 


70 FULK OF ANJOU AS KING 


flourished far and wide, from ancient days, even from the time of the 
apostles, the church, I say, now lies mangled and deprived of those 
more powerful members. She awaits consolation, and there is no one 
to comfort her. She stretches forth her hand, and there is none to aid 
her. We have become like to those of whom it is said, “Whatever folly 
the kings commit, for that the Greeks suffer.” °* They are sated with 
our flesh, and would that sometime it might be even to the point of 
nausea. 

Nevertheless, not without justice do we impute the cause of this 
great evil to the church of Rome itself, who, while she commands us 
to be obedient to the patriarch of Jerusalem, suffers us to be maimed 
unjustly by the patriarch of Antioch. For if our unity were restored 
to us, we would be ready, with willing hearts, as sons of obedience, to 
submit to either patriarch, without gainsaying or trouble. 

Let no one regard it as foreign to our task that we, who have under- 
taken to write history, have inserted these details about the condition 
of our church. For it is not fitting that we should treat of the affairs of 
others and be unmindful of our own. As the proverb says: “He who is 
forgetful of himself speaks but poorly.” 

But now let us return to the history.*® 


15. The count of Jaffa is accused before the king, and a great 
disturbance is caused in the realm. 


On the return of the king from Antioch, as we have mentioned before, 
a very dangerous disturbance again arose. For certain reasons some of 
the highest nobles of the realm: namely, Hugh, count of Jaffa, and 
Romain de Puy, lord of the region beyond the Jordan, are said to have 
conspired against the lord king. In order that this may be explained 
more clearly, it is necessary to go back a little in the story. 

In the time of Baldwin du Bourg, who preceded King Fulk on the 
throne, one Hugh du Puiset, of the diocese of Orléans, a man of high 
rank and one very influential among his own people, undertook a pil- 
grimage to Jerusalem. He was accompanied by his wife Mamilia, 
daughter of Hugh Cholet, count of Roussy. On the way a son was 

38 Horace Ep. 1. ii. 14. 

39 Even William himself doubted the propriety of including this material in his 
history. He seems to be apologizing for its insertion. Perhaps an important reason 


for including it was the lack of sufficient other information about Fulk’s reign to 
fill out the two books allotted to it. 


FULK OF ANJOU AS KING 71 


born to them in Apulia, for the Lady Mamilia was with child when 
she started on the journey. Since the boy was very delicate and could 
not safely be taken along, Hugh sent him to Lord Bohemond, his 
relative, and then crossed the sea to King Baldwin, who was also his 
kinsman according to the flesh.*° 

Immediately upon his arrival there, the king bestowed upon him 
as his own with hereditary rights to himself and his heirs the city of 
Jaffa with its dependencies, and there, not long after, the noble Hugh 
died. 

The king then gave his widow and the aforesaid city to Count Albert, 
a noble lord from the bishopric of Liége, brother of the count of Na- 
mur and a man of great influence in the empire. Before very long, 
however, both Count Albert and his wife died. Meanwhile, the child 
Hugh, who had been left when an infant in Apulia, had reached the 
age of manhood. He sought and obtained from the king his paternal 
inheritance which, on the death of his parents, devolved by hereditary 
right upon him. He then married the Lady Emelota, niece of the 
Patriarch Arnulf and widow of the illustrious noble, Eustace Gre- 
nier.t! By her Lord Eustace had had twin sons, Eustace the Younger, 
lord of the city of Sidon, and Walter, who ruled over Caesarea. After 
the death of King Baldwin and the elevation of Fulk to the throne, 
there arose from causes unknown a serious enmity between the king 
and Count Hugh. Some said that the king cherished a deep distrust 
of the count, who was rumored to be on too familiar terms with the 
queen, and of this there seemed to be many proofs. Hence, spurred on 
by a husband’s jealousy, the king is said to have conceived an inexora- 
ble hatred against the man.*? 


#0 William appears to be in error in ascribing the coming of Hugh’s father, Hugh II, 
to the time of Baldwin II. He has probably confused him with his cousin, Hugh III, 
who did come to the Holy Land in 1128. La Monte has shown that Hugh II started 
on the expedition with Bohemond I in 1106, which is a more convincing explanation 
of his wife’s stay in Apulia and the birth of Hugh there about 1106 or 1107 (J. L. La 
Monte, “The Lords of Le Puiset on the Crusades,” Speculum, XVII (1942), 102-106). 

41 See Book XI, note 63. 

42 This whole episode of Hugh, so interesting for its detailed account of the opera- 
tion of feudal justice, has been questioned (see R. Réhricht, Geschichte des Kénigreichs 
Jerusalem, 1100-1291, p. 201, note 2). It does involve the retelling of relatively 
trivial court gossip to which William seldom stoops. Perhaps he felt forced to in- 
clude it because of lack of other material for the reign of Fulk. Roéhricht has dated 
the episode as occurring in 1132, but it must be referred to a later date, for Hugh’s 
name appears on a grant by Alice of Antioch as late as 1134 (see J. L. La Monte, 
Feudal Monarchy in the Latin Kingdom of Jerusalem, 1100-1291, note 36). 


72 FULK OF ANJOU AS KING 


Count Hugh was young, tall of stature, and of handsome counte- 
nance. He was distinguished for his military prowess and was pleasing 
in the eyes of all. In him the gifts of nature seemed to have met in 
lavish abundance; without question, in respect to physical beauty and 
nobility of birth as well as experience in the art of war he had no equal 
in the kingdom. On his father’s side he was closely related to the 
queen, for their fathers had been cousins-german, that is, sons of two 
sisters. Some, desiring to make light of such rumors, declared that the 
only source of this hatred was the overweening arrogance and pre- 
sumption of the count, who refused to be subject to the king like the 
other nobles of the realm and obstinately declined to obey his com- 
mands. 


16. Walter of Caesarea challenges Count Hugh to single com- 
bat. The latter takes refuge with the enemy. He is deserted 
by his followers. 


One day Walter of Caesarea, the stepson of Hugh, a man in the full 
vigor of life, of fine appearance and famous for his strength, rose in the 
assembly of the nobles when the royal court was thronged. At the in- 
stigation of the king himself, it was claimed, he publicly accused Hugh 
in the royal presence of high treason and of having conspired with cer- 
tain accomplices of the same faction against the life of the king, con- 
trary to good morals and the laws of the times. 

The count denied the charge but said that although he was inno- 
cent he was ready to submit to the judgment of the court on the accusa- 
tions. After this exchange of words, single combat between them was 
decreed according to the custom of the Franks, and a suitable day was 
set for the combat.*® The count then left the court and returned to 
Jaffa. He did not present himself on the appointed day, however. 
Whether his conscience smote him because he was conscious of his guilt 
or whether he distrusted the court is uncertain, but by this action he 
justly brought upon himself, even among his own partisans, still 
greater suspicion of the crime imputed to him. In view of his obstinate 
disobedience to the summons, the court and the assembly of nobles 
condemned him in his absence as guilty of the charge against him. 

On learning of this, the count took a singular course, worthy of uni- 


43 This reference to trial by combat as “a custom of the Franks” instead of “our 
custom” is another indication that William’s parentage may be of non-French origin. 


FULK OF ANJOU AS KING 73 


versal hatred and indignation. He set sail in haste for Ascalon, that city 
hateful to the Christian name and friendly to our enemies, and de- 
manded help from them against the king. The people of that city gave 
a ready assent, for they realized that the internal dissensions and civil 
discord among the Christians would redound to their own advantage 
and cause great danger to the kingdom. A treaty satisfactory to both 
sides was concluded. Hugh thereupon gave hostages and returned to 
Jaffa. 

Then the Ascalonites, inspired by inexorable and stubborn hatred 
against us and rendered more confident by the treaty with the count 
and by his favor, invaded our territories with unwonted boldness and 
presumption. Without hindrance from anyone, they raided our ter- 
ritory as far as Arsuf, also known as Antipater, and carried off booty. 

News of these forays reached the king. He immediately summoned 
military forces from all over the kingdom and with a great host of 
people laid siege to Jaffa. It soon became evident to the count’s faithful 
followers who were with him in that same city, namely, Balian, senior, 
and other God-fearing men, that Hugh was determined to rush head- 
long into danger—that he could not be restrained from his fatal enter- 
prise by the sane warnings of his faithful friends. On the contrary, he 
was obstinately determined to pursue a course leading to greater dan- 
ger. They therefore abandoned the fiefs which they held from him 
and wisely betook themselves to the king. 


17. The city of Jaffais besieged; the nobles of the kingdom treat 
concerning peace. In the meantime Banyas is taken by the 
enemy. 


In the meantime the Patriarch William, a very gentle man and a 
lover of peace, together with certain princes of the realm, undertook 
the task of mediation and, for the sake of peace, tried to effect a com- 
promise between the king and the count. Mindful of the words of the 
Gospel, that “Every kingdom divided against itself is brought to deso- 
lation; every city or house divided against itself shall not stand,” ** 
they saw that these internal dissensions were most dangerous to the 
kingdom, and they feared, as well they might, lest the enemies of the 
Christian faith might seize this as an opportune time to do them injury. 

Finally, after many disputes, as is usually the case in affairs of this 


44 Mat. 12:25. 


74 FULK OF ANJOU AS KING 


kind, it seemed best to the peacemakers, both for the sake of harmony 
and for the greater honor of the king, that the count be exiled for a 
period of three years. At the expiration of that time, by the king’s 
grace, he and those whom he had led with him might be permitted to 
return to the kingdom, and this without incurring the reproach which 
would otherwise fall upon him as the result of this affair. Meanwhile, 
all his debts and whatever moneys he had borrowed anywhere were 
to be paid from the revenues of his possessions. 

Thus, at this time, the king was engaged in the vicinity of Jaffa, and 
Lord Renier, surnamed Brus, with other nobles of the realm, was also 
there. Meanwhile, the city of Banyas was under siege by Tegelmeluch 
{ Taj-al-Muluk Buri], king of Damascus.*® The king was endeavoring 
with all his power to procure aid to relieve this situation, but before he 
succeeded, the city was taken by force and fell into the hands of the 
enemy. The citizens were taken prisoners, and all the mercenary sol- 
diers in the city, both knights and foot soldiers, were seized. The wife 
of the noble and valiant Renier was also captured and carried away 
with the others. 


18. The count of Jaffa is severely wounded at Jerusalem. A tu- 
mult again arises. After recovering, however, he crosses the 
sea, according to agreement. 


Durine this time, the count of Jaffa was awaiting passage and linger- 
ing in Jerusalem as he was wont to do. One day he happened to be 
playing dice on a table before the shop of a merchant named Alfanus 
in the street which is called the street of the Furriers. The count, in- 
tent upon the game, had no thought of danger. Suddenly, before all 
the bystanders, a knight of Brittany drew his sword in hostile fashion 
and stabbed the count again and again. The entire city was shaken at 
the news of the outrage; a great crowd at once assembled, and an 
ominous murmur arose. But one sentiment issued from the lips of all, 
namely, that not without the knowledge of the king could this crime 
have been committed; that the miscreant would hardly have dared to 
attempt such a deed unless he had been confident of the king’s favor. 
Through the crowd ran the cry that the count was suffering unjustly 


*° Taj al-Muluk had died June 6, 1132. His son, Shams al-Muluk, was now ruler. 
The capture of Banyas was made by the Damascenes on December 11, 1132 (see Gibb, 
Chronicle, pp. 208-18). This account is out of place here (see note 18). 


FULK OF ANJOU AS KING 75 


from a charge of which he was innocent and that the king had given a 
plain proof of the unreasonable hatred, far beyond the merits of the 
case, which he had conceived against him. Accordingly, the count grew 
in universal favor and good will, and it was felt that the accusations 
made against him, of whatever nature, had proceeded entirely from 
malice. 

When the king learned of this sentiment, he felt it necessary to ex- 
onerate himself. In order to give substantial proof of his innocence, he 
ordered the culprit to be placed on trial. No accuser or witnesses were 
necessary to prove the crime, for it was well known to all. Since the 
regular process of law was needless, therefore, the king ordered a sen- 
tence commensurate with his guilt to be pronounced upon the man. The 
court accordingly convened, and the assassin was sentenced by unani- 
mous consent to suffer the penalty of mutilation of his members. The 
judgment was reported to the king, who ordered the sentence to be 
carried out. He directed, however, that the tongue should not be in- 
cluded among the members so mutilated. This exception was made 
lest it be said that the tongue had been removed purposely so that the 
criminal would be unable to confess the truth of the matter, namely, 
that he had been sent by the king. By this action Fulk very wisely 
protected his own reputation and quieted the intense indignation which 
had been roused against him. It was impossible to extort from the 
criminal, either in secret or in public, before or after the sentence was 
carried out, an admission that this monstrous act had been done by the 
order or with the knowledge of the king. On the contrary, he declared 
that he had ventured to do the deed on his own initiative in the hope of 
gaining the king’s favor. 

The count remained for a while in the kingdom, that his wounds 
might be cared for and his health restored. Then, when fully con- 
valescent, he left the kingdom and went to Apulia. His heart was full 
of sadness, both on account of the injuries so recently inflicted upon 
him, and also because by the decree he was compelled to wander like a 
beggar through unfamiliar places, an exile from his ancestral heri- 
tage.** 

Roger, who had now conquered all that region, received him kindly. 
He felt that this noble and valiant man had been driven from the 


46 This expression of sympathy for Hugh in exile recalls Ovid’s exile, with which 
William was very familiar. 


70 FULK OF ANJOU AS KING 
kingdom through the jealousy of his rivals. Accordingly, he had com- 


passion on him and gave him the county of Gargan. There the count, a 
man well worthy to be mourned by posterity, met a premature death 
and never returned to the kingdom. 

From that time, all who had informed against the count and thereby 
incited the king to wrath fell under the displeasure of Queen Melisend 
and were forced to take diligent measures for their safety. For her 
heart was wrung with deep sorrow for the exiled count, and her own 
good fame was in some measure besmirched by the infamous accusa- 
tion. Above all others, she persecuted in every possible way Rohard 
the Elder, later called Rohard of Nablus, who had been especially 
active in exciting the jealousy of the king. It was not safe for these in- 
formers to come into her presence; in fact, they deemed it prudent to 
keep away even from public gatherings. Even the king found that no 
place was entirely safe among the kindred and partisans of the queen. 
At length, through the mediation of certain intimate friends, her 
wrath was appeased, and the king finally, after persistent efforts, suc- 
ceeded in gaining a pardon for the other objects of her wrath—at least 
to such an extent that they could be introduced into her presence with 
others. But from that day forward, the king became so uxorious that, 
whereas he had formerly aroused her wrath, he now calmed it, and 
not even in unimportant cases did he take any measures without her 
knowledge and assistance.*7 


19. A treaty is made with the Damascenes; the prisoners who 
were taken at Banyas are restored. 


Axsout this time, the king granted a temporary peace to the Damas- 
cenes at their request. In addition to other things which they offered in 
order to obtain this truce, they restored, according to agreement, all 
the captives taken from the city of Banyas. The wife of the valiant 
Renier de Brus, the lord of that city, was among this number. She was 
returned to her distinguished husband after an absence of two years, 
and he graciously restored her to her position as his wife. Later, how- 
ever, he discovered that her conduct while with the enemy had not 
been altogether discreet. She had not satisfactorily preserved the sanc- 

‘7 There is evidence enough to prove that Melisend was a strong-willed woman 


without waiting upon such an incident for its expression. William’s conception of Fulk 
is colored throughout by his boyhood impression of the king as a very old man. 


FULK OF ANJOU AS KING 77 


tity of the marriage couch as a noble matron should. Accordingly, he 
cast her off. She did not deny her guilt, but entered a convent of holy 
women at Jerusalem, took the vows of perpetual chastity, and became 
a nun. After her death, the distinguished man married Agnes, a niece 
of William de Bury. On Renier’s death, Agnes became the wife of 
Gerard of Sidon. Of this marriage was born Renaud, who now rules 
over this same city of the Sidonians. 

The city of Banyas, which, as we have said, was conquered in the 
absence of its lord, had long been held by the people of the Assassins. 
Shortly before the time of which we are speaking, however, one of 
their rulers named Emir-Ali had ceded it to the Christians in return 
for a fitting compensation agreed upon by treaty.*® The king there- 
upon at once granted it as a possession with hereditary rights to this 
same Lord Renier. 

At a future time and place a description will be given of the people 
of the Assassins and an explanation of the worthless traditions, hateful 
to God, which they follow. In the meantime, let it suffice to know con- 
cerning them that they are a people very much distrusted and justly 
feared by the Christians as well as by nations of other faiths, above all, 
by princes.*9 


20. Raymond, son of the count of Poitou, arrives secretly at 
Antioch. He marries Constance, the daughter of Bohemond, 
against the will of the princess, her mother, who strives to 
prevent the alliance. Thus he obtains the kingdom. 


In the meantime, as we have said, the people of Antioch had sent en- 
voys to Raymond, the son of the count of Poitou. In accordance with 
their instructions, they made careful inquiries as to where he might 
most readily be found. From reliable reports, they learned that he was 
at the court of Henry the Elder, king of England, from whom he had 
received the arms of a knight. They therefore proceeded straightway 
to England, where they found the young man and in all secrecy ex- 
plained to him the reason for their coming. On the advice of the king, 


48 This had occurred in 1128. Qalanisi calls the leader of the Assassins who gave 
Banyas to Baldwin II, “Ismail, the Persian” or the ““Missioner” (see Gibb, Chronicle, 
pp. 191-94). 

#9 That the Assassins were feared as much by the Muslims as by the Christians is 
abundantly testified in Arab accounts (see P. K. Hitti, History of the Arabs, pp. 
446-48). 


wih 


78 FULK OF ANJOU AS KING 


his benefactor, Raymond gratefully embraced the opportunity offered 
him and, after making all necessary preparations for the journey, set 
out incognito. For Roger, duke of Apulia, was already aware of the 
plans of the people of Antioch in respect to calling Raymond and, in 
consequence, had made arrangements in every coast city of Apulia to 
waylay him. If the young man could be prevented from crossing, the 
duke hoped that by bribing the great men of that land he himself 
might easily gain the advantages of the inheritance which Raymond 
was seeking. 

Raymond, however, prudently concealed the real purpose of his 
journey. He cast aside all pride and, travelling as one of the common 
people, now on foot, now astride a humble beast of burden, pursued his 
journey among the people and never gave the slightest evidence of 
rank or wealth. Those who accompanied him were divided into bands 
and his household retainers likewise. Some of these people preceded 
him by three or four days’ journey, and others followed behind, as if 
having no connection with him. 

Thus, clad in the lowly habit of a pilgrim, often himself perform- 
ing the duties of a servant, he deceived everyone by his appearance 
and escaped the snares laid by his shrewd and powerful enemy. His 
arrival at Antioch delighted his friends and brought no little fear to 
others, partisans of the princess, who were endeavoring to hinder his 
elevation. 

Shortly before this time, yet after the departure of the envoys to 
invite Lord Raymond, the Princess Alice, widow of Lord Bohemond 
and sister of Queen Melisend, had again marched to Antioch. Despite 
the fact that her father had formerly thrust her from that city and 
ordered her to be content with Laodicea and Jabala, she assumed the 
role of sovereign and again took everything under her own sway. Her 
sister had interceded with the king not to interfere with her actions, 
and she had the support of certain nobles. 

In the meantime, Ralph, the crafty patriarch of Antioch, a man well 
versed in wiles, induced her to believe that Raymond, now said to be 
close at hand, had been sent for to become her own future husband. In 
this way the prelate hoped to secure her favor and influence against 
the clergy who were persecuting him. Alice’s credulous mind readily 
accepted that false hope. 

It was at once apparent to Raymond that without the good will and 


FULK OF ANJOU AS KING 79 


influence of the patriarch he could not hope to attain his desired end. 
Accordingly, through interpreters friendly to both Ralph and himself, 
he asked for an audience, that he might win the favor of the patriarch 
and gain his support. It was required of Raymond that he show fealty 
to the patriarch by solemn oath; and in return, it was agreed that he 
should marry Constance without opposition and receive the principality 
in full peace. In addition, it was provided that if Henry, his brother, 
should come to Antioch, the patriarch would endeavor loyally to se- 
cure for him Alice, mother of the young princess and widow of Bohe- 
mond, as his wife, together with her two maritime cities and the lands 
attached to them. 

As soon as this agreement had been made and confirmed with an 
oath, Raymond was introduced into the city. While Alice still supposed 
that all the arrangements were being made for her own nuptials, he 
was conducted to the basilica of the Prince of the Apostles and there 
married to the Lady Constance. The young princess was not yet of 
marriageable age, but the great nobles all demanded that the marriage 
take place, and the patriarch himself bestowed the bride upon her 
husband.*° 

On learning how she had been deceived, Alice at once left Antioch 
and retired to her own domain. Ever after she pursued the prince with 
relentless hatred. From that day, too, the patriarch assumed a more 
haughty attitude. Firm in the belief that he had established himself 
securely with the prince, he displayed unwonted arrogance and became 
unduly presumptuous in his demands on the prince.®! But in this re- 
spect he found himself entirely deceived. For the prince felt that the 
oath of fealty which the patriarch had extorted from him reflected dis- 
grace upon himself. Accordingly, forgetful of the benefits which he 
had received from the prelate, he began to persecute him unmercifully 
and, in spite of his sworn oath, aligned himself with the pontiff’s ad- 
versaries. 


50 Rohricht has dated this marriage 1136 (see R.K.J., p. 203), though there is some 
reason to think that it occurred in 1137. Constance in either case was well under ten 
years of age at the time. 

51 This was the first time that a prince of Antioch had received the investiture of 
his state from a patriarch of Antioch. As Raymond became acquainted with local tra- 
ditions and, even more, with the clerical opponents of the patriarch, he may well have 
resented the arrangement without further provocation from Ralph. The previous in- 
vestiture of a prince of Antioch by a patriarch was that of Bohemond I by Daimbert, 
patriarch of Jerusalem in 1100 (see Book IX, chap. 15). 


So FULK OF ANJOU AS KING 


21. An account of Raymond: his manners and appearance 5 his 
ancestors and lineage. 


Lorp Raymonp was of noble blood and ancient lineage. He was very 
tall and in personal appearance extremely pleasing. He was young— 
his cheeks were still covered with the light down of youth—he was 
handsome far beyond all the kings and princes of the world, and he 
was affable and agreeable in conversation.*? In fact, his entire bearing 
was in every respect that of a charming and elegant prince. Experi- 
enced in military matters and expert in the use of arms, he easily sur- 
passed all his predecessors as well as those who followed him. Al- 
though but slightly learned himself, he was nevertheless a patron of 
men of letters."* In religious matters, he was most devoted and listened 
attentively to the offices of the church, especially on feast days. After 
his marriage, he was careful to observe and maintain faithfulness in 
the conjugal relation. He was temperate in eating and drinking also, 
and munificent and free-handed to excess. But he was not provident 
and was far too fond of vicious games of dice and chance. He had, 
among other defects of character, a rash disposition, a habit of acting 
on a hasty impulse, and he frequently gave way to anger without re- 
straint or reason. He was seldom lucky. He paid no attention to the 
oath of fealty which he had sworn to the patriarch and did not redeem 
the promises he had made to him. 


The king builds a fortress to check the insolent inroads of 
the Ascalonites. It recetves the name Gibelin or Beersheba. 


Now, because of their continued success, the Ascalonites were becom- 
ing increasingly bold and insolent and were overrunning the entire 
region without restraint. Ascalon itself was subject to a very powerful 
Egyptian potentate. If this city should be taken, the prince foresaw 
with alarm that the Christian army might invade Egypt and disturb 
the peaceful conditions which existed there. Accordingly, at a great 


*2 Raymond was at least twenty years old by this time and may have been several 
years older still. Rohricht’s statement that he was born in 1099, however, is an error 
due to a confusion of Raymond with his older brother William, who was born at 
that time (see Auber, Histoire générale du Poitou, VU, 21, 105-107). 

63 This allusion to Rayinond’s patronage of letters is tantalizing, for William must 
have had specific instances in mind. What literary productions, whether in the vernac- 
ular or in Latin, flowed from this patronage are unknown. Yet there must have been 
such writings with which William was acquainted. 


FULK OF ANJOU AS KING 81 


outlay of money and effort, he was endeavoring to make the land of 
Ascalon a barrier, as it were, between Egypt and our territory. Fearing 
that the strength of its people might give way under the constant hard- 
ships and perils of warfare, he took great care to send to their assistance 
every three months new people and fresh legions, together with provi- 
sions and supplies of arms. The new arrivals naturally wished to try 
their strength and to give proofs of their courage. Hence, against the 
wishes of the veterans, they often made experimental sallies and ex- 
peditions. 

The Christians perceived that the bold incursions of the enemy 
showed no signs of ceasing; their forces were constantly renewed, and, 
like the hydra, they gained increased strength by the death of their 
citizens. Hence, after long deliberation, our people resolved to erect 
fortresses round about. These would serve as defenses against this 
monster which ever increased by the loss of its heads and, as often as it 
was destroyed, was reborn to our exceeding great peril. Within these 
strongholds forces could be easily assembled which, from their very 
proximity, could more readily check the enemy’s forays. Such fortresses 
would also serve as bases from which to make frequent attacks upon 
the city itself. 

They accordingly chose a place suitable for the purpose, in that part 
of Judea which, in the original distribution, fell by lot to the tribe of 
Simeon, and there they prepared to rebuild an ancient ruined city 
called Beersheba. The site selected lay at the foot of the mountains 
just at the beginning of the plain which extends without interruption 
from those mountains to the aforesaid city. All the people of the vicin- 
ity were called together; the patriarch William and the nobles also 
came. Thus the task, well-planned and begun under good auspices, was 
finished successfully with the help of the Lord. For twelve miles from 
Ascalon they built a strong fortress surrounded by an impregnable 
wall with towers, ramparts, and a moat. This place, in the time of the 
children of Israel, was the southern limit of the Land of Promise just 
as Dan, now called Banyas or Caesarea Philippi, was the northern. 
One often reads in the Old Testament, “from Dan even unto Beer- 
sheba.” 5 Here Abraham is said to have established a well, as he did 
in many other places, and because of the great quantity of water it 
gave he called it the Abundance. 


54 Ju. 20:1. 


82 FULK OF ANJOU AS KING 


Josephus also speaks of it in the book of the Antiquities, as follows: 
“A bimelech gave him land and flocks and they agreed that they would 
dwell peacefully together without guile. They made a treaty at a cer- 
tain well known as Beersheba, which may be called the Treaty of the 
Well, and indeed it is so called even to this time by the people of the 
vicinity. This place is also called the Seventh Well, and in Arabic it is 
known as Bethgebris, that is, the House of Gabriel.” °° 

When the fortress was finished and complete in every part, it was 
granted by common consent to the brothers of the house of the Hosp- 
tal, which is at Jerusalem. They have guarded their charge with all 
due diligence, even to the present time; and from that day, the attacks 
of the enemy in that place have become less violent.*® 


23. The count of Tripoli is slain at the Mount of the Pilgrims 
through the treachery of some of his own people. He is suc- 
ceeded by Raymond, his son, who avenges the death of his 
father. 


Nor long after this, Baswaj, commander of the army of Damascus, 
invaded the land of Tripoli. Count Pons marched valiantly forth 
against him with all his forces. The two armies met near the fortress 
called Mount of the Pilgrims, and a fierce battle was fought. But the 
lines of his army were broken and put to flight, and the count himself 
was taken prisoner.°? Through the treachery of the Syrians who lived 
on the heights of Lebanon, he was betrayed and put to death. He left 
a son, Raymond, who, as his heir, succeeded him in the care of the 
county. Gerald, bishop of Tripoli, was also captured at this time. He 
remained in captivity for a while without being recognized, but at last 
a prisoner held by the Christians was given in exchange for him and 
he was restored to his former liberty. In this battle some of the nobles 
of Tripoli fell, but the great majority of those slain were from the 
middle class. 

After the death of his father Raymond collected the remnant of the 
cavalry and with a strong body of foot soldiers in addition went up to 
Mt. Lebanon with great valor. There he seized and carried away in 
chains to Tripoli as many of those men of blood, with their wives and 


55 Josephus Ant. 1. 12. 
58 Stevenson has dated the building of this fortress in 1136 (see Stevenson, Crusaders, 


. 136). 
57 The death of Pons is dated by Qalanisi as March 25, 1137. Raymond II succeeded 
his father (see Gibb, Chronicle, p. 241). 


FULK OF ANJOU AS KING 83 


children, as he could find. For he considered them guilty of his father’s 
death and responsible for the general massacre of the Christians, since 
by their persuasive words they had drawn that powerful man into the 
plain of Tripoli. Accordingly, to avenge the blood of those who had 
fallen in battle, he visited upon them divers tortures in the presence 
of the people, and, in just proportion to the enormity of the crime 
which they had committed, he caused them to suffer death in its most 
cruel forms. 

Such were the first proofs of valor which were given by the young 
count, whereby he won the affection of all his people and universal 
approval. 


24. John, emperor of Constantinople, marches upon Antioch 
and seizes all Cilicia. 


MEANWHILE numerous reports began to circulate through the land. 
It was rumored that John, emperor of Constantinople, son of Alexius, 
was about to descend swiftly upon Syria. From every part of his empire 
he had summoned people of all tribes and tongues, and now, with a 
countless number of cavalry and a vast array of chariots and four- 
wheeled carts, he was on the march. Nor was this mere empty rumor. 
As soon as he learned from reliable sources that the people of Antioch 
had summoned Raymond thither, that they had given the city to him, 
and had bestowed upon him as his wife the daughter of Lord Bohe- 
mond, John determined to go to Antioch. Very wroth was he that, 
without his knowledge or command, they had presumed to give the 
daughter of their lord in marriage and, without consulting him, had 
dared to hand over the city to the rule of another.®* He claimed Anti- 
och with all the adjacent provinces as his own and wished to recall 
them to his own jurisdiction. He asserted that those great princes, 
men of valor and immortal memory who, at the command of God, had 
come on the first expedition (time does not permit the mention of 
their names one by one), had entered into a definite agreement with 
Alexius, his father and predecessor in the empire, with much inter- 
change of gifts and courtesy.®® The terms were that whatever cities or 


58 According to Chalandon, Alice had made overtures of a marriage alliance be- 
tween Constance and the emperor’s son, Manuel (F. Chalandon, Les Comnéne, Il, 122). 

5® William habitually refers back to the early agreements which the crusading lead- 
ers had made with Alexius in 1097. In a sense the claims did start there, but John had a 
more definite basis for his claims in the agreement which Bohemond I had made in 
1108 (see Chalandon, Les Comnéne, I], 122-26). 


84 FULK OF ANJOU AS KING 


fortresses the Christians might by any chance take on that entire cam- 
paign should be surrendered without contest to the empire. These, 
when captured, they had undertaken to guard faithfully to the best of 
their ability and strength until he should come with his army. These 
provisions, John asserted, were included in the pact, and the princes 
had confirmed them with solemn oath. 

There is no question that these princes had concluded an agreement 
with the emperor and that he, in turn, had bound himself to them by 
definite pledges which he had been the first to break. Since he had not 
kept to the terms of the agreement, the signatory princes steadfastly 
maintained that they were not bound to him. No less did they regard 
those who had already died as released from their agreement, since 
Alexius, as a vacillating and unstable man, had dealt fraudulently with 
them and had been the first to break his own pledges. According to the 
law of treaties, therefore, they rightly claimed that they were released 
from the pact, “For to keep faith with one who tries to act contrary to 
the tenor of a treaty is wrong.” 

Accordingly, the emperor sent officers throughout all his empire, 
and an entire year was spent in making the necessary preparations for 
a campaign, as befitted imperial magnificence. Then, followed by 
chariots and horses, an innumerable host, and accompanied by treas- 
ures of inestimable weight, number, and measure, he sailed across the 
Hellespont, which in common parlance is called the arm of St. George, 
and took the road toward Antioch. After crossing the intervening 
provinces, he came into Cilicia and halted to besiege Tarsus, a famous 
city of Cilicia Prima. This he took by force of arms, cast out the loyal 
subjects of the lord of Antioch, to whose faithful care it had been en- 
trusted, and put in his own nobles. Without delay, in like fashion, he 
made himself master of Adana, Mamistra, and Anavarza, the most 
populous city of Cilicia Secunda. He also took the other cities of that 
province, together with all the fortified towns and castles. Thus, con- 
trary to all justice and right, he seized as a part of his own kingdom 
the entire province of Cilicia, which the prince of Antioch had held in 
undisputed possession for forty years. For even before Antioch had 
come under our power Tarsus had been restored to Christian liberty 
by Baldwin, the duke’s brother, and Mamistra with all the rest of 
that region had been freed by the distinguished Tancred. 

Thence advancing in mighty strength, he pressed on to Antioch 


FULK OF ANJOU AS KING 85 


with all his armies. Upon his arrival there, he immediately began siege 
operations. Mighty machines and engines were placed in strategic posi- 
tions around the city and ever-increasing pressure was exerted upon 
the place. 


25. Zangi besieges the fortress called Montferrand. The king, 
with the help of the count of Tripoli, seeks to raise the siege, 
but in vain. The Christians are conquered, the count is taken 
prisoner, and the king retreats to the fortress. 


SucH then was the situation around Antioch. Meanwhile, Zangi, a 
very wicked man and a most cruel persecutor of the Christians, was 
well aware that the count of Tripoli had recently perished with a large 
host and that the entire locality was now without military forces. Ac- 
cordingly, he laid vigorous siege to Montferrand. This castle was situ- 
ated in the land of Tripoli on the heights above the city of Raphania, 
recently mentioned. By fierce attacks, persistently continued without 
respite, he pressed hard upon those within the fortress. 

News of this situation was brought to Count Raymond of Tripoli, 
son of the late Count Pons and nephew of the king on his mother’s 
side. The young count at once dispatched swift messengers to the king. 
With earnest entreaties, he besought Fulk to come without delay to aid 
them in the desperate situation. 

The king ever felt paternal solicitude for all the troubles of the 
Christians. He at once called together the principal men of the realm, 
levied forces of both infantry and cavalry and, by making forced 
marches, arrived speedily in the land of Tripoli. 

There he was met by messengers from the prince of Antioch. They 
brought the ill tidings, both by word of mouth and by letter, that the 
emperor was besieging Antioch—tidings which, alas, were too true.®%° 
With the utmost urgency they besought the king to come thither with 
all his forces as soon as possible, that he might aid his brethren in their 
critical situation. 

In view of this double emergency, the king called a council to con- 
sider what course to adopt. The opinion was unanimous that aid should 
first be given to the Christians besieged in the neighboring fortress (a 
task which seemed to be easy) and that then all with one accord should 
march on to the relief of the people of Antioch. The king and the 


80 Antioch was beseiged by John on August 29, 1137. 


86 FULK OF ANJOU AS KING 


count accordingly united their forces and attempted to march against 
the enemy, but Divine favor did not attend them. Zangi had received 
information that they were advancing, and, as they drew near their 
destination, he abandoned the siege and led his troops in battle forma- 
tion against them. 

The Christians advanced at a brisk march toward the city, their 
forces arranged in fighting array according to the rules of military 
science. It was their purpose to carry aid to the besieged and to supply 
the town, now entirely without food, with the necessary provisions 
which they were bearing with them. But the guides who were leading 
our army left the easier, level road on the left and, whether through 
error or malice, followed a difficult mountain route. They led the 
Christians through a narrow and pathless district where there was no 
place suitable for a battle. Here resistance would be difficult, and a 
favorable opportunity for attacking would be equally lacking. 

Zangi was a shrewd and experienced man of war. He at once per- 
ceived the situation and realized that the advantage was with him. 
Aglow with fervor, he summoned his men and, himself foremost 
among his thousands, roused their courage by his words and challenged 
them to follow his example. Fighting valiantly, he fell upon the 
Christian center and incited his men to our destruction. Our first lines 
broke ranks; they turned and fled. The leaders of our army saw that 
the first lines had given way; they realized that there was no hope of 
resistance and that they themselves in the narrow defiles could not 
come to their assistance. Accordingly, they counselled the king to look 
out for his own safety by withdrawing into the fortress near by. Fulk 
perceived that temporarily this was the best plan, for all the infantry 
had been either killed or captured. He therefore withdrew with a few 
attendants into the castle. The count of Tripoli, a young man of re- 
markable promise, was taken prisoner, and with him some of his 
knights. 

The band following the king entered the fortress and provided for 
their safety as they could. All the baggage, a vast amount, was lost 
that day. It included the horses and pack animals which were carrying 
provisions intended for revictualing the fortress. The fugitives brought 
no food with them into the fortress. Carrying only the weapons with 
which they were armed, they fled thither empty handed. 

Among others who fell that day was the illustrious Godfrey Char- 


FULK OF ANJOU AS KING 87 


pulu, a brother of the elder Joscelin, count of Edessa. He was distin- 
guished for his high rank and for his skill in arms. His death, as that of 
a valiant soldier, caused deep sorrow, and his melancholy end touched 
the entire army. 


26. Zangi again attacks the fortress; the besieged call on their 
neighbors for help. 


ZANGI was well aware that the Christians had carried no food with 
them into the fortress. All their supplies were in his hands, and the 
military strength of the entire realm was exhausted. In addition, the 
count was his prisoner, and the king, with the greatest nobles of the 
realm, was shut up without provisions in a half-ruined castle. Accord- 
ingly, he determined to renew the siege of Montferrand. He hoped 
that now no assistance from any source could be brought to the im- 
prisoned garrison and felt confident that within a short time he would 
succeed in taking the citadel. He therefore called his troops together 
once more. They responded to the summons so laden with the spoils 
taken from the Christians that they disdained even larger plunder be- 
cause of the great amount already collected. Thus Montferrand was 
again surrounded by hostile forces, and the siege was pressed forward 
with vigor. 

Among the great lords of the realm who had taken refuge with the 
king’ in the fortress were William de Bury, the constable, Renier de 
Brus, an illustrious warrior, Guy de Brisebar, Baldwin of Ramlah, 
Humphrey of Toron, a young man without experience in warfare, and 
many others. With them the king took counsel as to what should be 
done in such a desperate crisis. It was decided unanimously to appeal 
for aid to the prince of Antioch and the younger Joscelin, count of 
Edessa, to summon the patriarch of Jerusalem with all the people of 
the kingdom, and in the meantime to await the coming of this relief 
as best they might.** 

Such was the situation at Montferrand. Just at this time also Renaud, 
surnamed the Bishop, a valiant soldier distinguished for his military 
prowess, was taken prisoner. He was the nephew of Roger, bishop of 
Lydda, and head of the order of St. George.®? While engaged in pur- 

61 The surrender of Montferrand is dated in the third week of August. Raymond 


and Joscelin II arrived some days later. 
82 The order of St. George was short-lived. It is thought to have been originally 


88 FULK OF ANJOU AS KING 


suing the people of Ascalon in his usual vigorous manner, but all too 
rashly, he happened to fall into an ambush and fell a prey to the enemy. 

Meanwhile the messengers did not tarry but sped with all haste on 
their way. One went to Antioch, explained the dire straits of the king 
and his companions, and urged the prince to hasten to their relief with- 
out delay. Another by his vigorous entreaties moved the count of 
Edessa to action, while a third sped to Jerusalem and roused the entire 
people. 

The prince of Antioch hesitated for a little, uncertain as to what to 
do. The emperor was before his gates, and he feared for the fate of his 
city if he should attempt to leave it. On the other hand, it seemed 
harsh and inhumane not to go to the aid of the king in such a desperate 
situation. At length, sympathy with the woes and anxieties of the king 
and the Christian people won the day. He committed his city to the 
care of the Lord, in the full assurance that it was better to share all 
evils with his brethren than to rejoice in complete prosperity and peace 
while they were suffering thus. He summoned the nobles and the 
chief men among the people, explained his sentiments, and invited 
them all to go to the aid of the king. They were easily persuaded and 
all voluntarily agreed to his desire, so pleasing to God. Preparations 
for departure were speedily made. They left the city, blockaded as it 
was by the emperor’s forces, and set forth as with one mind to the relief 
of the king. 

The count of Edessa, moved by similar emotions, made ready all 
his forces and marched with amazing swiftness toward the same goal. 
William, the patriarch of Jerusalem, assembled all the troops left in 
the kingdom and, carrying with him the Sacred Cross of the Lord, 
also hurried eagerly thither. Everywhere, as he hastened on his way, 
he endeavored to raise reinforcements and begged them to go to the 
help of the king. 


27. Baswaj, governor of Damascus, pillages and burns Nablus. 


Wuite the affairs of the king were in this condition, news of the situa- 
tion was brought to Baswaj, governor of Damascus and chief of the 
army, who was mentioned above. He learned that the kingdom had 
been stripped of its usual army, that the king was besieged in a remote 


established by knights and pilgrims from England. It is not connected, so far as is 
known, with any of the other orders of St. George. 


FULK OF ANJOU AS KING 89 


part of the realm, and that the nobles and all the people, anxious to 
liberate him, were flocking thither as with one mind. He was con- 
vinced that the long-desired opportunity of injuring the Christians had 
now arrived. Accordingly, with a large force, he invaded the kingdom 
and suddenly attacked the unfortified city of Nablus, a place without 
walls, outworks, or even a moat. Thus, wholly without warning, like a 
thief in the night, he fell upon the unsuspecting citizens and, in a 
furious onslaught, spared neither sex nor age. Alive to the danger, but 
alas, too late, the survivors with their wives and children finally suc- 
ceeded in reaching the citadel in the middle of the place. Thus with 
the greatest difficulty they escaped through the midst of fire and mas- 
sacre. Unopposed, Baswaj raged throughout the city with unbridled 
license and consigned everything to the flames. He then departed 
without loss. With him he carried plunder, slaves, and everything else 
of value in the city.® 


28. The relief forces hurry to the aid of the king, but meanwhile 
still greater woes are inflicted upon the besieged. 


MEANWHILE, Zangi continued his vigorous attacks upon the besieged 
with unremitting zeal. The very walls shook under the impulse of his 
mighty engines. Millstones and huge rocks hurled from the machines 
fell into the midst of the citadel, shattered the houses within, and 
caused intense fear to the refugees there. Great fragments of rock and 
all kinds of whirling missiles were hurled with such violence against 
them that there was no longer any place of security within the walls 
where the feeble and wounded might be hidden. Everywhere was dan- 
ger, everywhere hazard; everywhere the specter of frightful death 
hovered before their eyes. Apprehension of sudden destruction and a 
sinister foreboding of disaster ever attended them. With this very 
object in view, their cruel foe redoubled his assaults. He arranged his 
men in alternate divisions and, by using successive relays, renewed his 
strength. When the first detachment became weary, fresh men were 
brought into line, so that the battle seemed continuous rather than be- 
gun anew. Insufficient numbers prevented the Christians from enjoy- 
ing these refreshing changes, yet they sustained with unswerving exer- 
tion not only the earlier but also the later attacks. But some succumbed 


83 This raid was made in the summer of 1137 while Fulk was involved with Zangi 
at Montferrand (see Stevenson, Crusaders, p. 146, note 2). 


go FULK OF ANJOU AS KING 


to severe wounds and others to illnesses of various kinds, so that day 
by day our ranks decreased. One failing was common to all, the im- 
possibility of enduring constant engagements. Their nights, devoted 
to keeping watch, were sleepless, while during the day their strength 
was further exhausted by never-ending combat. The enemy granted 
them no respite for the restoration of their wearied bodies. 

As a culmination of all these woes, the refugees had brought no 
provisions with them; there was no food remaining in the fortress 
from the former siege, and all that which they had intended to bring 
in had fallen into the hands of the enemy. Soon after they entered the 
citadel, therefore, the Christians were obliged to use their horses for 
food, since there was nothing else. After these were gone, there was no 
food of any description. So even the strong and robust grew weak 
from hunger, and leanness, induced by famine, ravaged the strength of 
even the most vigorous. 

Moreover, the number shut up within the fortress was so large that 
the supplies were not sufficient to afford even a modicum to each one. 
The lodging places were so overcrowded that great numbers lay in the 
streets and squares—in fact, the ground seemed as if covered with 
rushes. Javelins incautiously thrown at random by the archers often 
fell in their midst and inflicted fatal wounds. Zangi received full in- 
formation of all these details by reliable messengers. Confident that 
the Christians could not long endure such straits, he urged his men to 
yet stronger measures. He massed his cohorts so closely around the 
fortress and guarded all the entrances so strictly that no one, not even 
in a most desperate attempt, could reach our people, nor could they 
themselves go forth. 

The situation in the beleaguered city grew worse from day to day. 
Food was wholly lacking and hope was utterly gone. In this extremity 
the Christians learned by their own experience how imperious is the 
rule of famine and how true is that saying, “Famine alone makes cities 
free [from their masters].” ®4 

Yet hope of succor from the prince, the count of Edessa, and Jerusa- 
lem in some measure sustained the almost perishing people. But, since 
“for the yearning soul nothing moves swiftly enough,” they distrusted 
all delay, their eagerness increased because deferred, and an hour 
seemed as a year. 


®4 Lucan Pharsalia 11. 56. 


FULK OF ANJOU AS KING gI 


29. Relief arrives. In the meantime, however, the king is induced 
to surrender. He enters into an agreement with the foe and 
returns in safety to his own land. 


Wuite these events were transpiring at the besieged castle of Mont- 
ferrand, Prince Raymond was already drawing near with his legions. 
The count of Edessa, also with a large force, was not far away, and the 
army of Jerusalem, led by the Cross of Salvation, was likewise march- 
ing rapidly thither. Information of their approach was brought to 
Zangi by reliable messengers. He dreaded the arrival of these great 
leaders and, above all, of the emperor, who was, he knew, at Antioch. 
He feared that the monarch, on learning of the troubles of the besieged 
Christians, might feel compassion for them, and with his own uncon- 
querable army march out in wrath against him. Before news of the 
approaching relief could reach the prisoners in the castle, therefore, he 
sent envoys to make overtures of peace. They were instructed to say to 
the king and his nobles that the fortress, already half demolished, 
could not hold out much longer; that the Christians, exhausted by 
starvation, had lost courage and had no longer strength to resist. His 
own army, on the contrary, possessed in abundance all things necessary. 
Nevertheless, out of respect for the king, a great and illustrious prince 
among the Christians, he was willing to restore all the captives whom 
he had recently taken, including the count, and to permit the king and 
all his company to leave the place freely and peacefully and return to 
their own country, on condition that the fortress should be surren- 
dered. 

The Christians were ignorant that aid was so near. Hunger, vigils, 
hardships, and anguish of mind, together with deadly wounds had ut- 
terly exhausted their strength and reduced them to a state far from 
warlike. They received the proffered terms with great eagerness and 
were astonished that such humanity could exist in a man so cruel. Grate- 
fully they accepted the conditions imposed, without questioning the 
reason thereof. As soon as the understanding had been reduced to an 
agreement pleasing to both parties, the count of Tripoli was released 
and with him a large number of captives. The king and his men then 
marched out at once, receiving kindly treatment from the enemy, and 
the fortress was surrendered to the Turks. The king, agitated indeed 
but yet happy in his release from a situation of great perplexity and 


92 FULK OF ANJOU AS KING 


danger, went down from the heights into the fields near Arka. There 
he learned that the prince and the count were at hand. He met them 
with great affection and commended their brotherly love and solici- 
tude, but lamented that it was offered too late. He thanked them 
heartily because they had showed so much consideration for his affairs 
and as far as lay within their power had rendered the desired aid. 
Then, refreshed by friendly talk with one another, they parted and 
each returned to his own land.* 


30. On his return to Antioch the prince finds the city under siege. 
He makes a valiant resistance. Finally, however, through the 
intervention of certain individuals, he is reconciled to the 
emperor. 


THE prince of Antioch returned home with all haste, for his own 
affairs were in a very critical condition. He had left the most powerful 
prince of the world before his gates intent on hostile measures. Enter- 
ing by the upper gate, which is next to the citadel and stronghold of the 
city, Raymond found the emperor still determined to carry out his 
original design. Accordingly, for several days there was active warfare 
between the two armies. Often secretly but still more often openly, 
the people of Antioch sallied forth against the emperor’s army and 
frequently wrought great havoc. Without regard to the fact that both 
sides professed the same faith, they fought with one another as with 
enemies. 

The emperor, for his part, caused immensely heavy rocks to be 
hurled from the mighty machines and engines. In this way, he sought 
to weaken and break down the defenses of the city and to shatter the 
walls and towers at the gate of the Bridge. The legions, armed with 
arrows and all sorts of missiles, were disposed in a circle round the 
place. Aided by a strong band of slingers, they sought at long range to 
prevent the townspeople from defending the walls and were ever on 
the wz ch for an opportunity to approach and undermine the fortifica- 
tions. 

As this critical situation developed, men of good sense in both armies 
began to fear that, if wiser counsel did not speedily prevail, things 
would come to such a desperate pass that a fitting solution for possible 
dangerous crises would not easily be found. Accordingly, in apprehen- 


6° The narrow margin of time between the surrender of the king and the arrival 
of the relief forces is confirmed by Qalanisi (Gibb, Chronicle, pp. 242-43). 


FULK OF ANJOU AS KING 93 


sion of such a result, certain persons interposed as arbitrators. They 
went to the camp of the emperor with proposals of peace and, with 
propitiatory words and a great show of humility, endeavored to soften 
his wrath. In this wise and discreet manner, as was meet, they ap- 
proached the monarch and tried to pave the way for peace. It was 
finally arranged by the arbiters and those who had charge of bringing 
about the much-desired peace, that the prince, attended by all his 
barons, should present himself before his imperial majesty and, in the 
presence of the illustrious and distinguished nobles of the imperial 
palace, should with all due solemnity swear allegiance and fealty to the 
emperor. Furthermore, he should take a solemn oath that whenever 
the emperor desired to enter Antioch or its citadel, either in war or 
peace, the prince should not refuse to allow him a free and undisputed 
entrance. If the emperor should peacefully restore Aleppo, Shayzar, 
Hama, and Hims to the prince, as had been stipulated in the treaty, 
Raymond was to rest content with these cities and others near by, and 
without contest give back to the emperor the city of Antioch to be held 
by right of ownership. 

In return for the fealty shown him, the emperor should agree that 
if, by the aid of God, he succeeded in taking Aleppo, Shayzar, and all 
the adjacent region, he would allow the whole to be given to the prince 
without trouble or diminution and that the latter and his heirs should 
hold it in peace by perpetual right, but in benefice, which is commonly 
called in fief. 

In accordance with this agreement, the prince, attended by his noble 
suite, proceeded to the imperial camp. He was received by the emperor 
with fitting honor, and, after the covenant had been revised to the 
satisfaction of both parties, the prince tendered the oath of fealty to 
the emperor. Thereupon, the emperor at once granted him the investi- 
ture of the cities named above, with all their dependencies, and prom- 
ised faithfully that if, by the will of God, he should take them the 
following summer, he would personally surrender them to the,jrince. 

As soon as the treaty was concluded and peace fully reéstablished, 
the imperial standard was raised over the principal tower of the citadel. 
Then, laden with most bountiful gifts, the prince returned to Antioch 
with his retinue. Since the severe winter season was at hand, the em- 
peror went back to Cilicia with all his army, that he might spend the 
winter on the seacoast near Tarsus. 


HERE ENDS THE FOURTEENTH BOOK 


THE FIFTEENTH BOOK BEGINS 


EMPEROR JOHN SEEKS TO EXTEND HIS 
INFLUENCE OVER THE LATIN STATES 


1. The emperor lays siege to Shayzar; the prince and the count 
of Edessa attend him, as in duty bound by their oath of allegi- 


ance to him. 


THE emperor passed the winter months in Cilicia. On the approach 
of spring, that season most favorable for the pursuit of war, he sent 
forth the heralds to proclaim an imperial edict by which the com- 
manders of the army, the centurions, and the commanders of fifties 
were instructed to draw up their forces, to repair the engines of war, 
and to arm the entire people. Envoys had already been sent to invite 
the prince, the count of Edessa, and the other principal lords of those 
parts to march forth with the emperor to war. 

Accordingly, from all directions the troops assembled. About April 1, 
the emperor, in order to make good the agreement between himself 
and the prince, directed the entire host, with blare of trumpts and roll 
of drums, to proceed toward Shayzar. He entered the enemy’s coun- 
try and a few days later encamped before the city. 

As soon as they learned of this, the prince and the count levied 
troops from all over their domains and, with the same purpose in view, 
followed the emperor as quickly as possible. Soon they arrived with 
their armies before the city named above. 

The situation of Shayzar is very similar to that of Antioch, between 
the mountain and the river which flows past the latter city. The greater 
part lies in the plain which extends to the river, but there is also another 
part built on the slope of the mountain. On the heights above towers 
the citadel, which was generally believed to be impregnable. From this 
stronghold, on the right and on the left, the walls run down to the river 
and enclose the city with the suburbs adjacent to it. 

The emperor crossed the river, encircled the city with his troops, 
and laid siege to the place on that side which seemed most easily as- 
sailable because of the suburbs before it. From the machines, set up in 


EMPEROR JOHN AND THE LATIN STATES 95 


strategic positions, poured forth constant volleys of heavy stones which 
shook the towers and walls and even the houses of the people within. 
Under the repeated blows of these enormous missiles, the fortifica- 
tions, on which the inhabitants had relied as their greatest defense, were 
utterly overthrown and in their fall wrought dreadful havoc among 
the townspeople. 

The emperor, a man of great courage, pressed on the assault with 
glowing zeal and promised rewards for victory. Thus he kindled the 
enthusiasm of the young, ever eager for glory, for the strife and com- 
bats of war. Protected by the breastplate and girt with the sword, his 
head covered with a golden helmet, he mingled with the ranks and 
cheered now these, now those, with words of encouragement. Again, 
like a man of the people, he roused their valor by his example and 
fought valiantly, that he might render others more courageous for the 
fray. Thus did this man of lofty spirit move about without ceasing 
among the troops. From the first hour of the day even unto the latest 
he endured the heat of battle. He gave himself no rest—not even to 
take food. For either he was admonishing those who served the engines 
to take better and more frequent aim or he was inspiring courage in 
those who were engaged in the thick of the combat. He restored the 
strength of the fighters by successive relays of men and substituted 
fresh troops for those who were exhausted. 

But while others were engaged in strenuous conflict, the prince and 
the count, both young men, let themselves be drawn away by the 
frivolous pursuits common to men of their years. They were continu- 
ally playing at games of chance to the great detriment of their own 
interests. Moreover, by this lack of interest in warlike pursuits, they 
influenced others to take a less active part in the siege. 

When their ill conduct came to the notice of the emperor, he was 
greatly incensed, and more than once by friendly admonitions given in 
secret he strove to call them back to their duty. He set before them his 
own example and reminded them of the fact that he, although the 
most powerful monarch of the land, did not spare himself physical 
hardships and great expense. For some days the army continued with- 
out ceasing to carry on engagements and conflicts of this nature. Fi- 
nally, the emperor, indignant that a weak city could so long resist his 
incomparable army, wearied of the delay. He accused his men of 
laxity and tried to incite them to more vigorous efforts. He com- 


96 EMPEROR JOHN AND THE LATIN STATES 


manded that the attacks be redoubled and the siege pressed on with 
more boldness. 

During the vigorous but ineffective siege of the city, that suburb in 
the lower part of the town, which was mentioned above, was captured 
in a hand-to-hand fight. No mercy was shown to the citizens found 
there, except in the case of those who by word or dress or by some other 
sign indicated that they would follow the Christian faith. For Shayzar 
contained and had contained from the beginning many people who be- 
longed to the faithful and who, under the wretched yoke of slavery, 
were unjustly oppressed by their infidel masters.* 


2. The emperor in anger raises the siege and returns to Antioch 
without accomplishing his end. 


As soon as the suburb was taken, the citizens, alarmed lest the enemy 
should burst forcibly into the inner part and attack their wives and 
children, begged for a short truce. This was granted. The lord of 
Shayzar was a certain noble Arab named Machedolus.? This man 
secretly sent messengers to the emperor and humbly besought him 
with many prayers to save the city and protect the citizens. He prom- 
ised to give in return a large sum of money. The dissolute and inactive 
conduct of the prince and the count during the campaign had deeply 
angered the emperor, especially in view of the fact that in pursuance 
of his promise he was laboring in their behalf. Their promises of fealty, 
rather specious than reliable, he counted as nothing; they were, in fact, 
dead without works. Accordingly, he detested them, and, to punish 
their faithlessness, he had already determined in his own mind, with 
the counsel of a few intimate advisers, that at the first opportunity 
which offered the least semblance of honor, he would raise the siege 
and return home. 

Accordingly, as soon as the money agreed upon for raising the siege 
was paid, the heralds were ordered to proclaim peace, and the legions 
were directed to make ready for departure. Camp was at once broken. 


1 Shayzar was the native city of Usamah and is described in his autobiography (see 
P. K. Hitti, 42 Arab-Syrian Gentleman and Warrior in the Period of the Crusades: 
Memoirs of Usamah ibn-Mungidh, pp. 3-5 et passim). 

“It is difficult to recognize in William’s Machedolus the name of Usamah’s uncle 
who governed the city at this time. The uncle’s name is Izz-al-Din abu-al-Asakir 
Sultan. He died in 1154 and was succeeded by one Taj-al-Dawlah (see Hitti, Usamah, 
Introd., p. 6). 


EMPEROR JOHN AND THE LATIN STATES 097 


Orders were given that the legions proceed toward Antioch and that 
the entire army hasten thither.® 

When the count and the prince learned of the emperor’s action, they 
repented of their conduct, but, alas, too late. They endeavored to alter 
his intention, but he could not be swerved from the decision he had 
made. He rejected all their efforts at persuasion and hastened his de- 
parture. The count, far more sophisticated and wily than the prince, is 
said to have acted very maliciously in this matter. Influenced by a secret 
hatred against the prince, his lord, which he later openly acknow!- 
edged, he led the imprudent youth astray by his own greater subtlety 
so that the latter’s power might not be increased. By every possible 
means he endeavored to bring upon him the emperor’s displeasure, lest 
through that monarch the importance of the young prince might be 
increased. 


3. The emperor again demands the citadel of Antioch from the 
prince and thus indicates his intention of remaining for a time 
in that vicinity. 


THE emperor arrived at Antioch with his sons and his suite and en- 
tered the city attended by a large body of soldiers. He was conducted 
with great ceremony, first to the cathedral and then to the palace of 
the prince, who, with the count, assumed the office of marshal. The 
patriarch with all the clergy and people followed in procession accord- 
ing to custom. Songs of praise and the sound of musical instruments 
accompanied his progress as well as frequent bursts of joyous applause 
from the populace. 

For several days, as if the palace were his own, the emperor in- 
dulged freely as he would in the pleasures of the baths and other rec- 
reations pertaining to physical welfare. To the prince and the count, to 
their nobles, and even to some of the citizens, he showed profuse and 
almost prodigal munificence. At length, he caused the two lords with 
all the nobles of the province to be summoned to his presence. When 
they appeared before him, he addressed the prince as follows: “You 
know, my dear son Raymond, that out of love for you we have tarried - 
in this vicinity a long time, that we might enlarge your principality 

3 According to Qalanisi, who describes the emperor’s spring campaign on the upper 
Orontes, the real reason for raising the siege was the news that Zangi was collecting 


a large army and would soon pounce upon the Christians (see H. A. R. Gibb, trans., 
The Damascus Chronicle, pp. 248-52). 


98 EMPEROR JOHN AND THE LATIN STATES 


and extend your possessions to the detriment of the enemies of our 
faith. This we have done in accordance with the agreement formerly 
entered into, through the mediation of wise men, between our empire, 
beloved of God, and you, our loyal vassal. An opportune occasion has 
now come, and it is time to fulfil our promise and to place all the ad- 
joining region under your rule, as the stipulations of the treaty clearly 
provide. But you well know, and these nobles who stand with you in 
our presence also know, that to carry out the obligations by which we 
are bound is not the matter of a short time. On the contrary, it is evi- 
dent that your affairs demand an even longer sojourn on my part and 
yet greater outlay. Consequently, you must surrender to our care the 
citadel of this city, according to the tenor of the agreement, that our 
treasure may be placed there in security. Our forces must also have 
free access to the city, that they may come and go without hindrance. 
The engines of war needed for the siege of Aleppo cannot be so readily 
procured from Tarsus or Anavarza or the other cities of Cilicia. For 
these purposes this city affords far better facilities than any other place 
can offer. Fulfil your promise, therefore, and, conforming to the fealty 
which you have shown, do your duty. It will be the task of our im- 
perial highness to carry out the obligations resting upon us and to inter- 
pret these liberally and with overflowing measure.” 

The prince and his nobles were appalled at the severity of these 
words. For a long time they anxiously deliberated over the problem, 
uncertain what response to make. For it seemed a very harsh and seri- 
ous matter that the city, which our nation had acquired at such peril 
and which had been restored to the Christian faith at the expense of 
the precious blood of happy princes, should fall into the hands of the 
effeminate Greeks. Antioch had always been the head and governor 
of many great provinces, and, without her, it seemed to us that the rest 
of the country could not hold out. On the other hand, there could be 
no question that this had been included in the agreement made by the 
prince. Moreover, the emperor had brought in with him so many of 
his own men that it would be difficult to resist him if he should be in- 
clined to use force. The matter was at this critical point when the count 
of Edessa spoke thus, on behalf of all. “Sire, the words of your im- 
perial highness are fraught with divine eloquence and are worthy of 
all acceptance, for we see that their purpose is wholly concerned with 
increasing our power. But a new matter calls for fresh consideration, 


EMPEROR JOHN AND THE LATIN STATES 99 


nor does it lie within the power of the lord prince alone to agree to this 
demand. He must consider most carefully with the advice of his 
nobles, of me, forsooth, and of his other loyal subjects, how your dic- 
tum and demand may best be carried into effect. For if there should 
be an uprising of the populace, the execution of your demand might 
be hindered.” 

The count’s response was acceptable to the emperor. A short delay 
was thereupon granted, that the proposed deliberation might be held. 
The count then went home; the prince remained in the palace, where, 
according to report, he was practically a prisoner. 


4. An uprising occurs in Antioch; the emperor in alarm rescinds his 
demand ; the quarrel is settled, and the emperor leaves the city. 


As soon as the count reached home, he dispatched secret messengers to 
inform the people of the emperor’s demands and to rouse them to 
arms. A tumult, accompanied by loud shouting, soon arose throughout 
the city; crowds assembled from every direction, and the din increased 
to a mighty uproar. When the count heard the disturbance, he took 
horse and rode swiftly to the palace, as if fleeing from the pursuit of the 
populace. He threw himself, breathless, at the feet of the emperor. 
The monarch, astonished at his abrupt entrance, inquired solicitously 
why, contrary to the etiquette and discipline of the sacred palace, he 
had rushed so informally into the presence of his imperial majesty. The 
count answered that necessity knew no law. The pursuit of a raging 
mob had compelled him to transgress customary rules in order to 
avoid peril of death. In answer to the emperor’s repeated inquiries for 
details he said that he had entered an inn to rest and was about to re- 
fresh himself there.* Suddenly, the entire populace, armed with swords 
and other weapons such as fury supplies, besieged the door of the 
house. As one man they began to denounce him as a man of blood, a 
betrayer of his country, a murderer of the people, one who had taken 
money from the emperor and was about to sell the city to him. They 
demanded that he be surrendered to them. They had actually broken 
into the house before he had succeeded in making his escape through 
the midst of a thousand dangers. 

In the meantime, the mighty uproar was heard throughout the city; 


* The mention of an inn, hospitium, as a place fit to house one of the Latin princes 
implies a highly developed system of caring for transients, both merchants and soldiers, 


100 EMPEROR JOHN AND THE LATIN STATES 


unbridled tumult reigned. Repeated rumors circulated throughout the 
city that Antioch had been sold to the Greeks, that the citadel had al- 
ready been surrendered to them, and that the citizens would be forced 
to leave the homes of their forefathers and depart from their ancestral 
possessions. Kindled to fury by these reports, the townspeople attacked 
members of the emperor’s household wherever found. They dragged 
them down from their horses, despoiled them with violence, beat 
them with whips, and put to the sword all who showed the least re- 
sistance. Fugitives, desperately trying to escape from wounds and 
death, were pursued with drawn swords into the very palace of the 
emperor. 

The clamor of the citizens and the vehement outcries of his own fol- 
lowers roused the emperor to action. He ordered the prince and the 
nobles to be summoned immediately. Alarmed lest some serious dem- 
onstration be made against himself, he restrained his anger for the 
time being, and in reference to the rather free remarks which he had 
made that day in the presence of all, he said: “I remember that I dis- 
cussed with you today a matter which may perchance have given rise 
to this excitement among the people. At this time, I wish all the people 
as well as the fathers of the city to know that, since my demand seems 
to you so harsh and difficult, I revoke my sentence and retract that 
which I proposed. Retain for yourselves the citadel and the whole city 
as well. It is sufficient for me that the conditions which have prevailed 
up to this time continue. I know that you are in very truth my loyal 
servants, and I am confident that you will never prove false to the 
fealty which you have promised and guaranteed. Go, therefore, and 
try to quiet the raging populace. If my sojourn in Antioch causes them 
any degree of apprehension, let them not be further concerned. To- 
morrow, God willing, I shall take my departure.” 

All present manifested approval of the emperor’s resolve. His pru- 
dence, his farseeing counsel, and his wise discernment were highly 
extolled. The prince and the count then went out with others of the 
principal men and by words and gestures, nods and signs, endeavored 
to calm the uproar. Silence was at last obtained and the mob reduced 
by friendly words to some degree of tranquillity. The mediators then 
earnestly besought them to return to their homes, to lay aside their 
arms and be quiet. This result was finally brought about. 

On the following day the emperor, attended by his sons, his kindred, 


EMPEROR JOHN AND THE LATIN STATES 1o1 


and all his following, left Antioch, and by his orders the camp was 
established outside the walls.® 


5. Envoys are sent to the emperor to try to appease his anger. In 
this they are successful. The emperor returns to his own land. 


WisE men in the city, however, realized that the emperor’s wrath had 
been excited against the prince and the great nobles. Although he had 
wisely concealed his real feelings, yet he believed that they were re- 
sponsible for instigating and secretly encouraging the popular upris- 
ing. Accordingly, in the hope of restoring peace, men of experience 
and judgment were sent as envoys to his imperial majesty. They were 
to offer excuses for the prince and the principal men of the land and to 
declare that they were not guilty of exciting sedition among the people. 

The deputies were introduced into the presence of the emperor. Act- 
ing on behalf of their mission, they earnestly alleged the innocence of 
the prince and strove to convince the emperor of the fact in the follow- 
ing words: “Your imperial majesty and august highness knows far 
better than we that in all communities, and far more in cities and 
wherever men congregate in large numbers, all are not possessed. of 
equal wisdom or endowed with equal judgment. People have different 
manners and customs, they follow varied pursuits, as their interests 
direct. Most true is that wise saying: ‘My three guests seem almost to 
quarrel.’ ® And this also: ‘As many men, so many minds.’” In the 
midst of this great variety of manners and habits, it 1s the duty of the 
wise man to discern those who are deserving and to distribute rewards 
in proportion to merit. Following out this reasoning, the frenzied 
actions of an irresponsible mob should not redound to the detriment 
of the better-disposed element. It often happens that a disorderly mob, 
which brooks no restraint, rashly excites quarrels and disturbances. But 
it is also certain, as ancient and long-approved custom shows, that in 
all well-constituted cities the rash impulses of the populace are re- 
strained and unbridled audacity checked by the wise moderation of the 


5 This account of the reason for the departure of John from Antioch is accepted 
by Chalandon. There were deeper reasons than this ruse of Joscelin for the resentment 
of the Latin populace against the Greeks. The overlordship of Antioch by John car- 
ried with it, expressed or implied, the reéstablishment of a Greek patriarch. Inno- 
cent II, alarmed by John’s conduct in Cilicia, issued a bull forbidding Latin Christians 
to serve in the army of the Greeks (Jaffe, Reg., no. 7883); F. Chalandon, Les Comnéne, 
II, 154-563 see also note 17, below). 

® Horace Ep. 11. ii. 61. 7 Terence Phor. 11. iv. 14. 


102 EMPEROR JOHN AND THE LATIN STATES 


elders. If it were otherwise, the condition of the crowd would be far 
better than that of the nobles; unless the elders were permitted to cor- 
rect the errors of the thoughtless populace, the confusion of a heedless 
mob would prevail rather than the experience of the wise. Without the 
knowledge of the prince and of those charged with carrying on the 
most important affairs of state, the irresponsible people committed 
this outrage. Let them bear the punishment they deserve, but let the 
prince and the nobles be held guiltless. In proof of his innocence, the 
prince is ready to abide by the terms of the treaty and, if permitted, to 
transfer the city with the citadel into the hands of the emperor.” 

By this plea and others of similar import, the emperor was induced 
to change the feeling of intense indignation, which was due to suspi- 
cion alone, for one of a kindlier nature. He sent for the prince and also 
the count and the nobles and directed that they approach his presence 
in a friendly way. Thus the cloud of anger which had separated them 
was dispersed; the emperor graciously received their salutations and 
in return extended a kindly greeting. 

At length he informed them that urgent reasons compelled him to 
return home. On taking leave, he solemnly promised that, with the 
help of God, he would return with a strong force and would carry out 
the agreement which he had made. He then led his entire army into 
Cilicia. Thence, when his business in that country and in Syria was 
finished, he made ready his forces for the march and returned to his 
own land. 


6. The king of Jerusalem lays siege to a fortress beyond the Jor- 
dan and takes it by force. Our army suffers a deplorable de- 
feat at Tekoah. Eudes de Montfaucon falls at that place. 


In the following summer, not long after these events had happened 
at Antioch, Thierry, count of Flanders, a great and distinguished man 
among the princes of the West and a son-in-law of the lord king,® came 
on a pilgrimage to Jerusalem, with a noble retinue. 

The king and the people as a whole received him with the utmost 
joy. By the advice of the patriarch and other princes of the realm, it 

8 The acquisition of Cilicia and the capture of Leo and other leaders of the Armenian 
state were the most tangible results of John’s campaign during these two years. 

® Thierry of Alsace profited from the misfortunes of William Clito, son of Robert 


Curthose. He obtained Flanders and Sibylla, the daughter of Fulk, both formerly in 
Clito’s possession. This, the first of his journeys to the Holy Land, was made in 1139. 


EMPEROR JOHN AND THE LATIN STATES 103 


was unanimously decided, with the help of the splendid force of valiant 
knights who accompanied him, to besiege a certain stronghold on the 
other side of Jordan, near Mt. Galaad, in the territory of the Am- 
monites. This fortress was a great menace to our lands. It was a cavern, 
on the slope of a very high mountain, the approach to which was prac- 
tically inaccessible. Above it towered a mighty precipice which reached 
from the top of the promontory to the depths of the adjacent valley. 
On one side, a narrow and dangerous path between a high projecting 
cliff and the precipice just described led to the same cave. 

In this cave a band of wicked robbers and bandits from the lands of 
Moab, Ammon, and Galaad had established themselves; and from 
this base, as opportunity offered, they were in the habit of making fre- 
quent and unexpected forays upon our lands. These raids were often 
attended with great danger to us. Full information of the conditions 
prevailing in Christian territory was supplied to the bandits by scouts 
well acquainted with the region who were sent out before each attack. 
Our leaders were exceedingly anxious to remove these evils, and ac- 
cordingly, as we have said, they proposed to besiege the cave. They 
summoned all the people from that locality and, accompanied by 
military forces, crossed the Jordan. On reaching their destination, they 
seized the approach, as far as the inequalities of the country and the 
narrow defiles permitted, and located their camp there. Then the 
forces were stationed in a circle around and the place besieged. In ac- 
cordance with the laws of warfare, they proceeded to harass the enemy 
in every way and to hem them in as closely as possible, in order to force 
them to surrender. The robbers, on their part, with all the cunning that 
ever attends on misfortune, vigilantly prepared to defend themselves. 

Thus almost the entire Christian army was as with one mind val- 
iantly engaged upon this siege. Meanwhile, certain Turks had per- 
ceived that all the region across the Jordan had been stripped of sol- 
diers and thus lay exposed to hostile attacks. Accordingly, they seized 
the opportunity offered at this time and crossed the Jordan. Leaving 
the land of Jericho on the right, they proceeded along beside the lake 
of Asphalt, which is also called the Dead sea, and from there advanc- 
ing to the mountainous country, they fell upon that part of the province 
which in olden times belonged by lot to the tribe of Judah. They took 
possession by force of Tekoah, the city of the prophets Amos and Ha- 
bakkuk, and killed the few people who still remained there. They 


104 EMPEROR JOHN AND THE LATIN STATES 


found it almost denuded of inhabitants for, warned betimes of the 
enemy’s approach, all had departed and, with their wives and chil- 
dren, their herds and flocks, had fled to the neighboring cave of 
Odolla. Consequently, as the village was empty, the invaders entered 
the houses of the fugitives and carried off whatever had been left. 

Now it happened that in those days there had come to Jerusalem 
from Antioch Robert, surnamed the Burgundian, of pious memory 
in the Lord. He was a distinguished knight, valiant in arms, noble both 
according to the flesh and by nature, an Aquitanian by birth and master 
of the Knights of the Temple. Accompanied by some of his brethren 
and by a few knights of various ranks who had remained at Jerusalem, 
he immediately made all speed to the place just mentioned. At their 
head marched Bernard Vacher, one of the king’s household, bearing 
the royal standard, and all the people followed. 

But as soon as the Turks learned that the Christians were on the way, 
they left Hebehis, the home of the prophet Joel, and fled toward 
Hebron, the burial place of the patriarchs. From there they intended 
to descend into the plain and proceed toward Ascalon. The Christians, 
however, although they knew that the foe was in full retreat, did not 
follow in close pursuit, as if confident of victory. On the contrary, they 
scattered recklessly in different directions, more intent on plunder than 
on destroying the enemy. The Turks, although already in flight, soon 
perceived this. With renewed courage, they again massed in their usual 
fashion and as far as possible strove to rally their scattered forces. Full 
of confidence, they fell unexpectedly upon the bands of Christians, who 
were roving hither and yon without thought of danger, and wrought 
great destruction with the sword. Nevertheless, a few of our people 
made an effort to resist. They gathered together and engaged in battle. 

Meanwhile, the shrill sound of trumpets and horns, the champing 
of horses, the flash of glittering armor, the voices of the leaders cheer- 
ing on their men, together with the clouds of dust raised by the horses’ 
hoofs, carried the alarm to the scattered forces of the Christians. They 
hastened to the place of combat. But before they could join their com- 
rades who were trying to make a resistance, our first ranks gave way 
and fled. The enemy had showed their superiority, and our people were 
vanquished. 

Closely pursued by the enemy with arrows and drawn swords, the 
Christians tried to flee. But escape was practically impossible, because 


EMPEROR JOHN AND THE LATIN STATES 105 


the place was rough with rocks and almost pathless. Some perished by 
the sword, and others were hurled headlong from precipices. From 
Hebron, which is Kirjath-Arba, even to the boundaries of Tekoah the 
Turks pursued and wrought terrible massacre upon the Christians. 
Many noble and famous men fell on that day. Among others who per- 
ished was the illustrious Knight Templar, Eudes de Montfaucon. His 
death caused universal sorrow and mourning. 

The victorious enemy returned in triumph to Ascalon, rejoicing over 
the destruction of the Christians and the spoils which they carried with 
them. 

When our people who were engaged in the siege [at Mt. Galaad] 
learned of the disaster which had befallen us, they were filled with con- 
sternation. A realization of the fact, however, that by the law of war 
victory falls now to one side and now to the other comforted them, and 
they continued their work with renewed vigor. Within a short time, by 
the will of God, they took that stronghold and returned home cov- 
ered with glory. 


7. Zangi causes the kingdom of Damascus much uneasiness. 
The Damascenes appeal to the Christians for aid. They ob- 


tain it under certain conditions. Zangi returns to his own 


land. 


Wuite these events were taking place in the land of Jerusalem, Zangi, 
mightily puffed up by his successes, like an ever-restless worm, dared 
to aspire to conquer the [Saracen] kingdom of Damascus. Word was 
brought to Ainardus [Anar], the governor of that country, who was 
likewise the chief of the army and the father-in-law of the king, that 
Zangi had entered his territory with a hostile army.*° The governor at 
once dispatched envoys to the king of Jerusalem. Most earnestly he 
begged in conciliatory words that he and the Christian people would 
lend their aid and counsel against a cruel enemy, equally dangerous to 
both kingdoms. Lest he might seem to be boldly soliciting free aid 
from the king and his nobles, with little hope of return, he promised 
to pay twenty thousand pieces of gold per month for the necessary ex- 
penses of the enterprise. The treaty also included the provision that as 

10 Anar, or Mu’in al-Din, who had distinguished himself by holding Hims against 


Zangi in 1137, was a mamluk of Tughtigin and became the actual, if not nominal, 
ruler of Damascus in 1139. 


106 EMPEROR JOHN AND THE LATIN STATES 


soon as the enemy had been driven from Damascus the city of Banyas, 
which had been wrested from us a few years before, should be restored 
without contest. Moreover, as a guarantee that the articles of the treaty 
would be carried out, he promised to give as hostages sons of nobles, in 
number as agreed upon. 

After listening to these proposals, the king called together all the 
nobles of the realm, laid before them carefully all the provisions and 
details of the treaty offered by the deputies, and asked their advice as 
to the response. For a long time they deliberated, and finally, after 
mature consideration and a careful interchange of opinions over each 
detail, it was resolved to lend assistance to Anar and the Damascenes 
against this most cruel enemy, a menace to both kingdoms. 

It was thought best that this assistance be given freely, “lest the 
enemy, rendered more powerful because of our inactivity, should gain 
that kingdom and use its power thus increased against us.” Additional 
circumstances rendered the cause very popular; the most potent reason 
and the one which lent universal favor to the proposition was the fact 
that at the end of the treaty was added the clause about the city of 
Banyas. 


8. With the help of the Damascenes, the city of Banyas is be- 


sieged, 


Tuus the general plan was approved. As soon as the hostages men- 
tioned above had been received and placed in security, large forces of 
cavalry and infantry from all over the realm were ordered to assemble 
at once at Tiberias. Meanwhile, Zangi, in his superabundant valor, had 
invaded the land of Damascus with immense forces of cavalry. Leav- 
ing the city behind him, he had already advanced as far as a place called 
Rasaline. There he had established himself and his legions tempo- 
rarily, for the advance of the Christians caused him some hesitancy. 
Unless our forces hindered his plans, however, he felt confident that 
he could easily attain his desired end. 

News that Zangi had halted at the place mentioned above reached 
the Christians; also that the Damascenes had marched out from the 
city and were awaiting the arrival of the king and his troops at Nuara. 
Accordingly, they broke camp and, with standards raised, hastened as 
with one mind to the aforesaid place. But as soon as Zangi was in- 
formed of this movement, he hastily withdrew, for he was ever on the 


EMPEROR JOHN AND THE LATIN STATES 107 


alert and had no mind to come into conflict with two armies at the same 
time on hostile soil. Accordingly, before the Christians could unite with 
the Damascenes he left his position and hastily retreated. Leaving our 
forces and those of the Damascenes on the left, he proceeded by forced 
marches to the region commonly known as the valley of Baccar. 

Our troops, nevertheless, continued on to the appointed place, where 
they united with the Damascenes. There they learned definitely that 
Zangi had departed. Accordingly, by unanimous consent, the course 
of the entire army was turned toward Banyas, as agreed upon in the 
treaty. We have already mentioned that a few years before this, Tugh- 
tigin, king of Damascus, had taken this city by force of arms.'! After- 
wards, however, the magistrate to whom he had entrusted it had de- 
serted the Damascenes and gone over to their enemy, Zangi. This was 
the reason our allies were making such strenuous efforts to bring it 
under the power of the king of Jerusalem. They preferred that it 
should be restored to the Christians, whose favor they enjoyed, rather 
than see it held by an enemy whom they greatly feared and distrusted ; 
for from it as from a near vantage point he could do them much injury 
and cause them even greater trouble. 


9. The prince of Antioch and the count of Tripoli also come to 
help in the siege. The city is closely blockaded. 


Banyas is the city which is commonly called Belinas and which, be- 
fore the children of Israel entered the Promised Land, was known as 
Leshem. Afterwards, the sons of Dan received this as their allotment 
and called it Leshem Dan, as may be read in Joshua, where it is writ- 
ten: “therefore the children of Dan went up to fight against Leshem, 
and took it, and smote it with the edge of the sword, and possessed it, 
and dwelt therein, and called Leshem, Dan, after the name of Dan 
their father.” 1” 

Later this city was called Caesarea Philippi, because Philip the 
Tetrarch, son of the elder Herod, enlarged it in honor of Tiberius 
Caesar and made it famous with marvellous buildings. Thus it owed 
one appellation to the name of Caesar and the other to that of the man 
who enlarged it. 

Toward this city the allied armies directed their course. They 
reached there May 1, and at once blockaded it on all sides. Anar and 


11 See Book XIV, chaps. 17, 19, and notes 18, 45. 12 Jos, 19:47. 


108 EMPEROR JOHN AND THE LATIN STATES 


his forces took up a position on the east, between the city and the woods, 
in a place called Cohagar. The forces of the king were stationed on the 
west toward the open fields. The position of the troops thus encircling 
the city prevented all approach to those shut up within and removed 
any opportunity of entrance or exit. It was moreover deemed wise— 
and the action was sanctioned by common consent—to dispatch mes- 
sengers to Raymond, prince of Antioch, and to the count of Tripoli to 
invite them to participate in the siege already begun. This was imme- 
diately done. 

Meanwhile, the Christians, with the help of their equally zealous 
allies, the Turks, ever ready for the daily conflict, continued to press 
on the siege without intermission. From the hurling engines called 
petraries they threw huge stones of great weight, which shook the walls 
and demolished the buildings within the city itself. Showers of arrows 
and darts also rained like hail upon the harassed townspeople, so that 
it was impossible to find any place of security within the walls. Even 
the defenders, though protected by wall and ramparts, as they hurled 
stones or drew their bows scarcely ventured to look upon the assailants 
without. 

Then might have been witnessed a strange and novel sight: a hostile 
people encouraging an enemy to the fiercest warfare and, as an ally, 
actually in arms for the destruction of a common foe. Nor could it be 
readily discerned which of the allied armies battled the more valiantly 
against the common adversary or urged on the attack the more bitterly 
or persevered the longer in the burden of battle. Christians and Da- 
mascenes were equal in courage and united in purpose. Although in 
training and in the practice of arms they were indeed unlike, yet in the 
desire to inflict injury upon the enemy one race did not yield to the 
other."# 

The besieged, although wearied to the point of exhaustion by the 
ceaseless attacks and by the burden of vigils and excessive toil, still kept 
up a vigorous resistance. As far as their strength permitted, they made 
every effort to defend their wives and children and, above all, their 
liberty. The pressure of misfortune made them more ingenious, and 
every possible mode of resistance was tried. This continued for some 
time. It finally became evident to the Christians that no advantage 


13 William apparently found it not too difficult to approve of an alliance with 
Muslims against other Muslims. 


EMPEROR JOHN AND THE LATIN STATES tog 


could be gained unless they could build a wooden tower, move it close 
to the walls, and wage war upon the besieged from above. But in all 
that region no suitable material for such a purpose was to be found. 
Anar therefore dispatched men to Damascus for tall beams of great 
size which long ago had been set aside especially for such a purpose. 
He bade them use all possible speed to accomplish their errand and 
return. 


10. The prince and the count arrive. A storming engine is 
erected. The citizens, in the hope of aid, stoutly defend 
themselves. 


MEANWHILE, the prince of Antioch and the count of Tripoli, who had 
been summoned by our deputies, arrived. They brought, as had been 
hoped, a large number of strong fighters, with whom they joined our 
camp. Their coming doubled the distress of the besieged, and they 
seemed to lose all hope of resistance. The newcomers were anxious to 
test out their strength, in eager emulation of one another. Longing for 
praise and glory, they formed their men into separate companies and 
vigorously attacked the city. As a result, the terror of the besieged in- 
creased, and lack of confidence in their own forces fell upon them. The 
allied forces, on the other hand, grew more certain of victory, their 
courage increased, and ennui diminished as day after day found them 
stronger for assault. 

While these events were happening before Banyas, the messengers 
sent to Damascus returned without delay. They brought with them 
immense beams of the necessary size and strength. These were quickly 
dressed by the carpenters and workmen and put together solidly with 
iron nails. Soon an engine of great height towered aloft, from whose 
top the entire city could be surveyed. From this vantage point, arrows 
and missiles of every sort could be sent, while great stones hurled by 
hand would also help to keep the defenders back. As soon as the engine 
was ready, the ground between it and the walls was levelled off, and 
the machine was attached to the ramparts. There, as it looked down 
upon the whole city, it seemed as if a tower had been suddenly erected 
in the very midst of the place. 

Now for the first time the situation of the besieged became intolera- 
ble; they were driven to the last extremity, for it was impossible to 
devise any remedy against the downpour of stones and missiles which 


110 EMPEROR JOHN AND THE LATIN STATES 


fell without intermission from the movable tower. Moreover, there 
was no safe place within the city for the sick and wounded, or where 
those who, still strong and vigorous, were sacrificing themselves in 
defense of the others might withdraw to rest after their labors. 

In addition, they were now debarred from passing back and forth 
about the ramparts and could not without peril of death carry aid to 
their comrades who were falling. For the weapons and modes of as- 
sault used by those fighting below could be considered little or nothing 
in comparison with the manifold dangers to which they were exposed 
from the fighters in the tower. In fact, it seemed to be rather a war 
with gods than with men. Zangi had promised faithfully to come to 
their aid, and at first and even up to that very moment they had cher- 
ished the belief that he would do so. Now, however, in the imminent 
danger all hope of relief or chance of defense had apparently departed. 


11. A legate of the church of Rome lands; he proceeds to the 
siege. The city ts taken and a bishop is ordained there. All the 
princes repair to Jerusalem. 


Durinc the progress of this campaign, a legate from the church of 
Rome arrived at Sidon. Albericus, bishop of Ostia, was a Frenchman 
by birth, from the bishopric of Beauvais. He had been sent on a special 
mission to investigate the trouble which had arisen in the church at An- 
tioch between the lord patriarch and his canons. A short time before 
this, Peter, archbishop of Lyons, a man of revered life, had come to 
Syria in the capacity of envoy on this same matter. But he was stricken 
by death and did not accomplish the mission entrusted to him. Hence 
Albericus was appointed in place of the venerable archbishop just 
named to bring the controversy to a fitting end, as will be related 
further on. When Bishop Albericus learned that the entire Christian 
army was still engaged in the siege of Banyas and that William, pa- 
triarch of Jerusalem, Fulcher, archbishop of Tyre, and other princes 
of the realm were there, he hurried thither as rapidly as possible. 
Although the Christians had not faltered in their undertaking but 
were, on the contrary, zealously carrying it on, yet the support of this 
wise man and the sanction of apostolic authority spurred them on. His 
words of exhortation gave them added stimulus and fired them with 
desire to attack the city still more vigorously. 

Meanwhile, those who had ben detailed for work at the machines 


EMPEROR JOHN AND THE LATIN STATES 111 


continued to press the besieged mercilessly and without ceasing. No 
opportunity for rest was given, and to their condition of chronic fatigue 
was added ever-increasing panic and apprehension of danger. Their 
number too was constantly decreasing; for some had fallen by the 
sword, and others had suffered fatal wounds. Still others gave way 
through utter exhaustion, so that the defenders could not continue to 
ward off attacks as they had been doing. 

Anar, the governor of Damascus and the commander in chief of the 
army, was a man of keen insight who loyally adhered to the strict terms 
of the covenant which he had made with us. He realized the plight of 
the enemy; he knew also “that misfortune ever inclines one to lend 
a listening ear and that cumulative misery is wont to drive its victims 
to accept even the hardest terms.” Accordingly, he put the saying liter- 
ally to the test. He secretly sent some of his own followers to invite 
the people to surrender, that they might save their lives. At first they 
shrank from the idea with abhorrence and pretended that they could 
hold out for some time longer, as if they still had hope of further re- 
sistance. Nevertheless, in the end, they thankfully embraced the prof- 
fered terms with much avidity. Their ruler, however, a powerful 
nobleman whom they themselves call the amir, fearing that he might 
come to want, added a provision to the terms offered. In consideration 
of the surrender of the city, he asked that he be given some compensa- 
tion therefor, the amount to be determined through the good ofhces 
of some just man. For it seemed shameful and disgraceful that a noble 
lord, the former ruler of a great city, should be driven from his heredi- 
tary possessions and compelled to beg. This petition seemed fairly just 
and reasonable to Anar. He therefore guaranteed that the request 
should be granted, for he was absolutely determined to bring the city 
into our power as soon as possible. The provision was as follows: an 
annual revenue, in amount as agreed upon between them, was to be as- 
signed to the amir, payable from the proceeds of the baths and orchards, 
free permission to depart with all their goods should also be obtained 
for those citizens who wished it. To those who preferred to remain 
there or upon their estates, whether in the city or in the country, either 
permanently or temporarily, rather than to go elsewhere, he promised 
tranquil possession under good conditions, when assurance of fealty 
should be given. 

The king and all the rest of the Christians received this arrangement 


112 EMPEROR JOHN AND THE LATIN STATES 


with favor, and all the citizens prepared to surrender the place without 
delay. Then Anar, perceiving that the negotiations had arrived at the 
desired point of harmony and that the matter was settled in every de- 
tail, placed the facts in a friendly way before the king, the patriarch, 
the prince, and the count. He carefully explained all details of the 
secret negotiations which he had conducted and urged them with all 
the eloquence in his power to agree to the treaty. Out of respect for the 
wisdom and sincere fidelity of the man, they approved the terms, gave 
their assent, and promised that in all good faith they would act in every 
respect according to the arrangements which he had made. 

Upon the surrender of the city, therefore, the townspeople with 
their wives and children and all their belongings were permitted to 
leave without hindrance. Accordingly they departed to the place which 
they had chosen.14 

As soon as the city came into their power, the Christians, at the sug- 
gestion of the patriarch and with the consent and approval of Fulcher, 
archbishop of Tyre, under whose jurisdiction the church at Banyas 
certainly belonged by his right as metropolitan, chose as bishop of that 
place Adam, archdeacon of Acre. To him was committed the spiritual 
care of the faithful who desired to remain there. The temporal juris- 
diction, however, was restored to Renier, surnamed Brus, from whom, 
a few years before, it had been wrested by force. 

The king, accompanied by the prince of Antioch, the patriarch, and 
the papal legate, then hastened to Jerusalem to render thanks and 
solemn sacrifices to God. The prince tarried there for some days to 
make the customary prayers and then returned to Antioch. Before his 
departure, he endeavored to ascertain the legate’s intentions concern- 
ing the patriarch of his own city. He assured him that he might have 
full confidence of his own support and begged him to come to Antioch 
without delay. For the legate, as has been said, had been sent to investi- 
gate certain charges made against the patriarch by some of the canons 
of his own church and to bring the matter to a proper conclusion. 

It is now time to explain what has already been said about this pa- 
triarch. That this may be more readily understood, it is necessary to go 
back somewhat earlier in the story. 

14 The siege had lasted nearly a month, May 20 to June 12, 1140. The town was 


surrendered to Anar, who in turn gave it to the Christians according to promise (Gibb, 
Chronicle, pp. 259-61). 


EMPEROR JOHN AND THE LATIN STATES 113 


12. The prince of Antioch conspires with the adversaries of the 
patriarch of that city. The patriarch departs for Rome. He is 
taken prisoner by Roger, duke of Apulia. A reconciliation is 
eventually brought about between them, The patriarch fi- 
nally reaches Rome. 


Wuen Lord Raymond first came to Antioch and, indeed, even before 
he married his destined bride, in order that he might more easily gain 
his desired end he took an oath of fealty to Ralph, who at that time 
presided over the church at Antioch. He promised on his honor, ac- 
cording to the formula of showing allegiance, that “from that day 
forth he would do nothing either in thought or deed, by which the 
patriarch might lose honor, life, or limb or be held in vile captivity.” 
He did not abide by this oath, however, even for a short time. On the 
contrary, as soon as, through the interest and efforts of the patriarch, 
he had won his wife and obtained control of the entire country, he 
allied himself with the latter’s opponents and, contrary to the alle- 
giance which he had sworn, lent them aid and counsel to the detriment 
of the patriarch. 

With the assistance of such a powerful coadjutor, the patriarch’s 
enemies continued their hostile designs with even more boldness and 
went to Rome. His adversaries were Lambert, an archdeacon of that 
same church, a man of honorable character, well lettered but with little 
or no experience in secular affairs, and one Arnulf, a learned man of 
noble rank, well versed in worldly matters, by birth a Calabrian. With 
the consent and approval of the prince, these two men set out for Rome 
to appeal to the pope. The patriarch, although much against his will, 
was constrained by the prince to go there also. 

Matters were so arranged that Arnulf went on ahead and proceeded 
by a shorter route to Sicily. There he associated himself with his friends 
and relatives, for he was a native of Calabria, where he later became 
bishop of Cosenza (for, as we have said, he was a man of very high 
rank). He went to Roger, duke of Apulia,!® to whom he was well 
known and said, “Illustrious prince, your mortal enemy, who has de- 
prived you and your heirs forever of Antioch and, in defiance of law, 
has raised over it an unknown man, is given into your hand as you 

15 Roger II had been crowned king of Sicily by Pope Anacletus IT in 1130. His title 


was recognized by Pope Innocent II at the peace of Mignano, July 25, 1139. For what 
reasons William here prefers the title of duke of Apulia is not clear. 


114 EMPEROR JOHN AND THE LATIN STATES 


desired, and that without cost. Behold the Lord has delivered the 
patriarch of Antioch to you, and his numerous sins have brought him 
here. Rouse yourself, then; consider how you may best capture him; 
for assuredly, through him, the way may again be opened for you to 
succeed to your rightful and legitimate heritage of which you have 
been unjustly deprived by this man.” 

Influenced by these words, the duke of Apulia, a shrewd and wily 
man, at once ordered secret pitfalls to be carefully laid in all the coast 
cities so that the patriarch, on his arrival, might be seized, cast into 
chains, and sent immediately to Sicily. Accordingly, when Ralph, ap- 
prehending nothing of the sort, landed at Brindisi after a prosperous 
voyage, the directions of the duke were carried out. All the effects 
which he, as a powerful prince, had brought with him were seized, 
his retinue was dispersed, and he himself was bound and handed over 
to that same Arnulf to be dragged to Sicily and conducted before the 
duke. Thus for the first time Arnulf had the opportunity to indulge 
his rage freely against Ralph, his wicked persecutor, and to take a 
double revenge for all the evils which he had suffered at his hands. 

The patriarch was finally brought before the duke. Friendly col- 
loquies took place between the two. Ralph was a discreet man of fine 
appearance and possessed an eloquent tongue. He finally recovered, 
although under certain conditions, all that he had lost. His retinue was 
also restored to him. On his part, he promised that on his return he 
would revisit the duke. He was then dismissed with all honor and con- 
tinued on his journey to Rome. 

On arriving there, he had difhculty at first in obtaining an audience 
with the pope. He was regarded as a persecutor of the church, one who 
desired to lessen the preéminence of the apostolic see and infringe upon 
its prerogatives by setting up a rival chair and claiming that it was 
equal to that of Rome. Consequently, as guilty of lése majesté, he was 
refused entrance to the holy palace and audience with the pope. 


13. He is accused by his enemies, but finally returns to his own 
land in full favor. 


Tue pope and the entire church were much inclined to take advantage 
of any honorable opportunity to make matters difficult for the patri- 
arch, while they showed the utmost favor toward his adversaries. They 
regarded him in fact with suspicion, because he was a rich and mag- 


EMPEROR JOHN AND THE LATIN STATES 115 


nificent man and refused to acknowledge that the see which he held, 
that is, Antioch, was subject to the church of Rome. He contended, on 
the contrary, that it was equal in all respects to that of Rome. “Each,” 
he said, “was the church of Peter, but that of Antioch was, as it were, 
distinguished by the prerogative of the first born.” Hence they strove 
in many ways to annoy him.}° 

Finally, certain mediators, friendly to both, interceded for him and 
opened the way. Through their kind offices, he was admitted to the 
presence of the pope, surrounded by his court in solemn assembly. 
Great magnificence attended his reception. After he had appeared sev- 
eral times in the consistory, his adversaries seized their opportunity 
and publicly accused him. The charges were presented and prepara- 
tions made with all the solemnity of the law to proceed to the trial. 

But it was well known to the entire court that the accusers were not 
sufficiently prepared so as to be able fully to convince the pope and his 
coadjutors with regard to the charges. It was suggested, therefore, that 
both parties rest, until the pope on his own part could send someone to 
Antioch, there to obtain witnesses and proofs whereby the full facts of 
the case might be ascertained. Meanwhile, the patriarch resigned the 
pallium which on his own authority he had assumed from the altar of 
the church at Antioch, in despite, as it was claimed, of the apostolic see, 
and gave it to the cardinals. Thereupon another, taken from the body 
of the blessed Peter, was conferred upon him in the customary manner 
by the prior of the deacons. 

The patriarch remained for a while at Rome, as long as his affairs 
seemed to demand. He then took leave, in full favor and safe as far 
as the case was concerned, and returned to Sicily. Duke Roger received 
him with honor, and frequent colloquies and intimate discussion over 
many necessary matters took place between the two. Then the duke 
furnished him with a number of galleys sufhcient for the voyage, and, 
attended by favoring winds, he set sail for Syria. He landed at the 
place commonly called the Port of St. Simeon, about ten miles more 
or less from Antioch, at the mouth of the Orontes river, which flows 
by that city. 

16 This uncertainty of the papal court about the obedience of the Latin patriarchs 
in the East must be reckoned as a factor in papal policy toward the Latin churches 
of Syria. Doubtless it led the popes more readily to exempt ecclesiastical establishments 


in the Holy Land from local patriarchal jurisdiction than might otherwise have been 
done. 


116 EMPEROR JOHN AND THE LATIN STATES 


14. At the instigation of the prince, his clergy refuse to receive 
him on his return. He withdraws into the land of the count of 
Edessa. He is finally reconciled to the prince and returns to 


Antioch. 


As soon as the lord patriarch arrived at Coelesyria, as has been related, 
and thus was near his own city, he wrote to his church desiring that 
upon a stated day he should be met by a solemn procession at a desig- 
nated place outside the city. His people were well aware, however, that 
the prince was pursuing him with inexorable hatred, in defiance of the 
oath of fealty which he had taken. Accordingly, with a view to the 
prince’s favor, they flatly refused his request or to obey their patri- 
arch at all. In fact, owing to the violence of the prince, they even for- 
bade him to enter the city. When he perceived the wickedness of his 
clergy and the aversion in which he was held by those from whom he 
had deserved far different treatment and also the obstinate anger of 
the prince, he withdrew into the hill country near the city, known com- 
monly as the Black mountains. There he remained for a while, in the 
monasteries with which the place abounds. It was his hope that, when 
the rancor of the prince and his own clergy had abated and kindlier 
feelings prevailed, he might be called back to the city. 

But the prince continued to display his animosity even more openly 
than before. For Arnulf had sent him news from Sicily which strength- 
ened his hatred and gave it still more impetus. He wrote that the patri- 
arch had concluded a secret alliance against the prince with Duke 
Roger, his rival, and in proof of this he alleged that the duke had 
loaded the patriarch with gifts and honor on his return through Sicily. 
He had also provided the galleys necessary for the voyage.’" All these 
circumstances naturally tended to convince the prince that this infor- 
mation was true. 

While the patriarch was staying in the places just mentioned, special 
messengers came to him from Joscelin the Younger, count of Edessa. 
Influenced by hatred of the prince and by good will toward the patri- 
arch, the count sent an urgent invitation that he come with all his reti- 


17 The troubles of Ralph, which may originally have been of purely local ec- 
clesiastical significance, were thus widened out to enter the arena of political rivalry 
between Sicily and the Greek empire. Qalanisi (Gibb, Chronicle, pp. 245-46) notes 
the dispute between Prince Raymond and the patriarch under the year 1138 and ex- 
plains it on the ground that Raymond had agreed to Emperor John’s demand for 
the restoration of a Greek patriarch at Antioch. 


EMPEROR JOHN AND THE LATIN STATES 117 


nue to make him a visit. He might feel perfect confidence and security 
in doing this, for the bishops of that land, namely, the archbishops of 
Edessa, Coritium, and Hierapolis, favored the cause of the patriarch 
and venerated him devoutly as their lord and father. The patriarch 
was delighted at the invitation. He proceeded thither and was received 
with high honor by all the prelates of that land. The count also carried 
out his promise and gladly welcomed his coming in a kindly and de- 
vout spirit. 

Through the mediation of common friends, the prince at last re- 
stored him to favor. It was merely by the lips, however, and not from 
the heart, for it is said that he was led to do so by a monetary considera- 
tion. Hiding ulterior motives under conciliatory words, he sent by 
envoys a friendly invitation to the patriarch to return to the city and to 
resume his office. 

On receiving this message, the patriarch made preparations to re- 
turn at once. With him he took the bishops of that land, whose much- 
needed devotion to him in his adversity he had tested by sure proofs, 
and repaired to Antioch. He was met on his arrival not only by the 
entire body of clergy and people but by the prince himself with a large 
following of knights. Then, to the accompaniment of hymns and spir- 
itual songs, he was solemnly conducted in his pontifical robes into the 
city, then to the great church, and thence to his own palace. 


15. The archbishop of Lyons, papal legate, dies at Acre. Alberi- 
cus, bishop of Ostia, 1s dispatched thither. A synod is called at 
Antioch, 


MEANWHILE, Peter, archbishop of Lyons, arrived in Syria and landed 
at Acre. He had been sent by Pope Innocent as legate of the church 
of Rome, to bring the patriarch’s case to a proper conclusion. He was 
a Burgundian by birth, a man of devout life, simple and God-fearing, 
but he was already well advanced in years and beginning to be an old 
man. 

As soon as he arrived in Syria, he repaired to Jerusalem for the sake 
of prayer. Then, in response to the urgent plea of Lambert and Arnulf 
that he would hasten to Antioch to end the case, he left there and re- 
turned by the shortest route to Acre. Before he could proceed farther, 
however, he was taken dangerously ill. He sank rapidly and died. It 
was rumored that his death was brought about by poison administered 


118 EMPEROR JOHN AND THE LATIN STATES 


in his drink.18 Thus the patriarch’s enemies, who had hurried to An- 
tioch, found themselves disappointed and utterly deprived of the aid 
which they had anticipated from the coming of the legate. Exhausted 
by the fatigue of their journey and the hardships which they had so 
long endured, they supplicated for peace through mediators whom 
they judged well fitted for that office. They professed themselves 
ready to retract their accusations and to show fealty and begged that 
their benefices be restored. Lambert was given back his office of arch- 
deacon, but Arnulf found no mercy. Accordingly, relying upon the 
aid of the prince, with his usual courage he prepared to undertake 
again the hardships of a journey. He proceeded to Rome and, in 
season and out of season, renewed his accusations. At length, through 
his bold persistence, he obtained the concession that the legate about 
whom we are now speaking should be sent to Syria. He reached Jerusa- 
lem, as we have related, and, after completing his prayers, summoned 
the patriarch and all the bishops of the land to a synod to be held at 
Antioch on December 1.1° Thither he himself repaired with all haste. 


16. The patriarch is accused in the assembly of bishops. He 1s 
summoned but delays coming. Serlo, archbishop of Apamea, 
takes his part and is deposed. 


On the day appointed, there assembled from the diocese of Jerusalem 
William, the patriarch, Gaudentius, archbishop of Caesarea, and An- 
selm, bishop of Bethlehem. Fulcher, archbishop of Tyre, devoutly 
loyal to the church of Rome, was also present. On the latter, the legate 
placed his entire hope of successfully accomplishing his mission, for 
he was a magnanimous man and very discreet. Fulcher brought with 
him two of his suffragan bishops, Bernard of Sidon and Baldwin of 
Beirut. All the prelates from the province of Antioch were in attend- 
ance, for it was near by, but their sentiments were varied and not at all 


18 This was a favorite explanation of the death of an important principal in con- 
troversies, particularly in the Mediterranean world. Modern medicine might diagnose 
many such deaths as due to typhoid fever or other abdominal diseases with acute symp- 
toms. Doubtless, however, there were enough cases of actual poisoning to lend plausi- 
bility to the more common rumors. His death is dated May 28, 1139 (see R. Réhricht, 
Geschichte des Kénigreichs Jerusalem, 1100-1291, p. 223). 

19 The actions of this council, dated November 29 to December 2, 1139, are re- 
corded by Mansi (see J. D. Mansi, Sacrorum conciliorum nova et amplissima collectio, 
XXI, 503-506, 577-80). The papacy must have acted quickly upon the news of the 
death of the legate, Peter, archbishop of Lyons. 


EMPEROR JOHN AND THE LATIN STATES 119 


in accord. Stephen, archbishop of Tarsus, Gerard, bishop of Laodicea, 
and Hugh, bishop of Jabala, favored the cause of the canons against 
the lord patriarch; but Franco of Hierapolis and Gerard of Corice with 
Serlo of Apamea openly offered their protection to him as patriarch. 
The latter had been against him in the beginning but had later come 
over to his side. Others quite plainly inclined toward neutrality. 

On the day appointed, archbishops, bishops, and abbots in full pon- 
tifical state assembled, according to custom, in the church of the Prince 
of the Apostles. The pope’s envoy presided as representative of the 
pope, and the papal mandate was publicly read. Then, when the con- 
tents had been carefully perused and fully understood, the accusers, 
Arnulf and Lambert the archdeacon, came forward openly. The latter, 
although he had formerly very shrewdly become reconciled to the 
patriarch and thus obtained the restoration of his benefice, nevertheless 
now “bent like a bow” and a second time presented himself as accuser. 
Many others joined them, for it was apparent that conditions were not 
favorable for the patriarch. Here was shown the truth of that saying 
of Ovid, now a proverb: 


As long as you are prosperous, you will have many friends; 

If the weather becomes cloudy, you will find yourself alone.?° 
The accusers entered the public hall and announced that, the docu- 
ments of accusation having been presented, they were ready to proceed 
to the accusation according to the rules of law. If defeated, they were 
prepared to suffer the penalty. The charges on which they proposed 
to indict the patriarch were written on small sheets of paper. Some had 
reference to his installation, which was irregular and contrary to dis- 
cipline and the rules of the holy fathers. Others concerned his sins of 
incontinence and simony. Since the accusers insisted that he should 
appear in person, messengers were sent to summon him formally be- 
fore the synod and to warn him to come prepared to answer the charges 
preferred against him. However, he utterly refused to come. 

Accordingly, nothing was accomplished that day except that there 
was general conversation and mutual exhortation, as is usual in such 
gatherings. On the second day they again assembled and took their 
places in order. Again the patriarch was formally summoned by an 
edict of citation. As on the day previous, he absolutely declined to 
appear. 


20 Ovid Tristia 1. viii. 6. 


1200 EMPEROR JOHN AND THE LATIN STATES 


During this time Serlo, archbishop of Apamea, sat in the assembly 
of bishops without a wedding garment (for he was not apparelled in 
his pontifical robes, like the other bishops). When asked by the lord 
legate why he was not in accord with the other brethren and why he 
did not proceed to the accusation as he had done before, he answered, 
“My former action, in disparagement of my father, like that of the 
accursed Ham who disclosed the shame of his father, was taken in a 
moment of ill-advised ardor, to the loss of my soul’s salvation. But 
now, God helping me, I renounce the error of my ways and will at- 
tempt neither to accuse him nor to judge him presumptuously. On the 
contrary, I stand ready to fight for his safety and welfare, even unto 
death.” 

Thereupon he was ordered to depart at once. Sentence of degrada- 
tion and excommunication was pronounced against him, whether justly 
or otherwise, and he was deposed from all priestly and pontifical of- 
fice. Intense fear of the prince had fallen upon everyone, so that even 
the impartiality of the legate was affected and no opportunity of speak- 
ing in opposition was now given. The prince, who was far from wise 
or discreet, was urged on to this extreme by a certain Peter Armoin, 
custodian of the city’s citadel. This man, wicked beyond measure, 
hoped that if the patriarch were deposed the prince might be induced 
to raise to that dignity Peter Aimery, a nephew of his own, a man 
whom the patriarch, to his own destruction, had made a deacon of 
that same church. The result proved to be as he had hoped. 

Whether or not his deposition was real or even legal, Serlo at once 
left Antioch and set out for his own diocese. When he reached the 
castle of Harim, burdened with heavy cares, he fell ill and took to his 
bed. There, unable to endure his great wrongs, he turned his face to 
the wall and expired. 


17. The patriarch 1s deposed in his absence for insubordination. 
He is thrown into prison and shamefully treated. A gain he 
repars to Rome and obtains partial favor. On his way home, 
however, he dies by poison. 


On the third day the assembly again convened. When the prelates 
had taken their seats, messengers were a third time dispatched to sum- 
mon the patriarch by a peremptory edict to come and answer to the 
charges. Again, as before, he utterly refused to obey. Whether he was 


EMPEROR JOHN AND THE LATIN STATES 121 


led to this course by the stings of conscience or because, fully aware 
that the entire synod was unanimous in their hostile attitude toward 
him, he feared the violence of the prince we have not been able to learn 
with certainty. He remained, however, with his household in his own 
palace, which was thronged with an immense crowd of knights and com- 
mon people. For the whole city had flocked to his aid and, if they had 
not feared the power of the prince, would have been ready to drive the 
legate ignominiously from the city with all those who had consented 
to the deposition of the patriarch. 

The legate perceived that the patriarch would not come to him. 
Accordingly, relying upon the powerful protection of the prince, he 
went himself to the palace. There he pronounced the sentence of dep- 
osition upon the patriarch and compelled him by force to give up the 
ring and the crozier. He then ordered him to be delivered to the prince. 
Shamefully bound and treated ignominiously like a man of blood, the 
prelate was sent away to a prison in the monastery of St. Simeon, situ- 
ated upon a lofty mountain near the sea. 

This same Lord Ralph, whom I myself saw in my youth, was a tall 
and handsome man, slightly cross-eyed, but not to such an extent that 
he was uncomely.?! Although but little learned, he was a very fluent 
speaker, graceful and agreeable in conversation. His generous disposi- 
tion had won him much favor, not only with the knights but also with 
the common people. He was, however, very forgetful of his promises 
and agreements. Changeable and inconstant in his words, subtle and 
devious in all his ways, he was yet provident and discreet. In one re- 
spect alone he showed some lack of wisdom, in that he refused to re- 
ceive adversaries whom he had justly roused against him, when they 
wished to return into favor with him. He was called arrogant (and so 
indeed he was) and presumptuous beyond measure. Hence, he fell into 
this misfortune, which he could easily have avoided if he had con- 
ducted himself somewhat more discreetly. He was taken and for a long 
time held prisoner in that monastery. Finally he escaped and went to 
Rome, where he obtained a certain degree of favor from the pope. 
But while he was preparing to return, he died miserably from a poi- 

21 This statement is of importance in helping to compute William’s age. Where and 
when William saw him is difficult to determine, for it must presumably have been at 
Jerusalem and before the time of his imprisonment, therefore before 1140. His im- 


prisonment must have been less than a year, for he is reported to have died in Rome 
in 1141. 


122 EMPEROR JOHN AND THE LATIN STATES 


soned draught, administered by some unknown criminal hireling. Like 
another Marius, he experienced fully in his own person all that for- 
tune, whether good or bad, could do. 


18. The legate returns to Jerusalem; he holds a synod; he also 


dedicates the Temple of the Lord. 


Wuen the papal envoy had deposed the patriarch and finished the 
mission on which he had come to Antioch, he returned to Jerusalem. 
There he remained until the solemnities of Easter were over. Then he 
took counsel with the prelates of the churches, and on the third day 
after Holy Easter, with the assistance of the patriarch and some of the 
bishops, he solemnly dedicated the Temple of the Lord. 

There were present on the day of dedication many great and noble 
men from the parts beyond the mountains as well as from the lands on 
this side of the sea. Among them was Joscelin the Younger, count of 
Edessa, who was staying in the city with a great show of magnificence 
during the solemn days of Holy Easter. 

When the celebration was over, the legate called together the arch- 
bishops, bishops, and other prelates of the church and, with the pa- 
triarch, held a council in holy Sion, the primitive mother of churches. 
He desired to confer with them on matters which seemed especially 
pertinent at the moment. Maximus, the bishop of Armenia, or rather, 
the head over all the bishops of Cappadocia, Media, Persia, and the 
two Armenias, a distinguished teacher who is called the Catholicos, 
was present at this synod. The articles of faith in which his people 
seemed to differ from us were discussed with him, and he promised 
reform in many respects.* As soon as this business was finished accord- 
ing to the usual form, the legate returned to the city of Acre and from 
there set sail for Rome. 

The clergy of Antioch—and especially those who had conspired for 
the deposition of Lord Ralph—elected as patriarch a subdeacon of the 
same church, one Aimery. This they did at the instigation and sugges- 
tion of the prince, greatly influenced, it is said, by lavish gifts. 

Aimery was an unlettered man from the province of Limousin, 
whose life was far from noble. The Patriarch Ralph, thinking in this 
way to put him under greater obligations and hence render him more 


?2-The Armenians, who were usually friendly to the Latins, were on the verge of 
religious union with Rome on a number of occasions (see Mansi, XXI, 505-8, 583-84). 


EMPEROR JOHN AND THE LATIN STATES 123 


faithful to himself, had raised him to a deaconship in his church. This 
hope was vain, however, for from that very day Aimery is said to have 
allied himself with the patriarch’s enemies and, unmindful of loyalty, 
to have conspired for the deposition of his benefactor. In regard to the 
matter of his elevation, it is said that a certain Peter, surnamed Armoin, 
castellan of the same city, brought it about by intrigues and a lavish 
use of gifts, for he directed the attention of both the prince and the 
clergy toward Aimery who was his kinsman. 


19. Again the emperor goes down into Syria. He summons the 
prince to carry out the covenant already initiated. 


AsouT this time, John, emperor of Constantinople, once more re- 
cruited his forces, summoned his legions, and again directed his cam- 
paign and his armies toward Syria. Scarcely four years had elapsed 
since he had left Tarsus of Cilicia and all Syria, but urgent messages, 
oft repeated, from the prince and the people of Antioch induced him 
to set forth. In the greatness of his might, with horses and chariots, 
with untold treasure and innumerable forces, he started for the land 
of Antioch. 

Sailing across the Bosphorus, which is the’ well-known boundary 
between Europe and Asia, he crossed the intervening provinces and 
arrived at Attalia, the metropolis of Pamphilia, a large city on the 
seacoast. While he was lingering at that place, two of his sons, Alexius, 
the first born, and Andronicus, his second son, fell sick of a serious ill- 
ness which ended with their death.** The emperor at once called to 
him his third son, Isaac, and sent him back to Constantinople with the 
bodies of his brothers so that, as humanity requires, he might cause the 
last reverence to be shown to the remains and commit them to the tomb 
as befitted imperial majesty. When the funeral rites were over, Isaac 
continued, by his father’s commands, to live in Constantinople until 
the death of the emperor. 

The monarch then took his youngest son, Manuel, with him and 
continued his journey through Isauria into Cilicia. This country he 
traversed with great speed. Scarcely had the report of his advance been 
received before he marched with all his troops into the land of the 
count of Edessa and encamped without warning before Turbessel. This 


23 Only one, Alexius, died at Attalia. The other, Andronicus, died on the way back 
to Constantinople with the funeral cortége (see Chalandon, Les Comnéne, II, 183). 


124 EMPEROR JOHN AND THE LATIN STATES 


is a very rich fortress, twenty miles, or possibly a little more, from the 
Euphrates river. 

As soon as he arrived, he demanded hostages from Count Joscelin 
the Younger. The latter was filled with wonder and amazement at 
the emperor’s sudden arrival. At sight of the incomparable host, how- 
ever, which seemingly no kingdom of the world could withstand, and 
also in view of the fact that he was wholly unprepared and quite un- 
able to resist, he made a virtue of necessity and sent as hostage one of 
his daughters, named Isabella. The emperor’s only reason for making 
this demand was that he might bind the count more closely to himself 
and render him loyal in carrying out his orders. He then led his en- 
tire army swiftly toward Antioch and on September 25 placed his 
camp near a certain town called Gastun."* 

From there he sent messengers to the prince. In accordance with 
the conditions of the agreement formerly concluded between them, 
he demanded that the city with the citadel and all the fortifications of 
the town without exception be surrendered to him, that he might be 
able to wage war upon the neighboring cities of the enemy as from a 
convenient near-by base. He declared however, that he was ready, as 
far as lay in his power, to fulfil with a wide interpretation the terms 
of the written agreement and, in addition, to add good measure and 
overflowing, according to the nature of their deserts. 


20. The citizens send envoys to the emperor repudiating the 
treaty and refusing him admittance to the city. 


Many times ere this Raymond, prince of Antioch, had sent messen- 
gers to invite the emperor to come to Antioch.?® He now found himself 
in a difhcult position, however, and knowing that he was bound by the 
terms of the treaty, he hesitated as to what he should do. Accordingly, 
he called together the elders and the leading men of the city and of 
the whole land and asked their advice as to what course should be 
adopted in such a dangerous crisis. After long deliberation, they unani- 
mously agreed that it was by no means to the best interests of the land 
that a city so noble, so powerful, and so well fortified should be given 


*4 Gaston or Gastin was a fortress held by the Templars. John arrived here Septem- 
ber 25, 1142. 

°° There had been considerable correspondence between the prince of Antioch and 
the emperor. Recently, the advance of Zangi had led Raymond to invite and even 
urge the emperor to come (see Chalandon, Les Comnéne, Il, 186-87). 


EMPEROR JOHN AND THE LATIN STATES 125 


over into the power of the emperor by any agreement whatsoever. 
The result of such action would be that through the indolence of the 
Greeks the city, together with the whole region, would fall into the 
hands of the enemy, as had happened more than once before. 

Nevertheless, that the prince might not be charged, however justly, 
with violation of faith, they sought for a pretext under which they 
might veil this far from laudable act. For, on the emperor’s former 
visit, it had been agreed between them, as has been related, that the 
prince should surrender the city to the monarch without difficulty. 
Moreover, later, Raymond had repeatedly sent messengers urging 
the emperor to come to Syria and had promised that he would keep 
good faith with him. In order to excuse their lord in some measure for 
this act, they resolved to send representatives to the emperor, men 
chosen from among the greatest nobles of the land, who, on behalf of 
the blessed Peter and the patriarch and all the citizens, were to forbid 
him to enter the city. They were instructed to say that these former 
acts of the prince would not be considered as in any way valid; that 
he had had no legal power to make covenants in that way, in the patri- 
mony of his wife; and that she also had never had power to transfer 
the government to another person without the acquiescence of the citi- 
zens and lords. Nor had either of these rulers been authorized to 
transfer any of the land. If one or both should obstinately persist in 
this design, it would certainly result in their being driven from the 
city and their entire domain. They would be exiled from the heritage 
which, to the great disadvantage of their faithful subjects, they had 
illegally proposed to sell.?° 

The emperor was moved to anger at these words. Nevertheless, 
well knowing the hearts of the citizens and of the provincials as 
a whole, he commanded the army to return to Cilicia, that he 
might avoid the inclemency of the approaching winter in the milder 
temperature of the seacoast. For the air in winter is always softer on 
the coast, and the country is therefore better adapted to support the 
legions in comfort. 


°6 The reference to St. Peter and the patriarch suggests that the clergy played a 
prominent part in opposing John’s entrance into Antioch. Their reason for doing so 
was their opposition to the reéstablishment of the Greek hierarchy in the city. Ray- 
mond might treat the church problem with indifference and accede to the emperor’s 
demand, but they refused to do so. Raymond was more or less forced to change his 
attitude toward the emperor (see Chalandon, Les Comnéne, II, 188-90). 


1276 EMPEROR JOHN AND THE LATIN STATES 


21. The emperor sends messengers to the king of Jerusalem. On 
the pretext of visiting the venerable places, he announces that 
he intends to come thither. The king’s answer. 


THE emperor perceived that for the present his hope of entering An- 
tioch with his legions was wholly impossible of realization. Yet he 
hoped that when the winter was past and the pleasant spring weather 
returned he might attain at least a part of his wishes in regard to that 
city, even against the will of its citizens. He concealed his intention, 
therefore, in the depths of his heart, and, the better to disguise his real 
purpose, he dispatched an embassy of the highest nobility to King Fulk 
of Jerusalem. He announced that, if it seemed good to the Christians, 
he would like to come thither for the purpose of prayer and devotion; 
he would also gladly lend aid against the enemy in those parts. The 
king, however, after consulting with his advisers, sent an answer to his 
request by special envoys: namely, Anselm, bishop of Bethlehem; 
Geoffrey, abbot of the Temple of the Lord, a man skilled in the Greek 
language; and Rohard, the castellan of the citadel of Jerusalem. They 
were charged with the following message: “The kingdom is of very 
limited extent, nor does it afford sufficient food for so large a host. It 
could not sustain such an army without the risk of famine resulting 
from an utter dearth of the necessities of life. Nevertheless, if it pleased 
his imperial majesty, beloved of God, to come to the Holy City with 
a following of ten thousand men to visit the venerable places and to 
dispose all things according to his own wishes, the people would go 
forth to meet him with the greatest delight; they would welcome his 
coming with joy and exultation and would obey him as their lord and 
the mightiest prince in the world.” °7 

After listening to this message the emperor withdrew his proposal. 
He did not regard it as befitting his imperial glory that he who was 
ever wont to move attended by many thousands should proceed with 
such a small escort. Accordingly, he dismissed the envoys with many 
tokens of his favor and bestowed upon them gifts with lavish gener- 
osity. He then went on to Cilicia, where he passed the winter season 
near Tarsus, to await the coming of spring. In his heart, however, he 

°7 This polite refusal of any but a pious visit from John indicated the resistance of 


Jerusalem to John’s plans for a general overlordship of Christian Syria, which Chalan- 
don believes that he contemplated at this time (see Chalandon, Les Comnéne, Il, 


190-91). 


EMPEROR JOHN AND THE LATIN STATES 127 


purposed that in the following summer he would accomplish in Syria 
great deeds worthy of remembrance forever. 

About this time a certain nobleman, Paganus by name,?® built a 
fortress in the land of Arabia Secunda, which received the name of 
Kerak. Paganus had been at one time butler to the king and later held 
lands beyond the Jordan (after Romain de Puy and Ralph, his son, 
for their sins had been dispossessed and alienated from them). This 
place was strongly fortified both by its natural situation and by arti- 
ficial means. It was situated near an ancient city, formerly called Rabba, 
the metropolis of this same Arabia. It was at the siege of this place, as 
we read, that by the command of David, though at the hand of Joab, 
the innocent Uriah was killed. Later it was called Petra of the Desert; 
whence Arabia Secunda is now called Arabia of Petra.?° 


22. While hunting during his stay in Cilicia, the emperor is fa- 
tally wounded. 


Tue emperor of. Constantinople dearly loved to hunt in the woods 
and glades. In the early spring, before the season when kings ordi- 
narily lead forth their armies to war, he went to the forest attended 
by his usual escort assigned for the purpose. It was a custom of long 
standing which served to while away the monotonous hours. With bow 
in hand and quiver heavy with arrows as usual, he was pursuing the 
wild beasts with his customary energy. Suddenly a wild boar which 
had been started up by the dogs, infuriated by their shrill insistent 
barking, rushed past the hiding place of the emperor. With marvellous — 
swiftness he seized an arrow, but he carelessly stretched the bow too 
far and wounded himself in the bow hand with the point of the poi- 
soned arrow. Thus, from so trivial a cause, he received the summons of 
death. The pain of the wound soon compelled him to leave the woods 
and return to the camp. Physicians were summoned in numbers. He 
explained the accident to them and did not hesitate to say that he had 
caused his own death. Full of solicitude for their lord’s safety, they 


°8 The name Paganus (Payens) occurs frequently during this period and may in- 
dicate three different individuals. La Monte lists one as butler of the kingdom 1120- 
1136, another as chancellor 1115-1128 (J. L. La Monte, Feudal Monarchy in the 
Latin Kingdom of Jerusalem, 1100-1291, pp. 256-57). There is also the Templar, 
Hugh de Payens, prominent in the crusade of 1128. 

29 This, one of the most famous of the crusaders’ fortresses, watched one of the 
main pilgrim routes to Mecca. The incident is described in II Sa. 11; 12: 26-31. 


128 EMPEROR JOHN AND THE LATIN STATES 


applied remedies, but the fatal poison had already permeated his sys- 
tem. The means taken did not avail, and the venom continued to creep 
still further to the internal parts, thus effectually preventing all hope 
of recovery. He was advised that there was only one course which 
might save his life: the injured hand, in which as yet all the potent 
evil was concentrated, might be removed before the poison infected 
the rest of the body. But the emperor, a man of lofty spirit, although 
suffering intense agony and convinced that death was imminent, still 
steadfastly preserved his imperial majesty and rejected the advice. He 
is said to have answered, “It would be unseemly that the Roman em- 
pire should be ruled by one hand.” The army was utterly stunned and 
prostrated by this sinister occurrence, which was all the more appalling 
because there was no possibility of preventing it. The death of the great 
monarch caused universal grief among the legions. Anxious sorrow 
oppressed each heart and filled the camp with unprecedented woe. 


23. The emperor proclaims his younger son emperor and expires. 
The army returns home under the command of Emperor 


Manuel. 


MEANWHILE, the emperor, who was a man of keen and intelligent 
foresight, perceived that the day of his death was at hand. He there- 
fore called to him his kinsmen and his relatives by marriage, many of 
whom always accompanied him—the chiefs of the sacred palace and 
the heads of the armies—and consulted with them over the matter of 
his successor. He was in grave doubt as to what he ought to do— 
whether to commit the reins of empire to his elder son Isaac, whom, 
as was related, he had sent back to Constantinople from Attalia with 
the remains of his brothers and to whom, by the law of primogeniture, 
the throne seemed to belong, or whether he should give the preference 
to the younger son, who was with him. The latter was a youth of un- 
usual promise, who, in the estimation of all, was destined to become 
a great man. Another reason also caused the emperor to hesitate, for, 
as he remarked, “If we confer the scepter of empire upon this son, we 
shall seem to be acting contrary to the laws of mankind, which with 
justice make the elder the more important. If, on the other hand, in 
accordance with the usual procedure, we commit the government of 
the empire to Isaac there will be no one to lead safely home these 
armies, the strength and glory of the whole Roman empire.” It was 


EMPEROR JOHN AND THE LATIN STATES 129 


indeed plain that without a leader the legions could not pass through 
the intervening country in safety, for it was filled with enemies who 
would lay ambushes and summon assistance from all the country 
round about. 

There was among the other great men of the court an illustrious 
prince, by name John the protosebastos. He, with those of his party, 
earnestly tried to secure the succession for Isaac and strove to reassure 
the emperor in his anxiety about the safe return of the troops. Manuel, 
the younger son, however, who was present on the campaign with his 
father, stood high in the estimation and favor of the entire army, par- 
ticularly with the Latins. Some of the princes also worked diligently 
in every way for his interests. His father also regarded him with more 
affection and inclined toward him more favorably because he seemed 
wiser, more valiant in arms, and more affable in every way. Moreover, 
the responsibility of conducting the army back in safety weighed more 
heavily upon him. 

After long deliberation, by the will of God the choice finally fell 
upon the younger son. Accordingly, at the command of the emperor 
and in his presence, imperial reverence was shown to Manuel. Then, 
as is the custom of that empire, he was clad in the purple hose and 
enthusiastically hailed as Augustus by the legions. 

After Manuel had been thus raised to the supreme place of power 
in the empire, his distinguished father of famous memory, generous 
and pious, kind and merciful, yielded to fate. John was a man of me- 
dium height, with black hair and swarthy skin, and for this reason 1s 
still called the Moor. Though insignificant in appearance, he was dis- 
tinguished for his lofty character and famous for his prowess in war. 
He died in a place called the meadow of Mantles, near Anavarza, a 
very ancient city, and the metropolis of Cilicia Secunda. His death oc- 
curred in the month of April, in the year of the Incarnation of the 
Lord 1143, which was the twenty-seventh year of his reign and of his 
dite thesia ara 


80 Vjrae vero was never completed. William when writing these words did not know 
the exact age of John and left a blank, intending to fill it in later. In the haste of 
closing his work he either forgot this blank or had been unable to obtain the informa- 
tion. He is, of course, in error about the years of John’s reign, 1118-1143, not quite 
twenty-five instead of twenty-seven years. John was born in 1ro$$ and died in the 
fifty-sixth year of his life. The Greek historians are in substantial accord with Wil- 
liam’s account of John’s death and the selection of Manuel as his successor (see Chal- 
andon, Les Comnéne, Il, 192-93). 


130 EMPEROR JOHN AND THE LATIN STATES 


When the new emperor finally settled his affairs in that land, he 
led his armies back to Constantinople in safety. There he found that 
his elder brother, on the news of his father’s death, had at once taken 
possession of the palace. Manuel therefore sent a private letter to the 
official who was in charge of the palace and all the treasures and or- 
dered that his brother, who apprehended nothing of the kind, be 
seized at once and thrown into prison. 

Later, however, after he had made his solemn entry into the city, 
he became reconciled to his brother through the friendly offices of kins- 
men of both and of some of the nobles of the sacred palace. Thus, 
peacefully, Manuel obtained possession of the empire, according to 
the last wish of his father. As long as he lived, however, he never 
ceased to heap honors upon his brother as the elder and to show him 
abundant favor. 


24. The king and the nobles of the realm build the fortress Ibelin 


before Ascalon. 


Axsout this time Fulk, king of Jerusalem, and the other princes of the 
kingdom, together with the lord patriarch and the prelates of the 
church felt the necessity of checking the insolent ravages of the people 
of Ascalon. In order to restrain them in some measure at least from 
overrunning the land freely, it was decided by common consent to 
build a fortress in the country near the city of Ramlah and not far from 
Lydda, which is Diospolis. There was in that locality a hill shghtly 
raised above the plain. Here, according to tradition, there had once 
been a city of the Philistines called Gath. Near here, about ten miles 
from Ascalon, and not far from the coast, was once another city be- 
longing to that same people called Azot. 

The Christians responded as with one mind to the summons, and on 
the hill just mentioned, they built a fortress of very strong masonry 
with deep foundations and four towers. From the old buildings of 
which many vestiges remain to the present day, an abundant supply 
of stones was obtained. The wells of olden times which existed in large 
numbers in the vicinity of the ruined city also afforded an abundance 
of water, not only for use in the building operations, but also for the 
needs of man. 

When the fortress was finished and complete in every detail, it was 
by common consent committed to a certain nobleman of great wisdom, 


EMPEROR JOHN AND THE LATIN STATES 131 


Balian the Elder. He was the father of Hugh, Baldwin, and Balian 
the Younger, all of whom took the surname Ibelin from this place, 
which had been so called before the fortress was built there. In the 
guardianship of Ibelin and in the pursuit of the enemy, because of 
whom this castle had been built, Balian displayed great diligence. — 
After the death of their father, his sons, noble men, valiant in arms 
and vigilant in every respect, maintained the same careful custody 
over it until the city of Ascalon was finally restored to the Christian 


faith. 


25. By the unanimous wish of the barons, another fortress is built 
before Ascalon and given the name of Blanchegarde. 


Tuts experiment convinced the nobles of the realm that by establishing 
the two strongholds Beersheba and Ibelin they had made decided 
progress in checking the audacious raids of the Ascalonites. In large 
measure through this course the insolence of the latter had been re- 
pressed, their attacks lessened, and their projects defeated. Accord- 
ingly, in the following spring, it was resolved to build another fortress. 
By increasing the number of fortified places round about, they could 
harass the people of Ascalon by more extensive attacks and more often 
cause them terror, attended by sudden danger as of siege. 

Eight miles from Ascalon, in that part of Judea where the moun- 
tains end and the level plain begins, near the land of the Philistines, 
in the tribe of Simeon, there was a place which, in comparison with the 
mountainous country, seemed merely a hill. In contrast to more level 
land, however, it might well be considered a high mountain. This 
place was called in the Arabic tongue Telle Saphi, which we interpret 
as the Clear Hill or Mount. Here the wise men of the realm resolved 
to plant a fortress because it was conveniently near to the other strong- 
holds which had been built for similar purposes and also to the city. 
It was a site, moreover, well fortified by nature. 

Accordingly, when winter was over and spring approached, the king 
and his nobles, together with the patriarch and the prelates of the 
church, well satisfied with the idea, assembled as with one accord at 
that place. Workmen were called, the people were furnished all neces- 
sary materials, and a stronghold of hewn stone, resting on solid founda- 
tions, was built. It was adorned with four towers of suitable height. 
From the top of this there was an unobstructed view as far as the 


1322 EMPEROR JOHN AND THE LATIN STATES 


enemy’s city, and it proved to be a most troublesome obstacle and a 
veritable source of danger to the Ascalonites when they wished to go 
forth to ravage the country. It was called in the vernacular Blanche- 
garde, which in Latin means the White Watchtower. 

As soon as this fortress was completely finished in every respect, the 
king took it under his own protection. He furnished it with an ade- 
quate supply of food and weapons and committed it to the care of wise 
men who had had long experience in warfare, men whose fidelity and 
devotion were recognized as well proved. Often by themselves, more 
often in company with men at arms from the other fortresses built 
with similar intent, these men used to issue forth to encounter and de- 
feat the enemy when they tried to make raids from the city. Occa- 
sionally, they even attacked the men of Ascalon on their own initiative, 
wrought great havoc upon them, and frequently triumphed over them. 

The result was that those who dwelt in the surrounding country 
began to place great reliance on this castle as well as on the other 
strongholds, and a great many suburban places grew up around it. 
Numerous families established themselves there, and tillers of the 
fields as well. The whole district became much more secure, because 
the locality was occupied and a more abundant supply of food for the 
surrounding country was made possible. 

When the people of Ascalon saw that their city was encircled by 
impregnable forts, they began to feel less confidence than usual in 
their situation. Accordingly, they dispatched messengers repeatedly to 
their lord, the powerful prince of Egypt, urgently warning him that 
since he had no more possessions in that region he should take measures 
to protect Ascalon, which was the bulwark of his empire. 


26. The queen builds a convent at Bethany. She endows it with 
rich possessions and establishes her sister over it as superior. 


Tue kingdom had at this time, through the superabundant grace of 
God, been reduced to a fairly satisfactory state of tranquillity. Accord- 
ingly, the Lady Melisend, that queen of pious memory, conceived the 
idea of founding a convent for religious women if a place suited to her 
wishes could be found. She desired in this way to provide for the heal- 
ing of her own soul and those of her parents as also for the salvation 
of her husband and children. Her youngest sister Iveta had professed 
the religious life in the monastery of Saint Anna, the mother of the 


EMPEROR JOHN AND THE LATIN STATES 133 


blessed Mother of our Lord. It was consideration for this sister which 
led the queen to undertake this enterprise, for she felt that it was un- 
fitting that a king’s daughter should be subject to the authority of a 
mother superior, like an ordinary person. Accordingly, she mentally 
surveyed the whole country and made a careful investigation to find 
a suitable place where she might found a convent. After much delibera- 
tion, she finally decided upon Bethany, the home of Mary and Martha 
and Lazarus their brother, whom Jesus loved—Bethany, the familiar 
abiding place and home of our Lord and Saviour. This village is fif- 
teen furlongs from Jerusalem, and, according to the word of the Evan- 
gel, it lies beyond the Mount of Olives, on the eastern slope of that 
hill. The property belonged to the church of the Sepulchre of the 
Lord, but the queen gave to the canons Tekoah, the city of prophets, 
and in exchange received Bethany as her own. 

Since the place lay on the edge of the desert and thus might be ex- 
posed to the attacks of the enemy, the queen at great expense caused 
to be built a strongly fortified tower of hewn and polished stone. This 
was devoted to the necessary purpose of defense, that the maidens 
dedicated to God might have an impregnable fortress as a protection 
against the enemy. When the tower was finished and a place prepared, 
after a fashion, for carrying on the offices of religion, she established 
consecrated sisters there and placed over them as mother superior a 
venerable woman full of years and of ripe religious experience. She 
endowed the church with rich estates, so that in temporal possessions it 
should not be inferior to any monastery, either of men or women; or 
rather, as it is said, that it might be richer than any other church. 
Among other possessions which she generously bestowed upon this 
venerable place was the famous city of Jericho with its dependencies, 
situated in the plain of Jordan and very rich in resources of every kind. 
She also presented to the convent a large number of sacred vessels of 
gold and silver adorned with gems. She likewise gave it silken stuffs 
for the adornment of the house of God and vestments of every descrip- 
tion, both priestly and levitical, as ecclesiastical rules required. 

On the death of the venerable woman to whom she had entrusted 
the charge of this convent, the queen put her original intention into 
effect. With the sanction of the patriarch and the willing assent of the 
holy nuns, she made her sister the superior of the convent. On that 
occasion, she made many additional gifts, such as chalices, books, and 


134 EMPEROR JOHN AND THE LATIN STATES 


other ornaments pertaining to the service of the church. As long as she 
lived she continued to enrich the place by her favor, in the interests of 
her own soul and that of the sister whom she so tenderly loved. 


27. The king, while pursuing a hare in the plain of Acre, is 
thrown headlong from his horse; he dies and is buried at Je- 
rusalem with his predecessors. 


Ir happened in those days, when autumn was over, that the king and 
queen were sojourning for a time at the city of Acre. In order to vary 
the monotony by some agreeable recreation, the queen expressed a 
desire to go out of the city to a certain place in the suburbs where there 
were many springs. That she might not lack the pleasure of his com- 
pany, the king attended her with his usual escort. As they were riding 
along, the servants who had preceded the train happened to rouse a 
hare which was lying in a furrow. It fled, followed by the shouts of all. 
The king, impelled by evil fate, seized his lance and joined the pursuit. 
In vigorous chase, he began to urge on his horse in that direction. 
Finally, the steed, driven to reckless speed, stumbled and fell. The 
king was thrown headforemost to the ground. As he lay there stunned 
by the pain of the fall, the saddle struck his head and his brains gushed 
forth from both ears and nostrils. The members of his escort, those in 
advance and those following him, overcome with horror at the fright- 
ful accident, rushed to his aid as he lay on the ground. They found 
him unconscious, however, unable to speak or understand. 

When the queen was informed of her husband’s unexpected death, 
she was pierced to the heart by the sinister disaster. She tore her gar- 
ments and hair and by her loud shrieks and lamentations gave proof of 
her intense grief. Flinging herself upon the ground she embraced the 
lifeless body. Tears failed her through continual weeping; frequent 
sobs interrupted her voice, as she tried to give expression to her grief; 
nor could she do justice to it, although she cared for naught save to 
satisfy her anguish. The people of the household also manifested their 
grief by tears, words, and aspect and gave plain proof of great sorrow. 

The king’s deplorable accident soon became known. Rumor, on 
swift wings, spread the news throughout the city of Acre. Crowds 
flocked to the scene, all eager to convince themselves of the unspeak- 
able disaster. Tearfully they bore him thence to the city, where he 
lived until the third day, unconscious but still breathing. Thus, on 


EMPEROR JOHN AND THE LATIN STATES 135 


November 10, in the year 1142 of the Incarnation of our Lord and of 
Fulk’s reign the eleventh, his life was brought to a close in a good old 
age.3? 

His body was borne thence to Jerusalem with fitting honors. The 
entire body of clergy and people went out to meet the funeral train. 
He was buried with royal magnificence among his kingly predecessors 
of blessed memory in the church of the Sepulchre of the Lord, at the 
foot of Mount Calvary, by the gate as one enters on the right. William, 
the venerable patriarch of Jerusalem, conducted the royal obsequies. 

King Fulk left two children who had not yet attained the age of 
manhood: Baldwin, the eldest, then thirteen years old, and Amaury, 
aged seven. The royal power passed to the Lady Melisend, a queen 
beloved of God, to whom it belonged by hereditary right. 


31 The Latin here is rather ambiguous, quarta demum die, idibus videlicet Novembris. 
It might be read as meaning “on the fourth day of his illness, i.e., on the Ides of No- 
vember” which is November 13, or “on the fourth day of the Ides of November” 
which is November ro. In this instance it clearly has the first meaning, but William 
himself later read it with the second meaning (Book XVI, chap. 3). The text carries 
the year 1142, but all the evidence points to 1143 as the year of Fulk’s death. The 
date of Fulk’s death, so vital in the chronology of the Latin kingdom, has been con- 
fused by William’s dating. This may be merely a typographical or copyist’s error, for 
it is not consistent with his other references to the event. Mlle Chartrou, on the basis 
of local Angevin records as well as a review of all known evidence, concludes that 
it could not have occurred before late 1143, fixing the other terminal date as March 
26, 1144. She prefers 1144 on the basis of local western records (Joséphe Chartrou, 
LD Anjou de 1109 @ 1151, pp. 234-36). La Monte, who has reviewed the matter more 
recently, is convinced that her evidence does not preclude November, 1143 (La Monte, 
Feudal Monarchy, pp. 14-15, note 3). Normally there would be no ship sailing from 
Palestine as late as November, and the West would not have learned of his death be- 
fore 1144 even if a special courier had been dispatched immediately. La Monte pre- 
fers November 10, 1143, as the date of Fulk’s death. 


HERE ENDS THE FIFTEENTH BOOK 


THE SIXTEENTH BOOK BEGINS 


JOINT RULE OF BALDWIN III AND HIS 
MOTHER MELISEND: THE 
SECOND CRUSADE 


1. A brief preface is given. On the death of Fulk, his son Bald- 
win ILI succeeds to the throne. The personal appearance of 
the latter is described. 


Tue events which have been recorded in the present history up to this 
time have been assembled from the accounts of others who still pre- 
serve a faithful recollection of earlier times. It is, therefore, with much 
difficulty that we have obtained reliable material and the correct chro- 
nology and succession of events. As far as possible, however, we have 
given a faithful account of these events as received from the narratives 
themselves. The things which now follow we ourselves have, in part, 
witnessed with our own eyes and, in part, learned from the trustworthy 
relation of those who were present when the events occurred. Relying 
upon these two sources, therefore, by the will of God we shall set 
down for the benefit of posterity with more ease and accuracy the rest 
of this history. For the memory is ever wont to recall more vividly 
recent occurrences, and that which the eye presents to the mind is less 
easily forgotten than that which is conveyed by the ear alone. These 
words of our Flaccus express our own feelings: “Things conveyed 
through the ear affect the feelings less deeply than those which come 
from the faithful observation of the eyes; things which the spectator 
himself has transmitted to himself.” ° 

Fulk, the third Latin king of Jerusalem, was succeeded by Baldwin 


1 These remarks of William have been misunderstood. They were probably written 
after 1180. As has already appeared, he followed written sources to 1127, with a 
minimum of oral tradition. From 1127 to 1143 he was dependent upon such ac- 
counts as he heard or could gather from archives. In 1143 he was presumably thirteen 
years of age, and conscious of the drift of affairs. He had, of course, drawn some- 
thing from persona) recollection in the two previous books. He now felt more secure, 
because he had fuller conscious recollection of events. Actually, however, his work is 
practically our primary source for the history of the kingdom of Jerusalem from 1127 
to 1184. 

2 Horace Ars poet. 180-82. 


BALDWIN III AND MELISEND 137 


ITI, his son by Queen Melisend. As has been mentioned, Baldwin had 
one brother named Amaury, a little boy seven years old. When Bald- 
win later died without children, this brother succeeded him in the 
kingdom, as will be related in the following chapters. Baldwin was 
thirteen years old when he came to the throne, and he reigned twenty 
years.? He was a youth of excellent natural ability and even at that 
time gave plain evidence of that character which later he fully at- 
tained. On reaching manhood, he was easily preéminent among all 
others by beauty of feature and form as well as by his general bearing. 
In vivacity of mind and brilliancy of speech he was superior to all the 
nobles of the realm. He was taller than the average man, but his limbs 
were so well proportioned to his height that no feature seemed out of 
harmony with the whole. His features were comely and refined, his 
complexion florid, a proof of innate strength. In this respect he re- 
sembled his mother and was not inferior to his maternal grandfather. 
His eyes were of medium size, rather prominent and sparkling. He had 
straight yellowish hair and wore a rather full beard on cheeks and 
chin. He was of somewhat full habit, although he could not be called 
fleshy like his brother or spare like his mother. In short, it may be said 
that his whole appearance was so superior by reason of a certain re- 
markable dignity which shone forth from him that even strangers 
could not fail to recognize his innate kingly majesty. 


2. Concerning his life and habits. 


Batpwin’s habit of mind was equally well constituted and was in com- 
plete accord with his great physical beauty. He had an unusually keen 
intellect and was gifted by nature with the rare advantage of eloquent 
speech. Nor did he appear inferior to any other prince in his dignified 
and agreeable manners. He was extremely affable and tender-hearted, 
and, although he was liberal to almost everyone, far beyond his means, 
yet he’ was not at all desirous of the money of others. He did not 
trouble the patrimony of the churches, nor did he, like a prodigal, he 


3 Tt is necessary to keep in mind the fact that William’s chronological framework, 
constructed in 1182, becomes a complicating factor in determining dates. His state- 
ment of the age of Baldwin III and the number of years of his reign is consistent 
throughout. On that basis, Baldwin was born in 1130, began his reign in 1143, and 
died in 1163. This accords with the marriage of his parents (see Book XIV, note 10), 
which under normal conditions would make February, 1130, the earliest possible date 
for his birth. 


138 BALDWIN III AND MELISEND 


in wait for the riches of his subjects. He had one characteristic that is 
usually very rare in youth. Even at that time of life he feared God and 
felt great reverence for ecclesiastical institutions and the prelates of 
the church. He was gifted with a vivacious disposition and had, be- 
sides, the advantage of an accurate memory. He was fairly well edu- 
cated, much more so than was his brother Amaury, who succeeded him. 
Whatever leisure he could snatch from his public duties he delighted 
to devote to reading. He particularly enjoyed listening to the reading 
of history and inquired with great diligence into the deeds and habits 
of the noblest kings and princes of former times. With men of letters 
and wise laymen he loved above all to converse. His gracious affability 
led him to greet even the most lowly by name, much to their surprise. 
He voluntarily offered an opportunity of conversing with him to any- 
one who wished it or whom he casually met. If an audience was re- 
quested, he did not refuse it. 

In this way, he gained the favor of both fathers and people so that 
he was more popular with men of both classes than any of his predeces- 
sors had been. He endured hardships with patience and, after the ex- 
ample of the best princes, displayed great wisdom and foresight in the 
uncertain issues of war. In the midst of difficult situations which he en- 
dured for the sake of extending the realm, he showed royal stead fast- 
ness and at no time lost the presence of mind befitting a brave man. He 
was fully acquainted with the customary law by which the kingdom of 
the East was governed, so that in difficult questions, even the older 
nobles were wont to consult his knowledge and marvel at the erudition 
of his trained mind. 

His conversation was witty and jovial. Since he had unusual facility 
in adapting himself easily to everyone, he mingled acceptably with 
every age and condition. He was, moreover, a man of unusual courtesy, 
and this was the more remarkable because he permitted himself great 
freedom of speech. If he observed any reprehensible or striking faults 
in his friends, he corrected them in public regardless of whether his 
words pleased or offended. Yet these rebukes, since they were made 
more in jollity—or, rather, in lightness of heart—than with any in- 
tent to hurt, did not greatly lessen his popularity with the victims of 
his blunt remarks. His frankness was readily pardoned, in fact, because 
he bore with equanimity the cutting words which were directed against 
him in retaliation. In such things and in the pernicious games of chance 


BALDWIN III AND MELISEND 139 


and dice he indulged more than befitted royal majesty. In pursuit of 
the desires of the flesh, also, he is said to have dishonored the marriage 
ties of others. This was in his youth, however, for when he became a 
man, like the apostle he “put away childish things.” + Thus by the 
practice of the virtues he atoned for the faults of earlier years. For after 
he took a wife, he is said to have been entirely faithful to her. The 
reprehensible faults, displeasing to God, which he had contracted in 
his youth, under the impulse of that critical period, he later with wise 
counsel abandoned and became changed for the better. 

He was extremely temperate in taking bodily refreshment; in fact 
he was abstemious beyond the requirements of that age. He abom- 
inated excess either in food or in drink and used to say that it was touch- 
wood for the worst crimes.® 


3. Concerning his elevation to the throne and of how long he 
reigned under the guardianship of his mother. 


Kine Fux died on the tenth day of November.® On the day of the 
Lord’s Nativity following, in the year of the Incarnation of the Lord 
1142, Baldwin was solemnly anointed, consecrated, and crowned, to- 
gether with his mother, in the church of the Sepulchre of the Lord. 
The ceremony was conducted by William, patriarch of Jerusalem, be- 
fore the customary assemblage of the princes and all the prelates of 
the church. The head of the holy Roman church at that time was Eu- 
genius III; Aimery was patriarch of Antioch, and William, patriarch 
of Jerusalem. Archbishop Fulcher presided over the church at Tyre." 

Melisend, the king’s mother, was a woman of great wisdom who had 
had much experience in all kinds of secular matters. She had risen so 
far above the normal status of women that she dared to undertake im- 
portant measures. It was her ambition to emulate the magnificence of 
the greatest and noblest princes and to show herself in no wise inferior 

#1 Co. 13:11. 

5 Doubtless William has idealized Baldwin III somewhat but in so doing has given 
expression to his own ideas of virtues in a king. The great intimacy of this description 
would imply a close personal knowledge. William and Baldwin III were probably 
of about the same age and may have been schoolfellows at some time, since both spent 
their boyhood in Jerusalem. However, William nowhere makes a direct statement to 
that effect. 

8 See Book XV, note 31. 

7 Eugenius III became pope in 1145. William is overlooking Celestine II and Lu- 


cius II, whose very short reigns filled the two years between Innocent II and Eu- 
genius III. 


140 BALDWIN III AND MELISEND 


to them. Since her son was as yet under age, she ruled the kingdom and 
administered the government with such skilful care that she may be 
said truly to have equalled her ancestors in that respect. As long as her 
son was willing to be governed by her counsel, the people enjoyed a 
highly desirable state of tranquillity, and the affairs of the realm moved 
on prosperously. But the more frivolous elements in the kingdom soon 
found that the queen’s wise influence hindered their attempts to draw 
the king into their own pursuits. They therefore persuaded their royal 
master, who, like others of his age, was “pliable as wax in being 
bent toward vice, but rough toward those who rebuked him,” ® to 
withdraw from the guardianship of his mother and to rule the kingdom 
of his fathers himself. It was unseemly, they said, that a king who 
ought to rule all others should constantly be tied to the apron strings 
of his mother like the son of a private person. Although this intrigue 
originated in the thoughtless levity or malice of certain individuals, it 
came near being the ruin of the whole kingdom, as will be explained 
in more detail later when this subject is discussed. 


4. Zangi lays siege to Edessa. The location of this city is de- 
scribed. 


Tat same year, during the interval between the death of King Fulk 
and the elevation of Baldwin to the throne, the accursed Zangi with a 
mighty host laid siege to Edessa. This city, also more commonly 
known as Rohas, was the great and famous capital of the land of the 
Medes. Zangi was a powerful Turk, lord and ruler of the city once 
called Nineveh, but now known as Mosul, the metropolis of the region 
formerly known as the land of Assur. His reliance lay not only in the 
numbers and strength of his people but also in the fact that a serious 
feud had arisen between Raymond, prince of Antioch, and Joscelin, 
count of Edessa. This latter city was situated a day’s journey beyond 
the Euphrates. Its lord and master, the count just mentioned, had, 
contrary to the custom of his predecessors, given up his home there and 
established his permanent residence near the Euphrates at a castle 
called Turbessel. The fertility of the country in that vicinity and the 
leisure afforded by that place had led him to make this change. At 
Turbessel, he was far from the disturbance caused by his enemies, he 


8 Horace Ars poet. 163. 


BALDWIN III AND MELISEND I4I 


had time for luxurious pleasures of every kind, and he felt no responsi- 
bility, as he should have done, for the noble city. 

The inhabitants of Edessa were native Chaldeans and peaceful Ar- 
menians. They were utterly ignorant of the use of arms and familiar 
only with the business of trading. Latins also came hither occasionally, 
but citizens of that race were few in number. The protection of the city 
was entirely in the hands of mercenaries. These did not receive wages 
according to the time or kind of service rendered but often had to wait 
a year or more before they could collect what was due them.® 

Both Baldwin and Joscelin the Elder, as soon as they came into pos- 
session of this countship, had established their permanent residence at 
Edessa. They saw to it carefully that adequate supplies of arms and 
food and all else necessary for some length of time should be brought 
thither from the surrounding places. By this means perfect security 
for Edessa was obtained, and it also became justly formidable to the 
other cities in the vicinity. But as has been said, there was now enmity 
between the prince of Antioch and the count, and this was no longer 
concealed but had already reached the stage of open hatred.1° Conse- 
quently, neither felt any concern for the troubles or unlucky disasters 
of the other; rather, each rejoiced in the distress of the other and ex- 
ulted over any untoward mischance. 

The great prince Zangi seized the opportunity offered by these dis- 
sensions. He levied a countless number of cavalry forces from all over 
the East, summoned also the people of the neighboring cities, and laid 
siege to Edessa. He blocked all the entrances to the city so closely that 
the besieged could not issue forth, nor could anyone enter from outside. 
The people shut up within the city were soon driven to extremities by 
the shortage of food and provisions of all kinds. Edessa was surrounded 
by a massive wall and protected by lofty towers in the upper part of 
the city. There was another stronghold lower down, to which, even if 
the city should be taken, the citizens could flee for refuge. All such de- 


® The use of paid troops, including even knights, was probably more extensive in 
Edessa than elsewhere, owing to the fact that the large Armenian and other native 
Christian population had not been dispossessed by Western nobles. Doubtless the mer- 
cenaries at times included Muslims. 

10 The basis for this trouble probably lay, first, in the fact that Joscelin was a 
vassal of the prince of Antioch for some of his land and, secondly, that Raymond was 
a relative newcomer whereas Joscelin had been born in the East and was half Armenian 
in blood. Prejudice and political rivalry were at the bottom of their antagonism, 


142 BALDWIN III AND MELISEND 


fenses may avail against the foe if there are fighters who will put up a 
valiant fight for liberty, but they are useless when there are none 
among the besieged willing to undertake the part of defenders. For 
walls, towers, and ramparts avail but little if there are none to man 
them. 

Hence, when Zangi found that the city was without defenders his 
hope of taking it was greatly increased. He placed his troops in a cir- 
cle round about, stationed the chiefs of the legions in advantageous 
positions, and invested the city. Stones and missiles hurled from the 
engines battered the walls without ceasing and showers of arrows 
allowed the citizens no respite. 

Meanwhile, swiftly flying rumor spread the news abroad that 
Edessa, faithful worshipper of God, was undergoing the horrors of 
siege at the hand of enemies of the Christian faith and name. The 
hearts of all true believers, far and near, were appalled, and the zeal- 
ous began to arm themselves to take vengeance upon the wicked foe. 
The tidings of this critical situation roused the count to action, and he 
began assiduously to assemble his forces. Mindful too late of the noble 
city, he began, as it were, “to prepare funeral rites for the dead, for 
those whom, when sick and suppliant, he had neglected to aid.” He 
went about among the Christians and besought aid from his friends. 
He dispatched messengers to his lord, the prince of Antioch, and 
begged him with most humble and earnest prayers that he would sym- 
pathize with him in his trouble and deliver Edessa from the threatened 
fate of slavery. News of the dire calamity also reached the king of 
Jerusalem. Rumors of the siege of Edessa and the straits which her 
citizens were enduring were confirmed. After a conference with her 
nobles, the queen, who held the reins of government, ordered her kins- 
man, Manasses, the royal constable, Philip of Nablus, and Elinandus 
of Tiberias ‘1 to march thither with a strong force at once to assist the 
count and the afflicted citizens. The prince of Antioch, however, re- 
joiced in the count’s misfortune. Without regard for his own responsi- 
bility for the general welfare and the fact that “personal hatred should 
not be permitted to injure the common interest,” he offered excuses to 
delay giving the aid which had been asked. 

11 An Elinandus is mentioned as bishop of Tiberias at this time (R. Réhricht, Regesta 


regni Hierosolymitani, no. 245). Elsewhere, however, William indicates that a lay- 
man is meant (Book XVII, chap. 1). 


BALDWIN III AND MELISEND 143 


5. Edessa is captured and her people slain. 


In the meantime Zangi continued to attack the city without intermis- 
sion and ran through the whole gamut of injuries. No method was left 
untried which might tend to increase the woes of the citizens and help 
him to take the city. Through subterranean passages he sent in miners 
who dug tunnels under the wall. These were supported overhead by 
beams which were then set on fire. When the props burned away, a _ 
great part of the wall fell and left a breach which afforded the enemy 
an entrance more than a hundred cubits wide. The desired approach 
thus obtained, the legions rushed together from all directions, entered 
the city, and put to the sword all whom they encountered. Neither 
age, condition, nor sex was spared. To them might this saying well be 
applied: “They slay the widow and the stranger, and murder the fa- 
therless.” 1? 

Thus the city was captured and delivered over to the sword of the 
enemy. As soon as this happened, the more sensible and alert among 
the citizens fled with their wives and children to the citadel, which, as 
has been said, was in the city. Here they hoped that their lives at least 
might be safe, if only for a short time. But the inrush of such a crowd 
of people caused a panic, and many perished miserably in the strug- 
gling mob. Among others who died in this way are said to have been 
the Very Reverend Hugo, archbishop of Edessa, and some of his 
clergy. Those who were present at the time felt that the prelate was in 
some measure to blame for this catastrophe. Although he was said to 
have amassed great riches, which he might have used to pay troops 
for defending the city, he preferred, like a miser, to store up his wealth 
rather than to consider his perishing people. As a result, he reaped the 
fruits of his avarice and shared the fate of the populace. Unless the 
Lord in His mercy should come to his aid, an unsavory reputation will 
ever attend his memory. For terrible are the words of Scripture con- 
cerning men of his sort: “Thy money perish with thee.” 18 

Thus, while the prince of Antioch, influenced by foolish hatred, put 


12 Ps, 94: 6. 

13 Ac, 8:20. This criticism of Hugo, archbishop of Edessa, for refusing to use the 
wealth of the church for secular purposes is in marked contrast to William’s attitude 
toward Daimbert, who had been accused of a similar policy (see Books IX and X 
passim). 


144 BALDWIN III AND MELISEND 


off rendering the aid due to his brethren ‘4 and the count was waiting 
for help from strangers, the ancient city fell.1® Edessa, devoted to the 
Christian name from the times of the apostles, the city which was res- 
cued from the superstitions of the infidels by the words and preaching 
of the Apostle Thaddeus, suffered the undeserved yoke of servitude. 

Tradition says that the holy Apostle Thomas was buried in this city, 
as was also the Apostle Thaddeus and blessed King Abgar. This is that 
Abgar, the illustrious ruler of the city whose letter to the Lord Jesus 
Christ is mentioned by Eusebius of Caesarea in his work called the 
Ecclesiastical History. He says also that Abgar was deemed worthy 
to receive an answer from the Lord. He gives the letter of each one 
and adds the following: “In the public archives of the city of Edessa 
over which Abgar ruled, we found these letters so transcribed in the 
documents which contain the records of the deeds of King Abgar, pre- 
served from ancient times.” 16 

But so much on this matter; now let us resume the history. 


6. A fortress beyond the Jordan, called the Valley of Moses, is 
taken by the king. 


Durinc the first year of this King Baldwin’s reign, the Turks, with 
the consent and at the invitation of certain people dwelling in that 
vicinity, seized one of our strongholds called the Valley of Moses, in 
Syria Sobal beyond the Jordan. This place is located near the waters 
of Strife, where Moses, when the people of Israel were murmuring 
and dying from thirst, struck water from the rock and the whole people 
and their beasts drank thereof. 

When it became known that the enemy had seized this fortress and 
had killed the Christians dwelling there, the king, although still very 
young, levied forces from all over the land and set forth thither. With 
his troops he crossed the famous valley now occupied by the Dead sea, 


14 William has overlooked the fact that Raymond was involved in difficulties with the 
new emperor, Manuel. He sought to free himself from the vassalage to the Greeks 
when he heard of the death of John. But his efforts to extend his sway in Cilicia 
brought swift retribution from Manuel. There was actual warfare between Raymond 
and the Greeks (1143-1144), and Raymond was not in a position to give any real aid 
to Joscelin (see F. Chalandon Les Comnéne, Il, 241-43). 

15 The capture of Edessa by Zangi is dated December 23, 1144, the citadel two 
days later (R. Rohricht, Geschichte des Kénigreichs Jerusalem, 1100-1291, P. 234, 
note 4). 

16 See Book IV, chap. 2, and note 5. 


BALDWIN III AND MELISEND 145 


which is also called the lake of Asphalt, and went up into the hill coun- 
try of Arabia Secunda or Arabia Petra, in the land of Moab. From 
there he traversed Syria Sobal, or Arabia Tertia, now commonly called 
the land of Montreal, and came to his destination. The inhabitants of 
the country had atieady had news of our approach and with their wives 
and children had fled into the fortress, the defenses of which seemed 
to render it impregnable. For several days our forces exerted them- 
selves in vain before the place. Volleys of stone missiles, repeated 
showers of arrows, and other methods of assault were tried with no 
result. Finally the Christians became convinced that, because of its 
fortifications, the place could not aa taken. They ciekefore turned to 
other plans. 

The entire region was covered with luxuriant olive groves which 
shaded the surface of the land like a dense forest. From these trees the 
dwellers in that land derived all their living, as their fathers had done 
before them. If these failed, then all means of livelihood would be 
taken away. It was determined, therefore, to root out the trees and 
burn them. It was thought that the terrified inhabitants, rendered 
desperate by the destruction of their olive groves, would either give up 
or drive out the Turks who had taken refuge in the citadel and sur- 
render the fortress to us. This plan was entirely successful. As soon 
as they saw their beloved trees cut down, the people changed their 
tactics and adopted others. On condition that the Turks whom they had 
called in should be allowed to depart unharmed and that they them- 
selves with their families should not be punished by death for their 
wicked conduct, they restored the stronghold to the king. 

The castle was thereupon received, a garrison appointed, and sup- 
plies of food and arms sent in. Thus the king successfully finished the 
first campaign after his accession to the throne and, with his whole 
army safe and sound, returned victorious to his own land.'* 


7. Langiis killed while besieging Calogenbar. His son Nureddin 


succeeds him. 


ZanGI was greatly elated by his brilliant success in subjugating the city 
of Edessa. He immediately applied himself to besieging Calogenbar, 
a fortified place on the river Euphrates. While he was carrying on the 


17 This expedition must have occurred in the spring or summer of 1144, before the 
events in the north had become critical. 


146 BALDWIN III AND MELISEND 


siege of this place, however, the lord of the town entered into a con- 
spiracy with some of the chamberlains and eunuchs of Zangi’s own 
household. One night, as the prince, gorged with wine and unusually 
drunk, was lying in his tent, he was slain by some of his own servants. 
When the news of his death arrived, one of our people remarked 
apropos of his assassination, “What a happy coincidence! A guilty 
murderer, with the bloody name Sanguinus, has become ensanguined 
with his own blood.” 18 

The murderers were received within the walls by the lord of the be- 
sieged city, according to agreement, and thus escaped the vengeance of 
the dead man’s kin. Zangi’s entire army fled when deprived of the 
support and protection of their lord: His sons succeeded him, the one 
at Mosul in the Orient, and the other, Nureddin by name, at Aleppo. 
The latter was a wise and prudent man and, according to the supersti- 
tious traditions of his people, one who feared God. He was fortunate 
also in that he greatly increased the heritage which was left him by his 
father. 


8. A certain noble of Damascus, governor of the city of Bos- 
trum, enters into an alliance with the king. The army of the 
realm is sent to that city. Anar, governor of Damascus, tries 
to prevent these plans. 


Nor long after this, in the second year of King Baldwin’s reign, a 
certain noble Turkish satrap came with a noble retinue to Jerusalem. 
For some reason he had incurred the anger of Mejeredin [Mujir 
al-Din], king of Damascus. He had, moreover, fallen under the dis- 
pleasure of the governor, Mehen-Eddin [Mu’in al-Din], or Anar, a 
man whose authority throughout the land of the Damascenes was far 
greater than that of the king himself. This satrap assured the king and 
his mother that, if an honorable compensation worthy of his considera- 
tion were granted him, he would surrender to them the city of Bos- 
trum, over which he ruled, and also the stronghold of Selcath. Bostrum 
is the metropolis of Arabia Prima, which today is called in the common 

18 The siege of Qalat Jabar in the region of Edessa occurred in September, 1146. 
According to Qalanisi, the murderer was a personal favorite of Zangi, a man of 
Frankish origin. Zangi’s drunkenness is acknowledged. His death is dated September 


14, 1146. William evidently could not resist the temptation to indulge in a pun at 
Zangi’s death (see H. A. R. Gibb, trans., The Damascus Chronicle, p. 271). 


BALDWIN III AND MELISEND 147 


speech Bussereth. This same nobleman, Tantais by name, was said to 
be an Armenian by birth. He was tall of stature, of agreeable coun- 
tenance, and his entire bearing gave evidence of a manly spirit.’® 

Accordingly, a general conference of the nobles was called. The 
reasons for the visit of this great man were explained and every aspect 
of his proposition carefully considered. It was finally. unanimously re- 
solved that he be granted an honorable and satisfactory compensa- 
tion, that an army be levied, and an expedition sent to Bostrum. All 
agreed that, if through the agency of this man, Bostrum could be 
brought under our jurisdiction and added to the Christian name with 
perpetual right, such an increase of the kingdom would be most ac- 
ceptable to God. An agreement satisfactory to both parties was there- 
upon concluded, and the heralds were ordered to call together all the 
people of the realm immediately. After imploring aid from on high, 
the king and his nobles took with them the Life-giving Cross of Salva- 
tion and proceeded to Tiberias. Camp was established near the bridge 
where the waters of the Jordan separate from the sea. 

There was an alliance and a temporary peace between Anar and 
King Baldwin which had existed also in the time of the king’s father. 
Accordingly it was necessary that the governor be formally notified, 
in order that he might have a legitimate time, following the custom of 
the land, to assemble an army and make preparations for resistance. 
Otherwise the king would appear to have entered his territory sud- 
denly and without official notice, which is contrary to the law of treaties. 
Messengers had accordingly been sent to Anar, but he, as a shrewd 
man, had wisely deferred sending an answer.?° A month had already 
passed. During this time, he had been actively engaged in calling to his 
aid both by entreaties and by money all the neighboring chiefs of his 
own race from far and near. When large numbers had assembled from 
all parts, Anar sent the following message to the king and his nobles: 
“Contrary to the terms of the treaty into which you entered, you are 


19 This episode, which occurred in the spring of 1147, is evidently derived from 
Arabic as well as Latin sources. It is not difficult to recognize in “Mejeredin” Mujir 
al-Din, the “king” of Damascus, nor in ““Mehen-Eddin,” Mu’in al-Din, or Anar, who 
really ruled it. “Tantais” is Altuntash, “Selcath” is Sarkhad, “Bostrum” is Bostra of 
ancient times. 

20 William here displays again his interest in diplomatic exchange. Note his evident 
conviction that treaty obligations with Muslims were to be kept as scrupulously as 
those with Christians. 


148 BALDWIN III AND MELISEND 


preparing to march into the land of my lord and you are endeavoring 
to protect with undeserved patronage his rebellious servant, who 1s 
acting against the allegiance which he has sworn. We humbly beseech 
the lord king to desist from this unjust purpose and to preserve intact 
the substance of the agreements previously concluded between us. We 
are ready in all sincerity to refund to the king all the expense to which 
he has been put for this expedition.” 

To this the king responded by the advice of all as follows: “We do 
not intend to violate in any way the provisions of the treaty which we 
have made with you. But as this nobleman came to discuss matters with 
us in a friendly way, we cannot honorably fail a man who has placed all 
his hope in our kingdom. It will be satisfactory to us, however, if we 
are permitted to conduct him back in safety to the city which he aban- 
doned for our benefit. After he has withdrawn into his own castle, let 
his lord deal with him according to the laws of the land and recom- 
pense him as he deserves. As for us, both in coming and going we will 
wholly refrain from inflicting any injury upon our friend, the king 
of Damascus, as, by the will of God, we are bound to do.” 

This same Anar was a man of much wisdom and a lover of our peo- 
ple. He had three daughters, one of whom he had married to the king 
of the Damascenes, just mentioned; another to Nureddin, the son of 
Zangi; *1 and the third to a distinguished knight, Margar. He had, 
therefore, the good of the realm at heart, not only because he was the 
father-in-law of the king, but also because of his own great discretion. 
The king, however, was indolent by nature and devoted to drinking 
and revelry. He cared only for pleasure and gave himself up entirely 
to dissolute practices. 

Anar, as has been mentioned, made great efforts to gain the favor of 
the Christians by all possible complaisance; he made use of every art 
by which friends are won. But whether this proceeded from the heart 
and from sincerity of purpose or was forced upon him by necessity con- 
trary to his own wishes may well be questioned by the wise. Doubtless 
either might be the case, for he regarded his son-in-law, Nureddin, 
with the same distrust that he had formerly felt toward the latter’s fa- 
ther, Zangi. He ever feared that Nureddin might drive the king, who 
was also his son-in-law, but a most worthless and grossly ignorant man, 


°1’'The marriage of Anar’s daughter to Nureddin occurred in the early spring of 
this year (Gibb, Chronicle, pp. 275-76). 


BALDWIN III AND MELISEND 149 


from the kingdom. He himself would then lose the reins of govern- 
ment.?* 

This was the principal reason why he regarded our favor as most 
essential to his interests and in every possible way endeavored to secure 
it. This wise man seems to have had almost prophetic foresight, for the 
situation that he feared actually came to pass. After his death, Nured- 
din, with the consent of the people of Damascus, drove out the reign- 
ing king by force and seized the throne. 

It was for this reason, therefore, that he exerted himself faithfully 
to make good the expense to which the king had been put in raising the 
expedition and to send him back to his own land unharmed. Doubtless 
he would have adopted an even less hostile attitude toward the king 
and his forces in this matter if he could have restrained, as he would 
have liked, the allies whom he had summoned from without. For we 
have found many reliable proofs which give definite testimony to his 
loyalty, sincerity, and steadfastness in various matters. 


9. The army experiences countless perils while on the march. 


Amonc the envoys who brought this report was a certain Bernard 
Vacher, who stood in very close relation to the king. When these facts 
were announced, the people at once began to cry out that Bernard was 
a traitor, that anyone who would seek to dissuade them in this matter 
and put obstacles in their way was not loyal to the Christians. With 
loud shouts, the irresponsible mob began to demand that the march be 
resumed, that the effort to obtain possession of that noble city be not 
so readily abandoned. Thanks were due to the nobleman who had 
offered a service to Christianity that would be remembered throughout 
the ages; his proposal should be carried out in every detail faithfully 
and devotedly; for this purpose they ought to strive even to the death. 

Amid tumultuous uproar the will of the crowd prevailed, and the 
advice of saner minds was rejected. The baggage was accordingly 
arranged, the camp broken up, and the march directed toward the 
city. After passing Cavea Roab, they entered the plain called Medan, 
where the Arabs and other Eastern people are wont to hold yearly 
fairs. At this point our army began to encounter the enemy in such vast 

22 This accurate analysis of the motives of Anar in his almost consistent policy of 


friendship with Jerusalem is supported by Qalanisi, the historian of Damascus, who 
was living and writing there at this time. 


150 BALDWIN III AND MELISEND 


numbers that even those who had formerly been most insistent that 
the campaign be continued would gladly have turned back, had that 
been possible. Yet the troops, although astounded at the magnitude 
of the enemy’s array, prepared to go into battle at once. On the advice 
of those experienced in the art of warfare, however, the king ordered 
that camp be made first. This was done, and the troops took thought 
for their bodily refreshment as far as was possible in the critical situa- 
tion. The night passed in sleepless vigilance. The enemy’s hosts, now 
increased beyond number, closed in on all sides about our legions, 
confident that on the morrow the Christians, bound like the lowest 
slaves, would become their prey. Our people, however, wisely kept 
constant watch and attended most carefully to their duties, as behooved 
brave men. When morning came, a conference was held, and it was 
determined to advance, for to retreat seemed not only disgraceful but 
practically impossible. In fact, the enemy now encircled them on every 
side and effectually hindered either course. 

Nevertheless, our men pressed on courageously. A path was finally 
opened by the sword through the enemy’s midst, and our forces, as 
with one accord, advanced toward their destination. Burdened as they 
were, however, with breastplates, helmets, and shields, they moved at 
a slow pace. Their progress was hindered also by the great numbers 
of the foe around them. The cavalry squadrons, being without bag- 
gage, could have proceeded more rapidly, but it was necessary that they 
adapt their movements to the pace of the infantry companies, that the 
ranks might not be broken and the enemy be given a chance to break in 
upon the formations. So the cohorts suffered with each other, and the 
entire Christian company was as one. The knights showed such care for 
the people on foot that they often dismounted from their horses and 
shared like hardships. They even offered to carry the weary, that the 
difficulties of the march might be made lighter. 

Meanwhile, the enemy continued to harass the army with ceaseless 
showers of arrows and strove to break our lines by increasing their 
efforts. But the more the Christians were menaced, the more closely 
they massed themselves together. Fearlessly and ardently they con- 
tinued on their way. ; 

As a culminating point of troubles, they were assailed by terrible 
thirst, which was intensified by the difficulty of the march and by the 
heat of summer. Their route was through an arid and waterless coun- 


BALDWIN III AND MELISEND 151 


try, for that entire region is without springs. In winter the natives 
collect the rain water in reservoirs, both natural and artificial. At this 
time, however, these had become useless, for the province had recently 
suffered from a pest of locusts of extraordinary extent, so that all the 
pools of this kind had been spoiled and the water corrupted by the 
dead insects therein. 

The region through which our road lay is called Trachonitis. Luke 
mentions it in his Gospel as follows: “Philip tetrarch of Ituraea and of 
the region of Trachonitis.” ?? The name seems to us to be derived 
rather from the tracones. For the hidden, subterranean caves in which 
that region abounds are called tracones. Nearly all the people of that* 
locality live in grottos and caves and have their homes in these tracones. 


10. On arriving at their destination, they find the city occupied 
by the enemy. Accordingly, they return home without ac- 
complishing their end. 


Tue Christians traversed a part of that country under conditions of 
extreme danger. About the last hour of the day, they came to a place 
which was called Adratum in earlier days, but which is now generally 
known as the city of Bernard d’Estampes. It is one of the suffragan 
cities of the metropolis of Bostrum. The inhabitants of this place had 
joined the enemy’s forces, and therefore our people had to suffer even 
worse hardships than before. For when they tried to obtain water from 
the cisterns which lay open, they lost even the buckets which had 
been let down. The foe, hidden in the subterranean caverns, cut the 
ropes by which these had been lowered, and sent them back dangling. 
The frustration of this hope, for the sake of which they had so long 
labored in vain, intensified the agony of their thirst. 

For four successive days our people never indulged in rest; indeed, 
they were so continually persecuted that they scarcely had leisure, even 
during the night, to satisfy their bodily needs. Day by day the enemy’s 
numbers increased, while our forces as steadily decreased. Some were 
killed, others fatally wounded. Still others, panic-stricken and despair- 
ing of their lives, swelled the throng around the baggage, skulked 
among the horses and pack animals, and feigned weakness, that they 
might not be compelled to come out and bear the brunt of the enemy’s 
attacks. Dense showers of arrows and other missiles fell like rain or 


23 Lu. 3:1. 


152 BALDWIN III AND MELISEND 


hail upon our forces so incessantly that the host of men and beasts 
seemed covered with weapons. Well might a spectator marvel at the 
continued perseverance of the foe in attacking and the invincible en- 
durance of the Christians in resisting. Nonetheless, our people con- 
tinued to let fly showers of arrows and darts, but as the enemy were 
able to move about freely, our missiles rarely injured them. 

The Christians continued their march under many perils, and at 
last, in the fourth day they drew near their destination and saw the 
city at a distance. With great difficulty they drove off the enemy by 
force and took possession of the waters which flowed forth in modera- 
tion from the rocks. Camp was made near by, and the forces devoted 
themselves for a short period to bodily refreshment and relaxation. 
That night the Christians enjoyed some degree of rest and were eagerly 
looking forward to the morrow. But in the silence of midnight, a bearer 
of ill tidings stealthily left the city and made his way through the en- 
emy’s lines to our camp. He announced that he had private messages 
for the king and begged to be led to him at once. He was admitted. The 
nobles were summoned and also the noble lord, the former governor of 
the city, who had led us into the present predicament. The messenger 
then disclosed the fact that the wife of this same lord had betrayed the 
city and surrendered it to the Turks. They had introduced their forces 
and taken possession of all the strongholds, including the citadel itself. 
Everyone else had been driven out. 

Our people were overwhelmed by the news of this disaster. They 
held a conference and finally decided that their best course was to re- 
turn speedily to their own land at whatever risk. Some of the chief 
men of the kingdom, however, privately counselled the king to mount 
the horse of John Gomani, which was reputed to excel all other army 
steeds in swiftness and endurance, and, with the Cross of Salvation in 
his hand, to look out for his own safety alone. This advice was given 
in despair of the possibility of return and in anticipation that the entire 
army would shortly be destroyed. The king, however, although still 
very young, rejected this counsel with royal magnificence and clearly 
showed what his character would be in later years. He declared that 
he would scorn to save his own life if a people consecrated to God were 
to perish so wretchedly. 

Although these admonitions proceeded from loyal affection, the 
king declined to heed them, and other plans were adopted. To ad- 


BALDWIN III AND MELISEND £52 


vance farther meant utter destruction; therefore measures for the 
retreat were taken. Now for the first time the Christians felt the hard- 
ship of their situation in double measure, for their great hope now 
was gone, and they realized that their efforts had been all in vain. 
Their troubles up to this time had been serious enough—in fact, almost 
unendurable—and they had suffered miseries equal to any they might 
encounter afterward. Yet as they struggled on, they were supported 
by the confident hope of taking the city, and these pleasurable anticipa- 
tions enabled them to hold out. Now, however, this hope had failed 
them, and they realized that their project must be abandoned. Accord- 
ingly, the herald proclaimed the return, and all prepared for the 
homeward march. 


11. The army encounters untold perils on the return march. The 
Turks are amazed at the perseverance of our troops. 


Ar dawn on the following day, Nureddin arrived from the city men- 
tioned above and, with an infinite number of Turks, joined the co- 
horts of the enemy. His father-in-law had appealed to him for aid. The 
Christians, however, started out on the return march, as had been ar- 
ranged. As soon as the Turks perceived this movement, they hastened 
against them and, with a great clamor, tried to prevent the retreat. But 
the very difficulties that beset our people on every side strengthened 
their courage. With their swords they broke through the opposing 
ranks and, although with extreme danger and at the cost of many lives, 
forced their way through. 

General orders had been given that the bodies of all the dead in the 
Christian ranks be placed upon camels and other pack animals, that 
the knowledge of the massacre of our forces might not tend to 
strengthen the enemy. The weak and wounded were also to be placed 
on beasts of burden so as to give the impression that not a single Chris- 
tian had been killed or wounded. Even these disabled ones were di- 
rected to draw their swords, that they might present at least a sem- 
blance of strength. It was a source of amazement, therefore, to the 
wiser heads among the enemy that, after such volleys of arrows, such 
repeated conflicts, such torture of thirst, dust, and unbearable heat, not 
a single dead or disabled Christian could be found. This people must 
indeed be made of iron, they thought, for otherwise they could not 
sustain so persistently such continuing pressure. Accordingly, as all 


154 BALDWIN III AND MELISEND 


their efforts were in vain, the enemy turned to other tactics. The entire 
country thereabout was covered with a dense growth of brambles, dry 
thistles and other weeds, old stubble and crops now ripe. To this they 
set fire, and a strong wind soon carried it furiously toward us. Our 
misfortunes were now doubled by the encroaching flames and the dense 
clouds of smoke which attended them. With cries of woe the people 
turned as one body to the venerable Robert, archbishop of Nazareth, 
and tearfully begged him: “Pray for us, father; through the Life- 
giving Cross which you bear in your hands, the Cross upon which we 
believe that the Author of our salvation hung, rescue us from these 
evils, for we can no longer endure them.” The wind had borne the 
smoke toward them so that the faces and the general aspect of the 
people were black, like that of smiths when working at the forge. The 
heat from the fires in addition to the usual heat of summer, together 
with extreme thirst, had raised their suffering to a point beyond en- 
durance. 

The beloved man of God was deeply moved by their cries and sup- 
plications. In humility of spirit, he raised the Cross of Salvation toward 
the flames, which were rushing against him in all their violence, and 
invoked aid from on high. Immediately divine favor attended them; 
in a moment the wind veered about and sent the reeking volume of 
cloud and flame against the enemy. Thus the evil which the Turks had 
prepared for our undoing was turned to their own destruction. They 
stood amazed at the wondrous miracle; unique indeed must be that 
faith of the Christians which through prayer could bring about so swift 
an answer from their Lord God. For a time entirely engrossed by their 
own danger, they perforce gave our troops some peace and allowed 
them a short respite. 


12. An envoy ts dispatched to the enemy on behalf of peace. A 
noble knight in the enemy’s ranks falls. The Turkish army 
is dispersed, and our forces proceed without further hin- 
drance. 


Tuus our army was hard pressed by these intolerable evils. Mean- 
while, the great nobles and those of wider experience began to realize 
that the endurance of the people could not last much longer. Accord- 
ingly, they went to the king and persuaded him to send an envoy to 
Anar concerning peace. Any terms would be accepted, provided only 


BALDWIN III AND MELISEND 155 


that the Christian army be allowed to return home. For this mission 
was selected a man of rather doubtful repute, who, once before on a 
similar errand, had acted disloyally toward the people of Christ. Yet 
because of his familiarity with the language of the Turks, this mission 
also was entrusted to him. In response to the injunction that he should 
faithfully perform the duty laid upon him, he is reported to have said, 
. “The suspicions against me are unjust and far beyond anything that I 
have deserved; yet I will go. But if I am guilty of the charges brought 
against me, may I not be permitted to return; or rather, may I perish 
by the sword of the enemy.” 

The wretched man had pronounced his own sentence of death and 
soon experienced the judgment of God, for before he reached the 
Turks and accomplished his mission he perished at the hand of the 
enemy. 

Four distinguished Arab chiefs, followed by a host of their people, 
took part in this campaign. They were brothers, sons of the mighty 
and distinguished Arab satrap Morel. These troops kept making per- 
sistent and very spirited attacks upon the flanks of our army. Yet our 
soldiers under the commands given them did not dare to break out of 
line against them. For if, contrary to the discipline of war, they should 
break the ranks, they would be exposed to a harsh sentence as deserters 
from their places. In the retinue of that Turk who was with us, how- 
ever, there was a certain knight who could not endure this situation and 
longed to relieve us of the annoyance. Regardless of the rules imposed 
and reckless of his life, he spurred his horse forward with great cour- 
age. He threw the spear which he was carrying against one of the four 
brothers, then ran him through with his sword in the midst of his 
ranks, and hurled the lifeless body to the ground. Then he returned 
without injury to our lines. 

An immense throng at once gathered round the body of the dead 
chief. When it became evident that he had already breathed forth his 
luckless spirit, the assembled crowd broke into loud lamentations and 
gave expression to their intense grief in floods of tears. 

But our people rejoiced greatly. Eagerly they demanded to know 
the name of the man who had exposed himself to such peril and thereby 
wrought a feat worthy of eternal fame. It was discovered that he was 
an alien who might readily be pardoned for transgressing the rules, 
especially as he did not know the language and had not understood 


156 BALDWIN III AND MELISEND 
the public edict. Accordingly, although he had undoubtedly acted con- 


trary to the rules of military discipline, yet, since he had been unaware 
of the command, he was mercifully pardoned, and his deed was re- 
garded as praiseworthy, rather because of the result than because it 
was right. 

In this way the enemy’s battle line on that side was broken. Our 
army was now able to spread out, and accordingly, in the more open 
country they soon secured compensation for the straits which they had 
suffered. After an uninterrupted march of several days, they again 
came to Cavea Roab. Since the passage was very narrow and it might 
be dangerous to cross here, the leaders purposely ordered that it be 
avoided. But Anar, the procurator of Damascus, observed that the 
king was leading his army toward the valley just mentioned. Accord- 
ingly, he sent messengers to say that if the king pleased he would cause 
a meal to be prepared for him in all good faith beyond Cavea, for he 
knew that now for several days the army had been suffering from lack 
of provisions. Whether this was a sincere offer, made out of good will 
toward the Christians, or whether it was simply a ruse to force the 
Christian army into the narrow defiles of still more dangerous valleys 
we have not been able to ascertain. Nevertheless, the traditional belief 
is that the gifts of an enemy should rightly be distrusted. Conse- 
quently, by unanimous decision, it was determined to proceed by the 
upper road which was more level and less dangerous. 

There was no one to guide them, however, through the country 
which they must traverse. But suddenly there appeared ahead of the 
ranks an unknown knight mounted upon a white horse. He wore a 
breastplate and short gauntlets reaching to the elbow and carried a red 
standard. Like an angel of the Lord, this man led them by the short- 
est routes to waters hitherto unknown and showed them the best and 
most convenient places to make camp. It had taken the expedition 
practically five days to reach Cavea, but under the guidance of this 
leader they arrived at Gadara in three. 


13. Our legions reach Gadara. The place is described. The troops 


return home. 


Gapara is situated in the region called Decapolis, of which it is writ- 
ten in the Gospel of Mark, “and again, departing from the coasts of 
Tyre and Sidon, he came unto the sea of Galilee, through the midst of 


BALDWIN III AND MELISEND 157 


the coasts of Decapolis.” °* As its name indicates, this land contains 
ten cities, namely, Hippus, Pella, Gadara, the place just mentioned, 
and seven others. This last-named city is situated on the borderland 
between the enemy’s country and our own. When our first legions 
reached it, the Turks once more began to harass our rear ranks, as if 
again seized by their former evil fury. They soon perceived, however, 
that their efforts were of no avail, for the Christians had already en- 
tered their own land. Accordingly, exhausted under the burden of 
smoke, extreme hot weather, and fatigue, they broke ranks and began 
to return in throngs to their own country. That night passed in unusual 
tranquillity. Our men allowed their wearied bodies the rest and re- 
freshment so much needed, and on the following day they proceeded 
to Tiberias. 

Those who still preserve an accurate memory of this occurrence all 
agree that the leader of this march was known to no one. When the 
army made camp, he always disappeared immediately. He was never 
seen anywhere in the camp, but in the morning he again went on ahead 
of the troops. No one now living can remember any equally perilous 
expedition during the period of the Latins in the Orient which did not 
result in a decisive victory for the enemy. 

When the king returned to the realm and the Cross of the Lord was 
restored to Jerusalem, there was great rejoicing among the people who 
had remained at home, because their friends had now returned. Well 
might they cry, “For this my son was dead, and is alive again; he was 
lost, and is found.” 75 

Shortly after this, that same noble Turk was summoned with pacific 
words under pretense of reconciliation by the subtle Anar. He met with 
most shameful treatment, however. The wretched man was blinded 
and spent the rest of his life in the utmost poverty and misery.?° 


14. The citizens of Edessa appeal to the count. He hurries thither 
and, without the knowledge of the enemy, receives the city. 


WHILE these events were transpiring in our vicinity, a deplorable 
thing which should be recorded happened in the county of Edessa. In 


24 Mar. 7:31. 25 Lu. 15:24. 

26 This episode is also told at some length by Qalanisi. According to him, Altuntash 
came to Damascus, was taken prisoner, tried, and condemned to blinding as he had 
blinded a brother. He was allowed to live out his life in a house in Damascus (Gibb, 
Chronicle, pp. 276-79). 


158 BALDWIN III AND MELISEND 


order that the details of this occurrence may be fully understood it is 
necessary to go back somewhat earlier in the story. 

After the death of Zangi, that greatest persecutor of the Christian 
faith, his son Nureddin was detained at Mosul for a time on the matter 
of his succession to his father’s principate. Only a few of his retainers 
were left to keep guard at Edessa. All the rest of the population was 
strong in the ‘Christian faith. Realizing this fact, the inhabitants of 
Edessa secretly sent messengers to Count Joscelin and announced that, 
with the exception of a few Turks who were guarding the citadel, their 
city was practically abandoned to the citizens. Now the people of 
Edessa were, and had been from the time of the apostles, rooted and 
grounded in the Christian faith so that, as has been mentioned else- 
where, there were very few, practically none, of other faiths dwelling 
among them. Most earnestly, they begged the count that he would 
assemble military forces and hasten to the city, which the citizens 
would at once surrender to him without danger or obstacle. 

Joscelin hastily assembled all the troops of that country, both in- 
fantry and cavalry. Then, accompanied by Baldwin of Marash, a 
noble and powerful man, he quickly crossed the river and appeared 
suddenly at night before Edessa with all his followers. While the 
Turks who had been left as guards were sleeping, in the silence of the 
night, the citizens admitted some of the count’s people by ropes and 
ladders. These opened the gates to the rest who were waiting outside. 
All rushed in at the same time pell-mell; they spread through the 
city in every direction and put to the sword every foe whom they en- 
countered. Some of the latter, however, succeeded in escaping death 
and reached the citadel. 

In this manner, the count and his army of Christians held the city 
for several days. They did not succeed in taking the citadel, however, 
for that was carefully fortified and well equipped with provisions, 
weapons, and soldiers. The lack of success in this respect was largely 
due to the fact that the count’s forces had brought with them neither 
engines nor anything with which to build them. Nor could any material 
suitable for the purpose be found in the city. 


BALDWIN III AND MELISEND 159 


15. Nureddin attacks Edessa. He places the city under siege. He 


causes the Christians extreme distress. 


MEssENGERS were now sent forth to inform Christian people every- 
where of this success and to invite those in the vicinity to hasten thither 
to assist in holding and preserving for the Christian religion forever 
the city which had been received through the grace of God. Christians 
everywhere rejoiced over this news, and, in proportion to the deep sor- 
row which they had felt over the captivity of Edessa, they received 
consolation in like measure. Mourning soon took the place of extreme 
joy, however, and the sound of the zither was changed into strains of 
grief. Sorrow, even more intense than before, revived. For as soon as 
Nureddin learned that the inhabitants had surrendered Edessa to the 
count, he levied troops from all parts of the Orient and ordered the 
herald to direct the people of the neighboring cities to assemble at one 
place. Suddenly he appeared before Edessa, placed his legions in a 
circle about it, and began siege operations. Thus it was with our people 
as it is written, “The sword without, and terror within.” 27 For out- 
side, the enemy’s lines being made ready for battle prevented all exit 
and threatened death to the Christians, while within, the Turks in the 
citadel also inspired them with fear and harassed them with constant 
attacks. 

Beset by so many difficulties, the Christians knew not what to do. 
They took frequent counsel together and as frequently changed their 
plans. But to whatever course of action they turned, they found no 
path which led to safety, no escape without danger of death. At last, 
in view of all the exigencies of place and time, it was unanimously 
resolved that they must leave the city, even at the risk of death. Un- 
questionably, it would be better to encounter the enemy and force a 
path to safety with the sword than to endure a siege. In the latter case, 
either all without distinction would perish by the sword, or, through 
lack of food, be enslaved by the Turks and forced to endure the bitter 
yoke of servitude, a fate worse than any form of death. This decision 
was approved by all; the plan was extremely perilous, yet, in view of 
other possible fates that might befall them, it seemed to be the only 
course. 

The citizens, by whose zealous efforts the count and his soldiers had 


27 De, 32:25. 


160 BALDWIN III AND MELISEND 


been introduced into the city, heard with dismay that all hope of re- 
sistance had fled and that every path to safety was closed. If they 
should remain in Edessa, after the departure of the count, they, as the 
authors of the attempt, would certainly be punished by death in its 
most dreadful form. They preferred, therefore, to depart with their 
wives and children and to share uncertain fortune with their brethren 
of the Christian army, rather than to fall by certain death, or, a still 
more fearful fate, to suffer servitude under an infidel enemy. 


16. The count leaves the city with his army and endeavors to re- 
turn to his own country. He is pursued by Nureddin. The 
army is massacred, but the count escapes by flight. 


As soon as the gates were opened, all rushed eagerly forth as if thereby 
lay the only path to safety. Although they well knew that a way must 
be cut through the enemy’s lines with the sword, yet whatever might 
happen after they had once left the city seemed of little consequence. 
Meanwhile, the Turks in the citadel had unbarred the entrances and 
let some of their number into the city. These pressed hard on the 
Christians from behind and forced them to hasten their departure. At 
the same time the Turks outside the gates heard that some of their 
people were already in the city and were fighting with the Christians. 
Anxious to join them, they forcibly seized the gates which had been 
opened to allow our people to depart. Thus a great multitude of all 
ranks and classes was massed at that point, as one party tried to issue 
forth and the other endeavored to force an entrance. A fierce struggle, 
serious in its consequences to both sides, ensued in the narrow space. 
The foe outside fought furiously to push in, but the strength and de- 
termination of the Christians finally prevailed against them. A pas- 
sage was opened by the sword, at the cost of many lives on both sides, 
and our people spread out over the plain. 

There might have been seen a most piteous spectacle, deplorable 
even to describe! A helpless throng of unwarlike citizens, old men and 
sick people, matrons and tender maidens, aged women and little ones, 
even babes at the breast, all crowded together in the narrow gateway. 
Some were trodden under the feet of the horses; others, crushed by 
the on-pressing multitude, were stifled to death; while still others fell 
under the merciless sword of the Turks. The greater part of the citi- 
zens, both men and women, who had elected to follow the departing 


BALDWIN III AND MELISEND 161 


army perished miserably at that time. A few escaped because of their 
own strength and vigor or by the assistance of the horses and were able 
to accompany the army as it retreated. 

Nureddin, on perceiving that the Christians were preparing to re- 
turn home, summoned his cohorts for pursuit. He drew up his troops 
ready for battle and arranged his lines in good order; then, ever press- 
ing close on their rear, he kept up a series of continual attacks. The 
Christians directed their march toward the Euphrates, which was 
about fourteen miles from Edessa. Constant fighting and ever-present 
danger attended the count and his army upon the entire march thither. 
At almost every step there were engagements, now of many, again of 
individuals, which resulted in great loss on both sides. There died that 
noble man whom we mentioned before, Baldwin of Marash, a warrior 
distinguished for his military achievements. Many other excellent 
men perished also at this time who were well worthy of being remem- 
bered. May their souls enjoy everlasting rest! Their names are for- 
gotten but are surely written in heaven, for they died with a glorious 
end for the sake of the faith and liberty of the people of Christ! 

The count’s strength was entirely unequal to that of the enemy. He 
had lost the greater part of his forces and could no longer withstand 
the continual onslaughts of the Turks. In order to save his life, there- 
fore, he crossed the Euphrates and retired to Samosata. The others fled 
in different directions as seemed best to each; the baggage and equip- 
ment was abandoned, and all thought only of life and safety. 

The news of the disaster spread far and wide through all the neigh- 
boring lands, and those who had rejoiced over the capture of Edessa 
were now all the more cruelly depressed by the second loss of the city, 
the massacre of the nobles, and the discomfiture of the Christian 
people.*® 


17. Wiliam, patriarch of Jerusalem, dies. Fulcher, archbishop of 
Tyre, succeeds to that chair, and Ralph, the king’s chancel- 
lor, is imposed upon the church of Tyre by royal power. 


Axsourt this time, William, patriarch of Jerusalem, of precious mem- 
ory, a simple and God-fearing man, went the way of all flesh. He died 
on September 27, in the fifteenth year of his rule. On January 25 of the 


28 This recapture and second loss of Edessa occurred late in 1146 (November- 
December). 


162 BALDWIN III AND MELISEND 


following year, Fulcher, archbishop of Tyre, was chosen in his place, 
the third in the number of our predecessors.?° 

About the time of the feast of Epiphany, a thunderbolt sent from 
on high struck the church of the Sepulchre of the Lord on Mt. Sion 
and exposed it to great danger. The omen terrified the entire city and 
was, as we believe, a portent of disaster. A comet also was visible for 
many days, and certain other unusual signs, prophetic of future events, 
appeared. 

Since the church at Tyre was without a head, the king and his 
mother, on whom the responsibility of the realm and the entire govern- 
ment rested, met at Tyre with the lord patriarch who had formerly 
occupied that church and the suffragan bishops of that same church. 
Their object was to appoint someone to the archbishopric. The choice 
of a bishop was duly discussed, as is customary in such cases, but the 
views of the electors differed. One party demanded the appointment 
of Ralph, the royal chancellor, a man undoubtedly learned but too 
worldly. He was English by birth, a very handsome man, and most 
acceptable to the king and the queen—and, indeed, to all of the 
court. The king and his mother approved and strongly supported him 
as their choice. 

The chief patrons of the other party were John of Pisa, archdeacon 
of Tyre and later a cardinal of the church of Rome, with title Saints 
Sylvester and Martin, Bernard of Sidon, and John, bishop of Beirut. 
These prelates, following the lord patriarch, opposed the choice of 
Ralph. They made an appeal against the other party, which relied on 
the pressure exerted by the king, and, with the patriarch as their pa- 
tron, they put forth every effort to defeat it. 

The result was that the Chancellor Ralph succeeded by violence in 
usurping the church and its possessions and for two years maintained 
his position. Finally the case was appealed to Rome and, in the pres- 
ence of the parties, Pope Eugenius rendered the decision that the elec- 
tion of the chancellor was null and void.*° Later, this same Ralph, 


29 William, who became patriarch in 1130, died September 27, 1145. Fulcher be- 
came patriarch January 25, 1146. 

8° The detailed account of this election affords an insight into the variety of in- 
terests involved in important ecclesiastical elections. Just when this decision was ren- 
dered is not certain. Ralph’s successor, Peter, was still prior of the canons of the Holy 
Sepulchre in May, 1148, and Ralph was perhaps referred to as electus of Tyre as late 
as 1151 (see R. Reg., nos. 249, 258). 


BALDWIN III AND MELISEND 163 


through the favor of Pope Hadrian IV, his compatriot, obtained the 
church at Bethlehem and was ordained as bishop of that city.31 

But in the chair of Tyre was placed with the consent and approval 
of all, Peter, prior of the church of the Holy Sepulchre, a native of 
Barcelona in Hither Spain. He was a man of rare simplicity and gen- 
tleness, who feared God and kept himself apart from all evil, one 
whose memory is held in benediction both by God and man. He was 
noble according to the flesh but still nobler in spirit. His life and deeds 
deserve a far longer and more careful treatment, but our story must 
pass over special details and return to the discussion of general topics.®* 


18. The people of the West are aroused. Conrad, emperor of the 
Romans, and Louis, king of France, with many other 
princes, set forth on the way to aid the Christians of the East. 


WueEn the city of Edessa was captured, as has been related, the story of 
the ominous disaster was carried by rumor throughout the entire West. 
It was said that the impious race of Turks had not only overwhelmed 
the city of Edessa but was also laying waste the cities, villas, and forti- 
fied places of our people and overrunning the entire East unchecked. 
Thus the people of Christ were suffering extraordinary trials because 
of constant combats and repeated invasions. 

Messengers went about to peoples and nations everywhere spread- 
ing these reports; provinces which had become lazy and enervated by 
long periods of peace were visited and their aid besought to avenge 
these great wrongs. Pope Eugenius III, a devout man of God, also 
felt the solicitude of a father for his sons of the East, it was said, and 
was in full and affectionate sympathy with them. He dispatched 
throughout the various regions of the West religious men, eloquent 
in exhortation, powerful both in word and deed, to inform princes 

31 Hadrian IV, the only Englishman to hold the papal office, became pope in De- 
cember, 1154. The first notice of Ralph as bishop of Bethlehem appears in June, 1156 
(see R. Reg., no. 321). Hadrian IV was named Nicholas Breakspear and is known 
in English history, but Ralph of Bethlehem is known to have been an Englishman 
only through William (see Beatrice Siedschlag, English Participation in the Crusades, 
1150-1220, p. 110). 

82 Tt is interesting to speculate as to the connection between William and Peter, 
prior of the Holy Sepulchre, which this warm reference to the latter implies. Peter 
had been prior since 1130 and was therefore in Jerusalem during all of William’s 


youth. He may have directed the education of William and been instrumental in start- 
ing him on his career in the church. 


164 BALDWIN III AND MELISEND 


and people, tribes and tongues everywhere of the intolerable sufferings 
of their brethren in the East and to rouse them to go forth to avenge 
these terrible wrongs. Among these envoys was Bernard, abbot of 
Clairvaux, of immortal memory, beloved of God, a man whose honora- 
ble life was an example to all and in every respect worthy of remem- 
brance. He was chosen as the leader for carrying out this mission so 
pleasing to God, and with all diligence he executed the task laid upon 
him. Although weak of body because of approaching old age, almost 
constant fasting, and a too meager diet, he went about through the 
kingdom and through the country everywhere with his colaborers be- 
loved of God, zealously and indefatigably preaching the kingdom of 
God. With all due care he described the affliction of the people of the 
East and the woes by which they were continually oppressed. He set 
forth clearly that the cities of the faithful, once devoted to the Chris- 
tian profession, were now suffering the direst servitude under the per- 
secutors of the name of Christ. Bound with chains and shackles, con- 
sumed by hunger, confined in horrible prisons, in filth and squalor, 
clothed with bitterness, those brethren for whom also Christ was will- 
ing to die were sitting in beggary and irons. To the task of liberating 
their oppressed brethren he invited them and stirred their hearts with 
longing to avenge such wrongs; he promised that aid from on high 
and eternal rewards with the elect awaited all who would undertake 
this pious work. 

As with devoted perseverance he spread this message among na- 
tions, principalities, and kingdoms, he won instant favor with great 
and small. Voluntarily they gave a ready assent to his preaching and 
vowed to take the road to Jerusalem. Fitting upon their shoulders the 
sign of the quickening cross, they prepared for the journey. Not alone 
with the throngs of common people were his persuasive words effec- 
tive, but even with the supreme rulers of the world and those who 
occupied the highest pinnacle of kingdoms. The most powerful and 
illustrious kings of the land, namely, Conrad, emperor of the Romans, 
and Louis, king of the Franks, with many princes of both kingdoms, 
embraced the word with equal desire for the same end. Upon their 
shoulders and garments they impressed the saving token of the revivi- 
fying cross in all devotion as a sign that they too would undertake the 
pilgrimage.** 


3° This expedition is usually called the Second Crusade. Eugenius III, like Bernard 


BALDWIN III AND MELISEND 165 


19. The emperor sets out first with his army and arrives at Con- | 
stantinople. The sultan of Iconwum sets ambuscades for him. 


THE two monarchs made all due arrangements for the government 
of their kingdoms and joined to their number those who in fervent 
longing had taken upon themselves the vows of salvation. When all 
necessary preparation for the march had been completed as befitted 
royal dignity, they set out upon the pilgrimage pleasing to God, in the 
month of May. They departed under unlucky auspices, however, and 
with sinister omens. For they started on the way as if contrary to the 
will of an angry God, and, in punishment for the sins of man, they 
accomplished nothing pleasing to Him on that entire pilgrimage. Nay, 
they even rendered worse the situation of those to whom they intended 
to bring succor.?# 

The leaders had decided to advance separately, each one conducting 
his own army, so that disagreements and contentions might not arise 
among the people. In this way, also, the necessaries of life for the 
legions might more easily be procured, and fodder for the horses and 
pack animals would be more abundant. 

They traversed Bavaria, crossed the mighty river Danube at Ratis- 
bon, and descended into Austria with the river on their left. They then 
entered the land of Hungary, where they received honorable treatment 
from the king of that country. Passing through that kingdom and the 
two Pannonias, they went through the provinces of the Bulgarians, 
namely, Moesia and Dacia Mediterranea, with Dacia Ripensis on the 
left. They reached Thrace, passed through the famous cities of Philip- 
popolis and Adrianople, and finally arrived at the royal city.*° They 


of Clairvaux, was a Cistercian, and Cistercian leadership of this crusade was as pro- 
nounced as the Cluniac leadership had been in the First. St. Bernard is usually credited 
with the persuasion of Conrad and Louis VII to enlist for the crusade despite the advice 
of leading ministers of the two monarchs, Eugenius III had sent out his first call for 
a crusade in December, 1145, which he repeated in March, 1146. The most complete 
study of this crusade is still that of Kugler, contained in his several works on the 
subject (see B. Kugler, Studien zur Geschichte des zqweiten Kreuzzugs; Analecten zur 
Geschichte des zweiten Kreuzzugs; Neue Analecten zur Geschichte des xweiten 
Kreuzzugs; Geschichte der Kreuzziige). These should be supplemented by biographies 
of St. Bernard of Clairvaux (see especially E. Vacandard, Vie de Saint Bernard abbé 
de Clairvaux, and Byzantine histories of the period. 

84 This judgment was based on the ultimate failure of the enterprise and not upon 
any specific errors or wrongdoing at the outset. 

35 William presents a very summary account of this journey along the old pilgrim 
and crusaders’ trail to Constantinople in contrast to the detailed account of the earlier 


166 BALDWIN III AND MELISEND 


had a friendly interview with Manuel, emperor of Constantinople, 
and enjoyed a few days of rest, most necessary for the refreshment 
and relaxation of the armies after so many hardships.** Then they 
crossed the Hellespont, whose waters lave the banks of Constantinople 
and form the boundary between Europe and Asia, and entered Bithynia, 
the first province of Asia which one reaches. All the legions encamped 
in the village of Chalcedon, whence the city they had just left could be 
seen not far away. It was in this ancient city that the fourth holy synod 
of six hundred and thirty-six fathers convened in the time of the Em- 
peror Martian and Pope Leo to combat the heresy of Eutyches, the 
monk and abbot who declared that there was but one nature in our 
-Lord Jesus Christ.3* 

The sultan of Iconium had known for a long time that these great 
princes were on the march and, in great fear of their coming, he had 
already called for aid from the most remote parts of the Orient. Full 
of anxiety as to ways and means by which he might ward off the im- 
minent dangers arising from the presence of so many enemies, he 
fortified cities, restored ruined strongholds, and implored aid from the 
neighboring peoples. With constant anxiety he awaited the arrival of 
the enemy who were said to be at his gates and, from day to day, looked 
forward with apprehension to the destruction of his people and the 
desolation of his country. Rumor said that the approaching host had 
never been equalled in number, that their cavalry forces alone would 
cover the whole surface of the land; the largest rivers would not suf- 
fice to furnish them drink, nor could the most fertile countries supply 
them with food. Although these reports were greatly exaggerated, yet 
the actual facts might well strike terror to the hearts of great chiefs 
who were not followers of the Christian faith. For, according to the 
expedition. However, the Second Crusade was better planned and executed with much 
less trouble. Otto, bishop of Freising, accompanied Conrad on the journey and wrote 
an account of the crusade, which, however, William did not see. 

86 The relations of Emperor Manuel with Emperor Conrad III and with King 
Louis VII were neither as simple nor as pleasant as William here summarizes them. 
Both of the latter, as soon as they decided to go on the crusade, had begun an inter- 
change of letters and envoys with Manuel. When they neared Constantinople, Man- 
uel’s worries were even greater than had been those of Alexius. He was actually at 
war with Roger of Sicily at the time. His recently acquired possessions in Cilicia would 
be endangered by the crusaders, once they reached eastern Asia Minor. Chalandon has 
treated this problem, or series of problems, more fully than any other recent historian, 
and, though he is disposed to be more sympathetic towards Manuel than the facts fully 


justify, his account deserves great respect (see Chalandon, Les Comnéne, 1, 262-315). 
87 See earlier reference to the council in Book II, chap. 12, note 16. 


BALDWIN III AND MELISEND 167 


uniform statement of men who took part in this expedition, there were 
in the army of the emperor alone about seventy thousand mailed 
knights, besides the people on foot, women and children, and light- 
armed cavalry. In the army of the king of France also it was estimated 
that there were seventy thousand valiant men wearing the breastplate, 
in addition to those on foot.** If God in His good pleasure had deigned 
to attend them and had granted them His mercy and saving grace, 
doubtless they might have subdued to the Christian faith not only 
the sultan but indeed all the provinces of the Orient. But the Lord 
in His just, although secret, judgment rejected their service and did 
not regard it as an acceptable offering, perchance because it was offered 
with unworthy hands. 


20. After crossing the Hellespont, the army of Emperor Conrad 
is led astray by the malice of the Greeks and drawn into very 
dangerous places. 


As soon as all the legions had been moved across the Hellespont, Em- 
peror Conrad with some of the principal nobles of his suite took leave 
of the emperor and also sailed across the sea. The legions, each under 
command of its own leader, were then ordered to advance. Leaving 
Galatia, Paphlagonia, and the two provinces of Pontus on the left and 
Phrygia, Lydia, and Asia Minor on the right, Conrad marched straight 
through the center of Bithynia to Nicomedia, the metropolis of that 
land. On the right he passed Nicaea, the city where, in the time of 
Emperor Constantine, the synod of three hundred and eighteen holy 
fathers convened to combat the wicked doctrine of the unhappy Arius.®° 
From here the entire army, in battle array, followed the shortest route 
to Lycaonia, the capital of which is Iconium. 

At this place, the sultan had assembled large forces of armed men 
and also an immense body of Turks from the neighboring lands. He 
was awaiting a favorable time and place to attack the Christians as they 
tried to pass and thus to prevent their advance. By bribes and entreaties 
he had roused against our people all the kings, leaders, and chiefs of 
every degree, even in the most remote provinces of the East. By a 
constant succession of messengers, he had prayed them to consider that 
if such a mighty host of armed men were permitted to pass through 


38 Here again the numbers must be considered impressionistic rather than accurate. 
39 See earlier reference to the council of Nicaea in Book III, chap. 1, note 1. 


t 


168 BALDWIN III AND MELISEND 


the country without opposition, they would reduce the entire East to 
their sway by force of arms. A great number of nations responded 
quickly to his call and from the two Armenias, Cappadocia, Isauria, 
Cilicia, Media, and Parthia a vast multitude assembled. With the as- 
sistance of all these nations, he hoped that he might be able to resist 
with somewhat equal forces the mighty host which was said to be ap- 
proaching. 

On departing from Constantinople, Conrad had requested the em- 
peror to furnish him with guides who knew the country and were 
well informed about the neighboring provinces. These men, however, 
proved to be far from trustworthy. It was understood that they had 
been furnished to lead the armies in all good faith so that the troops 
following them might not be exposed imprudently to dangers and 
difficulties or to lack of food while on the march. As soon as they had 
conducted the army into the land of the enemy, however, these guides 
informed the leaders that in order to take advantage of a shorter route, 
which led through unoccupied country, necessary food for a certain 
number of days must be carried with them. Within a few days there- 
after, they faithfully promised that the armies would arrive at the far- 
famed city of Iconium and would find themselves in a most fertile 
country full of all kinds of provisions. Obedient to this injunction, 
the Christians loaded pack animals, carts, and all kinds of vehicles with 
provisions, for they trusted their guides and followed them in simple 
good faith. 

The guides, however, led by the malice inherent in the Greek race 
and also by their customary hatred of the Christians, acted treacher- 
ously. Either because commanded by their master or because bribed 
by the Turks, they purposely led the legions by unfrequented routes 
and drew them into places which offered the enemy favorable op- 
portunities to attack and overcome a credulous people.*° 


21. The guides furnished by the Greek emperor to lead Emperor 
Conrad’s army wickedly depart and leave the troops exposed 
to great danger. 


Wuen the allotted number of days had passed and the expedition had 
not reached the destination so eagerly desired, the emperor ordered 


*° Chalandon, of course, discredits this charge of treachery and explains the disaster 
to Conrad’s army on the theory that the people had become so enfeebled through thirst 


BALDWIN III AND MELISEND 169 


the Greek guides to be brought before him. In the presence of his 
nobles he began to put searching questions to them: Why was it that 
the army had already been upon the march longer than had been 
stipulated in the beginning and yet had not reached its destination? 
The guides as usual resorted to falsehoods and asserted steadfastly 
that, with the help of God, all the legions would arrive at Iconium 
within three days. The emperor, a man without guile, readily believed 
their words and answered that he would endure these three days also, 
since he had faith in their promises. On the following night, camp was 
made in the usuai manner, but while all were resting after their labors, 
these treacherous guides secretly fled in the dead of night and left 
the people who had been confided to their faithful care without leaders. 
At length the light of day returned and the time for resuming the 
march approached, but those who usually led the lines could not be 
found. The treachery of the deserters was finally reported to the 
emperor and the chiefs of the army, and their perfidy became known 
to all. 

Moreover, these men of Belial, in order to add to their wickedness 
and heap crime upon crime, hastened to the army of the king of France, 
which was reported to be in the vicinity. There they falsely declared 
that Emperor Conrad, who had gone on ahead under their guidance, 
had been entirely successful and had gained an important victory over 
the enemy. He had seized Iconium by force of arms and had destroyed 
it from the very foundations. 

It seems evident to us that they made this assertion either to induce 
the king to follow the same route and thus fall into the same perils, 
or, possibly, by leading him to believe that Conrad had been entirely 
successful, to prevent him from hurrying to the assistance of his im- 
perilled brethren. It may be, however, that they invented this story 
to avert punishment from themselves. For if they had reported that 
the army had perished, they would have been seized as traitors, since 
it was by their wickedness that the people had rushed to their destruc- 
tion. Whatever their intentions may have been, it 1s certain that it was 
their perfidy which led the betrayed army to descend into that abyss of 
death. 

As soon as the emperor realized that the army was without guides, 





and hunger that they fell an easy prey to the fleet mounted Turks who hovered about 
(Chalandon, Les Comnéne, I, 285-88). 


170 BALDWIN III AND MELISEND 


he called a council of all the chiefs to consider what course of action 
must be taken. An utter lack of harmony was immediately disclosed; 
some declared that they must turn back, while others advised that 
they continue on their way. Well might it have been said of them in 
this crisis, “He poureth contempt upon princes and causeth them to 
wander in the wilderness where there is no way.” #1 

While they were in this state of uncertainty, anxious over their 
ignorance of the country and concerned about the lack of provisions 
(for fodder for the horses and pack animals as well as all kinds of 
food supplies for the troops had entirely given out), there came a report 
that the enemy’s army, a vast multitude of Turks, was near at hand. 
This proved to be true. The Christians were in a sterile wilderness, 
far from all cultivated land; they had been purposely led there, as 
we have said before, by their traitorous guides. They should have 
marched through Lycaonia, which they had left on the right. By this 
route they would have passed through a cultivated land full of all 
kinds of supplies and would have arrived at their destination in far 
less time. Instead, the Greeks led them to the left and forced the 
entire army to turn aside into the wilderness of Cappadocia, far from 
Iconium. 

It was common talk, and probably quite true, that these perilous 
wanderings were devised with the knowledge and at the command 
of the Greek emperor, who has always envied the successful advance 
of the Christians. For it is well known that the Greeks have always 
looked with distrust on all increase of power by the Western nations 
(as they still do), especially by that of the Teutonic nation, as rivals 
of the empire. They take it ill that the king of the Teutons calls him- 
self the emperor of the Romans. For thereby he seems to detract too 
much from the prestige of their own emperor, whom they themselves . 
call monarch, that is, the one who rules supreme over all and there- 
fore is the one and only emperor of the Romans.*? 


42 Ps, 107: 40. 

42 There was some foundation to this theory of jealousy. The inability of the two 
emperors to decide which should call upon the other when Conrad arrived at Con- 
stantinople caused not only embarrassment but actual trouble (see Chalandon, Les* 
Commnéne, Il, 277). 


BALDWIN III AND MELISEND 171 


22. The Turks make a sudden attack upon the Teutonic host; 
the legions are destroyed, but the emperor escapes. 


Durinc this time, the emperor’s army was suffering from hunger, 
from ignorance of the country, from long-continued privations, as well 
as from the difficulties of the roads, the lack of horses, and the burden 
of the baggage. Meanwhile, the Turkish satraps and officers of various 
ranks, well aware of the situation, assembled their forces and made a 
sudden attack upon the Christian camp. This unexpected action threw 
the legions into utter confusion, for they had not foreseen anything of 
the kind. The strength of the Turks lay in their swift horses, which 
had suffered from no lack of food, and in their light equipment of 
bows and arrows. With loud cries, they surrounded the camp and with 
their usual agility fell furiously upon our soldiers, who were retarded 
by their heavy armor. The Christians were superior to the foe in 
strength and practice in arms, yet, weighed down as they were with 
breastplates, greaves, and shields, they could not combat the Turks, 
nor could they pursue them very far from the camp. Their horses 
also, emaciated by hunger and the long marches, were utterly unable 
to gallop hither and yon. The Turks, on the contrary, charged en masse; 
while still at a distance they let fly countless showers of arrows which 
fell like hail upon the horses and their riders and brought death and 
wounds from afar. When the Christians tried to pursue, however, the 
Turks turned and fled upon their swift horses and thus escaped the 
sword of their foes. Our army, hemmed in on all sides, was in mortal 
‘ danger from the constant showers of darts and arrows. They had no 
chance to retaliate or to engage the foe at close quarters, nor could 
they lay hold of the enemy. As often as they tried to make a counter- 
attack, the Turks broke ranks, eluded all their attempts, and galloped 
off in different directions. Then, when the Christians returned to their 
camp, the Turks reconstructed their lines, again surrounded our forces, 
and attacked even more furiously, as if they were besieging a town. 
Thus, by the hidden, though just, purposes of God, the valor of 
these great Christian princes, whose arms and strength, courage and 
numbers had seemed incomparable, suddenly collapsed under the 
pressure of a rather mild warfare. Scarcely a vestige of their former 
glory remained, and merely a remnant of their vast forces. Of seventy 
thousand mailed knights and many companies of foot soldiers, countless 


172 BALDWIN III AND MELISEND 


in number, barely a tenth part escaped, according to the statement of 
those who were on this expedition.*? Some perished by hunger, others 
were cut down by the sword, and still others fell into the hands of the 
enemy as prisoners. The emperor escaped, however, with a few of his 
nobles. After several days, he succeeded with great difficulty in reach- 
ing the vicinity of Nicaea with the remnant of his followers. 

But the victorious Turks, laden with spoils and enriched by count- 
less treasures, with horses and arms even to superabundance, retired 
to their own fortresses. There, since they knew the country well, they 
eagerly awaited the coming of the king of France, for, according to 
report, he had reached practically these same parts. Since they had 
vanquished the superior forces of Emperor Conrad, they hoped even 
more easily to rout the army of the king of France. The result was, 
in fact, as they had anticipated. 

The sultan of Iconium did not participate in this great adventure. 
Because God permitted it, a noble and powerful Turkish satrap called 
Paramus, who commanded the sultan’s troops, accomplished this almost 
unhoped-for feat. The event took place in the month of November, in 
the year of the Incarnation 1146. 


23. The king of the Franks crosses the Hellespont and arrives 
with his host at Nicaea in Bithynia. The two sovereigns con- 
fer with one another. Emperor Conrad returns to Constan- 
tinople. 


Meanwuli e the king of the Franks, following almost the same route 
with his army, had arrived at Constantinople. There he remained for 
a short time. He held several private interviews with the emperor, who 
showed him great honor and, on his departure, presented him with 
bountiful gifts. The nobles of his suite also were treated with marked 
favor. From Constantinople the king passed into Bithynia with all his 
legions. At a point between the royal city and the Black Sea (which 
are distant from each other thirty miles), he crossed the Hellespont. 
Here it is at its narrowest, barely a mile in width. He then marched 
round the Nicomedian gulf which is so named from the adjacent city 
of Nicomedia, capital of Bithynia, and which also forms part of the 

48 William, then eighteen years old, probably talked with some of the survivors 


whom he met later at Jerusalem. His statement of the date of this disaster should be 
corrected to October 26, 1147. The proportion of the losses is probably fairly accurate. 


BALDWIN III AND MELISEND 173 


Bosphorus or Hellespont. In the village of Nicaea, not very far from 
the city itself, the king established his camp until he should determine 
by what route to advance. He made careful inquiries about the em- 
peror of the Romans, who had preceded him, and was told that the 
emperor had lost his army, but that he himself, a wanderer and a 
fugitive, had made his escape with a few of his nobles. At first this 
was merely a doubtful rumor, without trustworthy foundation. As 
time went on, however, it received definite confirmation. For a little 
later Frederick, duke of Swabia,*# came to the army of the king of 
the Franks from the emperor’s camp. He brought full and detailed 
information about the disaster, which up to that time had been known 
merely through vague and unreliable rumors. 

The duke, a young man of admirable qualities, later succeeded his 
uncle, Emperor Conrad, as ruler of the Roman Empire, which he now 
governs with vigor and success. He had come to invite the king to a 
conference with the emperor, that they might consult together, albeit 
too late, over the route to be followed. On hearing of the tragic dis- 
aster which had befallen the emperor and the perils and destruction of 
their brethren, the entire army was moved with righteous indignation 
and pity. The king, deeply stirred by the duke’s report, held counsel 
with his people. Then, under the duke’s escort, he set out with some 
of his nobles to confer with the emperor, whose camp was not far away. 

The two monarchs exchanged the customary salutations with the 
kiss of peace. They then engaged in a friendly conference, during 
which they decided to persevere in the accomplishment of their pur- 
pose and to join their forces for the advance march. Many from both 
hosts, however, and especially from that of the Teutons, disregarded 
their vows and returned to Constantinople. Their travelling money 
was exhausted, and the extreme hardships of the march and the neces- 
sary outlay terrified them. 

After consulting with the chief commanders of both armies, the 
two monarchs abandoned the route which the emperor had previously 
taken on the left and directed the line of march toward Asia Minor. 
On their right were the two Phrygias and behind them Bithynia. They 
marched, now by the inland route, now by the road along the shore, 
with Philadelphia on the left, and came first to Smyrna. From there 


44 This was the future Frederick Barbarossa, king of Germany and emperor of the 
Holy Roman Empire, 1152-1190. 


174 BALDWIN III AND MELISEND 


they proceeded to Ephesus, the capital of Asia Minor, famous for the 
life and preaching of John the Evangelist, and also the place of his 
burial. At Ephesus, the emperor commanded the legions which had 
survived to march back overland. He himself took ship and returned 
to Constantinople. The reasons for this action are unknown; perchance 
he was chagrined over the depleted numbers of the great host which 
he had led forth; perchance he found the arrogance of the Franks un- 
endurable.*> He was received by the emperor with even more marked 
distinction than before and remained at Constantinople with his nobles 
until the beginning of the following spring. The two sovereigns were 
closely united by marriage; for their wives were sisters, daughters of 
the elder Berengar, count of Sulzbach, a great and noble prince, very 
powerful in the kingdom of the Teutons.*® Hence the emperor showed 
Conrad very great favor and, at the special request of the empress, 
lavished gifts upon him and his nobles most liberally. 


24. The king of the Franks proceeds by a different route to 
Ephesus. Here Guy of Ponthieu digs. In spite of the efforts 
of the foe, the Franks cross the river Meander. 


Meranwui e the king of the Franks, much engaged with his nobles 
over preparations for the march, was tarrying at Ephesus to allow his 
army to recuperate. During this time, Count Guy of Ponthieu, a noble 
distinguished for his military skill and prowess, fell ill and died. He 
was buried with all due honor in the vestibule of the church at Ephesus. 
From here the king set out with the whole army and marched with all 
the speed possible toward the east. After a few days’ march he reached 
the fords of the river Meander, beloved of swans. This is the river of 
which our Naso writes in the Heroides: 


So when destiny calls, cast down in the wet grass, 
The white swan sings at the shoals of the Meander.*? 


45 The difference in speech, manners, and customs no doubt caused considerable fric- 
tion. There was also the illness of Conrad. Manuel and his wife had come by ship 
to Ephesus, where Conrad was staying, and invited him to return with them to Con- 
oo where Manuel himself looked after him (Chalandon, Les Comnéne, II, 
308). 

46 Bertha of Sulzbach had been betrothed to Manuel in 1142 before the death of 
Emperor John. Her name was changed to Irene and she was trained in Greek manners 
before her marriage in 1146 (Chalandon, Les Comnéne, Il, 210, 260). 

47 Ovid Her. vil. 1-2. 


BALDWIN III AND MELISEND 175 


Amid the green meadows on the banks of this river the king made his 
camp. Here for the first time, the longing of the Franks to see their 
foe was gratified, for as the Christians tried to approach the river, 
great numbers of. Turks appeared on the opposite bank and prevented 
them from using the water. At last they found the fords, however, and, 
despite the enemy’s efforts, forced a passage across the river and rushed 
upon the Turks. They killed many of them and took numerous pris- 
oners. The rest turned and fled. The victorious Franks at once seized 
the Turkish camp, which was filled with spoils of the richest kind and 
supplies of every description, and by vigorous action made themselves 
masters of the farther bank. Filled with joy over the victory and the 
rich spoils which they had seized, the Christians passed a quiet night 
and, at dawn, prepared to resume the march. 

Thence they advanced to Laodicea, a city of that same locality. Here 
they supplied themselves with provisions for several days, as was their 
custom, and again set forth as with one mind. 


25. The Frankish army suffers a most disastrous defeat. The 
vanguard which had gone on ahead escapes. 


A PRECIPITOUS mountain, very difficult of ascent, blocked the path of 
the advancing army. According to the plan of march, it must be sur- 
mounted that day. It was customary upon this campaign to designate 
each day a certain number of distinguished men to act as leaders—some 
to conduct the advance guard and others to bring up the rear as protec- 
tion for the non-militant throng and especially for the crowd of people 
on foot. On these men also devolved the duty of planning with 
the nobles the route to be followed, the length of the march, and 
the location of the camp for the next day. On this particular day, the 
choice fell, in the order of his turn, upon a certain nobleman from 
Aquitaine named Geoffrey de Rancogne. Accordingly, he went on 
ahead with the standard of the king and ascended the mountain with 
the vanguard. His orders were that the vanguard should make camp 
on the heights. When he reached the summit, however, the greater 
part of the day still remained, and Geoffrey decided, notwithstanding 
his orders, to advance a little farther, for he felt that the march had 
been too short that day. The guides assured him that there was a 
better spot for the camp near by. Accordingly, he went on farther. The 


176 BALDWIN III AND MELISEND 


people who were following the vanguard supposed that the camp was 
to be placed on the summit of the mountain, and, in the belief that 
the day’s march was nearly completed, they began rather carelessly to 
lag behind. Thus the army was divided; some had already crossed the 
ridge, while others were still loitering upon it. The Turks, ever on the 
alert for an opportunity to attack, immediately recognized the situa- 
tion; they were, in fact, ever following alongside the army with this 
very end in view, and from a distance they kept close watch on the 
movements of the Christians. The way was narrow and the ranks were 
separated, because the larger and stronger force had gone on ahead; 
the Turks knew that the situation of the rear ranks could not easily 
become known, nor could help be sent to them in their extremity. They 
took advantage of the favorable opportunity and seized the summit 
of the mountain, so as to cause still greater confusion between our 
van and the rear guard. Then in battle array, they fell upon our forces, 
and before the latter could seize arms the Turks had broken up their 
lines by force. No longer was the fight carried on with bows and 
arrows; it was fought at close quarters with the sword and brought 
death and destruction to the Christians. All who tried to flee were most 
cruelly pursued. Our people were hindered by the narrow defiles, and 
their horses were exhausted by the long marches and the difficulty of 
the roads. In addition, they were hindered by the enormous amount of 
baggage. Yet they resisted as with one accord and with unflinching 
courage fought valiantly on behalf of life and liberty and in defense 
of their companions of the way. They carried on the combat with 
swords and lances and by both words and example cheered each other 
to continued effort. 

The Turks, inspired by the hope of victory, likewise endeavored © 
to animate each other; they called to mind how, only a few days be- 
fore, they had routed a much greater army with less danger and had 
easily triumphed over forces more numerous and far stronger. 

The battle was long fought and of doubtful outcome. Finally, how- 
ever, in punishment for our sins, the infidels conquered. Many Chris- 
tians were killed and large numbers made prisoners; our army was 
reduced to a very few. Many noble and illustrious men perished that 
day, men notable for their military deeds and well worthy of pious 
remembrance. Among the number were the count of Varennes, a man 
preéminent even among great lords, Gauchiers de Montjoy, Evrard 


BALDWIN III AND MELISEND 177 


de Breteuil, Itiers de Meingnac, and many others. Their names we 
do not remember, but we believe that they are written in heaven and 
their memory will be held in benediction forever.*8 

That day the glorious reputation of the Franks was lost through a 
misfortune most fatal and disastrous for the Christians; their valor, 
up to this time formidable to the nations, was crushed to earth. Hence- 
forward it was as a mockery in the eyes of those unclean races to whom 
formerly it had been a terror. 

Why was it, O blessed Lord Jesus, that this people, so devoted to 
Thee, who longed to adore the traces of Thy footprints and to kiss 
the venerated places which Thou hadst consecrated by Thy bodily 
presence, suffered defeat at the hand of those who hated Thee? Truly, 
Thy judgments are as a bottomless pit and there is no one who can 
understand them. For Thou, alone, O Lord, art able to do all things 
and there is no one who can resist Thy will. 


26. The king escapes by chance and joims the advance guard. 
The remnant of the army reaches Attalia and from there 
crosses over into Syria. 


Meranwulte, the king, rather by chance than by his own efforts, 
escaped amid the great peril and confusion. In the silence of midnight, 
without a guide, he climbed the slope of the mountain so often men- 
tioned and, with a few attendants, reached the camp which had been 
placed somewhat farther on. As has been said, the vanguard, follow- 
ing the royal standard, had traversed the narrow passes of the moun- 
tain without difficulty and had established camp without opposition 
in a suitable location. They were utterly unaware of all that had hap- 
pened to the army in their rear. Yet when they found that the arrival 
of the troops was interrupted and great delay ensued, an ominous fore- 
boding of some disaster prevailed, an inkling that all was not as could 
be desired. But when those who had escaped with the king arrived at 
the camp, the sad disaster became known with certainty. Then sorrow 
fell upon the army, and grievous anxiety seized the hearts of all. With 
tremulous voice and tearful sighs, each sought for those most dear to 


48 William’s information about the French army is more complete and accurate 
than about the German army, a portion of which, under the leadership of Otto, 
bishop of Freising, had preceded the French on this road and had likewise met dis- 
aster at this pass. 


178 BALDWIN III AND MELISEND 


him, and when they were found missing, grief was redoubled. The 
camp resounded with lamentations, and the troops were torn with 
anguish. Throughout the entire camp there was not a place which was 
not filled with mourning for friends and household companions. One 
sought his father, another his master. Here a woman was searching 
everywhere for her son, there another for her husband. Those whose 
search was fruitless passed a sleepless night, burdened with anxious 
fear lest the worst had happened to the absent ones. During the night, 
however, there arrived at the camp some of each class. These, rather 
by chance than by their own wisdom, had escaped death by hiding 
among the bushes and rocks or in underground caverns under the pro- 
tection of the kindly darkness. This disaster occurred in January in 
the year of the Incarnation of our Lord 1146.*° 

From this time, there began to be a shortage of bread and all other 
provisions in the camp. Moreover, for many days thereafter, they 
had no market of any kind. But there was an even worse trouble. They 
had no guides to lead them and they were wandering now here, now 
there, without knowledge of the locality. Finally, however, they en- 
tered Pamphylia, over steep mountain passes and through deep valleys, 
and with great difhculty, although without conflict with the enemy, 
succeeded in reaching Attalia, the capital of that district. Attalia lies 
upon the seacoast and is subject to the emperor of Constantinople. It 
possesses very rich fields, which are, nevertheless, of no advantage to 
the townspeople, for they are surrounded by enemies on all sides who 
hinder their cultivation. Therefore, the fertile soil lies fallow, since 
there is no one to work it. Yet the place has many other advantages 
which it offers freely to visitors. It is most delightfully situated, it 
abounds in clear and healthful waters, and it is planted with fruit- 
bearing trees. The grain supply is brought from overseas in ample 
quantities, so that those resorting there are well supplied with the neces- 
saries of life. 

It borders very closely, however, on the land of the enemy, and 
since it was found impossible to endure their continual attacks, it be- 
came tributary to them. Through this connection, Attalia maintains 
trade in necessaries with the enemy. Our soldiers, unacquainted with 
the Greek language, corrupted the name of this city to Satalia. Ac- 
cordingly that entire portion of the sea, from the promontory of Lissi- 


48 This may be a copyist’s error, for the year was 1148. 


BALDWIN III AND MELISEND 179 


dona to the island of Cyprus, is called the Attalic sea and is known in 
common parlance as the Satalian gulf. 

At Attalia the king of the Franks and his people suffered from a 
serious shortage of food brought on by the great number of people 
who had come thither; in fact, the survivors of the army, and above all 
the poor, nearly perished of famine. Here the king left the people 
on foot and with his nobles went on board ship. Isauria and Cilicia were 
passed on the left, and the island of Cyprus on the right. After a 
short sea voyage with favorable winds, they sailed into the mouth of 
the Orontes river, which flows by Antioch, and landed at the place 
which is now called the Port of St. Simeon, near the ancient city of 
Seleucia, ten miles from Antioch.*° 


27. Raymond, prince of Antioch, receives the king of the Franks 
. with great honor at the Port of St. Simeon and conducts him 
to Antioch. Later, however, they are wickedly alienated. 


For many days Raymond, prince of Antioch, had eagerly awaited 
the arrival of the king of the Franks. When he learned that the king 
had landed in his domains, he summoned all the nobles of the land 
and the chief leaders of the people and went out to meet him with 
a chosen escort. He greeted the king with much reverence and con- 
ducted him with great pomp into the city of Antioch, where he was 
met by the clergy and the people. Long before this time—in fact, as 
soon as he heard that Louis was coming—Raymond had conceived the 
idea that by his aid he might be able to enlarge the principality of 
Antioch. With this in mind, therefore, even before the king started 
oh the pilgrimage, the prince had sent to him in France a large store 
of noble gifts and treasures of great price in the hope of winning his 
favor. He also counted greatly on the interest of the queen with the 
lord king, for she had been his inseparable companion on his pilgrimage. 
She was Raymond’s niece, the eldest daughter of Count William of 
Poitou, his brother.*+ 


°° His arrival here is dated March 19, 1148. 

51 This is the famous Eleanor of Aquitaine, prominent in the historv of both France 
and England. Her betrothal to Louis had been brought about largely through the ef- 
forts of Suger, abbot of St. Denis and virtually prime minister of the kingdom. He 
anticipated the death of William X, duke of Aquitaine, without male heir and hoped 
through the marriage to enlarge the kingdom. William X died about the time of the 
marriage. 


180 BALDWIN III AND MELISEND 


As we have said, therefore, Raymond showed the king every atten- 
tion on his arrival. He likewise displayed a similar care for the nobles 
and chief men in the royal retinue and gave them many proofs of his 
great liberality. In short, he outdid all in showing honor to each one 
according to his rank and handled everything with the greatest mag- 
nificence. He felt a lively hope that with the assistance of the king 
and his troops he would be able to subjugate the neighboring cities, 
namely, Aleppo, Shayzar, and several others. Nor would this hope 
have been futile, could he have induced the king and his chief men to 
undertake the work. For the arrival of King Louis had brought such 
fear to our enemies that now they not only distrusted their own strength 
but even despaired of life itself.5? 

Raymond had already more than once approached the king privately 
in regard to the plans which he had in mind. Now he came before 
the members of the king’s suite and his own nobles and explained with 
due formality how his request could be accomplished without difficulty 
and at the same time be of advantage and renown to themselves. The 
king, however, ardently desired to go to Jerusalem to fulfil his vows, 
and his determination was irrevocable. When Raymond found that 
he could not induce the king to join him, his attitude changed. Frus- 
trated in his ambitious designs, he began to hate the king’s ways; he 
openly plotted against him and took means to do him injury. He re- 
solved also to deprive him of his wife, either by force or by secret 
intrigue. The queen readily assented to this design, for she was a 
foolish woman.>* Her conduct before and after this time showed her 
to be, as we have said, far from circumspect. Contrary to her royal 

52 The prestige of the king of the Franks is attested by Qalanisi, who mentions Con- 
rad as though he were merely a noble in the former’s army (see Gibb, Chronicle, pp. 
280-81). 

53 Tt must be borne in mind that, when William wrote this, Eleanor had been long 
separated from Louis VII and had taken her inheritance from Louis of France to 
Henry II of England. Louis and Eleanor were estranged when they returned from 
the crusade. They were of incompatible temperament, socially active and pleasure- 
loving Eleanor contrasting with the pious, almost puritanical Louis. Eleanor was 
thrilled by the elaborate social life of the East, both at Constantinople and at Antioch. 
Whether her indiscretions involved any more than overindulgence in this social life 
may be questioned. It became customary for French writers to place the more sinister 
interpretation upon the matter, so that legends soon circulated about her amours with 
various persons, including even Saladin, who at this time was about ten years of age. 


The sources of William’s information about this matter were obviously French (see 
R.K.J., p. 248, note 3). 


BALDWIN III AND MELISEND 181 


dignity, she disregarded her marriage vows and was unfaithful to 
her husband. 

As soon as the king discovered these plots, he took means to pro- 
vide for his life and safety by anticipating the designs of the prince. 
By the advice of his chief nobles, he hastened his departure and secretly 
left Antioch with his people. Thus the splendid aspect of his affairs 
was completely changed, and the end was quite unlike the beginning. 
His coming had been attended with pomp and glory; but fortune 
is fickle, and his departure was ignominious. 

Some people attribute this outcome to the king’s own base conduct. 
They maintain that he received his just deserts because he did not 
accede to the request of a great prince from whom he and his followers 
had received kind treatment. This is of especial interest, because these 
persons constantly affirm that if the king would have devoted himself 
to that work, one or more of the above-named cities might easily have 
been taken. 


28. The winter being over, Emperor Conrad arrives in Syria by 
sea. Count Alphonse also lands at the city of Acre. He dies 
at Caesarea. 


Emperor Conrap passed the winter in the royal city. He was treated 
with the utmost courtesy by the emperor of Constantinople, as befitted 
so great a prince, and on his departure received many and splendid 
gifts. Attended by his escort of nobles, he set sail for the East in a fleet 
which was provided by his imperial highness and landed at the port 
of Acre. From there he went on to Jerusalem. King Baldwin and 
Fulcher, patriarch of precious memory, accompanied by the clergy and 
the entire people, met him outside the city and, to the sound of hymns 
and chants, conducted him into Jerusalem.** 

About that same time there also landed at the port of Acre a splendid 
and illustrious man, Alphonse, count of Toulouse.®* He was a son of 
the elder Count Raymond, that great leader who rendered such im- 
portant service on the first expedition. Alphonse was eminent because 
of his own worth but still more so because of the precious memory 
left by his father. While on his way to Jerusalem to give thanks for 


54 Conrad arrived in Jerusalem about the second week in April, 1148. 
55 See Book X, note 54. 


182 BALDWIN III AND MELISEND 


the successful accomplishment of his pilgrimage, he stopped at the 
coast city of Caesarea. A few days after reaching there, however, he 
fell sick and died. It was rumored that he was poisoned, but the author 
of the fell crime was not discovered. The arrival of this man of famous 
memory had been anticipated with eagerness by the entire people, for 
it was hoped that he would bring to the kingdom the happy and 
- prosperous omens of his father. 


29. The king of the Franks leaves Antioch and proceeds to 


Jerusalem. The patriarch of Jerusalem is sent to meet him. 


MEANWHILE, news was received at Jerusalem that the king of the 
Franks had left Antioch and was approaching the land of Tripoli. 
The nobles at once unanimously resolved to send Fulcher, patriarch 
of Jerusalem of precious memory, to invite the king with fitting words 
and salutary counsel to visit the kingdom. For it was feared that the 
prince of Antioch might become reconciled to him and call him back 
or that he might be detained by the count of Tripoli, his kinsman. In 
either case, the desires of the people of Jerusalem would be hindered. 

The possessions of the Latins in the East were divided into four 
principalities. The first to the south was the kingdom of Jerusalem, 
which began at the brook between Jubail and Beirut, martime cities of 
the province of Phoenicia, and ended at the desert which is beyond 
Daron. The second toward the north was the county of Tripoli, which 
began at the rivulet just mentioned and extended to another stream 
between Maraclea and Valenia, likewise maritime cities. The third was 
the principality of Antioch. This began at the last-named rivulet and 
extended toward the west to Tarsus in Cilicia. The county of Edessa, 
the fourth division, began at the forest called Marrim and extended 
out toward the east beyond the Euphrates. 

From the first, the great and powerful lords of these countries had 
cherished the hope that through the valiant assistance of these sover- 
eigns who were coming they might be able to enlarge their own terri- 
tories and extend their boundaries immensely. All had powerful ene- 
mies whose hated cities, so near their own territories, they longed to 
add to their own domains. All were anxious over their own affairs and 
eager to extend their lands. Accordingly, each one, intent on anticipat- 
ing the others, sent messengers with gifts and invitations to the two 
monarchs. Of these, the hopes of the king and people of Jerusalem 


BALDWIN III AND MELISEND 183 


seemed most likely to be realized. Love and reverent devotion for the 
holy places naturally drew all thither; moreover, the emperor was 
now with them. There was reason to believe that the king of the Franks 
would also hasten thither, both to accomplish his pilgrimage and to 
offer his prayers, and also that he might engage in some work for the 
advancement of Christianity, as decided by common counsel. 

The chief men of the realm greatly feared that the king might be 
detained in the vicinity of Aleppo by the prince, to whom he was 
closely bound by the ties of marriage and affection, a contingency which 
seemed quite probable. They feared also that the queen might in- 
tervene. They therefore sent the patriarch to meet him. 

When they learned, however, that the king and the prince had 
parted with far from friendly feelings, they felt increased hope that 
he would leave there without delay and come to Jerusalem. Yet to 
guard against the tricks of fortune and to anticipate anything that 
might happen, they sent the venerable patriarch to use his influence 
with the king. Nor was this hope in vain; the king was persuaded by 
Fulcher’s words and proceeded at once to Jerusalem.*® All the clergy 
and people went out to meet him on his arrival. With all due honor 
and ceremony he was welcomed to the city and, to the accompaniment 
of hymns and chants, was led with his nobles to the venerable places. 

When at last his prayers had been accomplished according to custom, 
a general court was proclaimed at the city of Acre to consider the 
results of this great pilgrimage, the completion of such great labors, 
and also the enlargement of the realm. On the appointed day they 
assembled at Acre, as had been arranged. Then, together with the 
nobles of the realm who possessed an accurate knowledge of affairs 
and places, they entered into a careful consideration as to what plan 
was most expedient. 


56 William’s clear analysis reveals one of the great weaknesses of the Latin East, 
but William apparently does not condemn the rivalry so long as Jerusalem gains by it. 


HERE ENDS THE SIXTEENTH BOOK 


HERE BEGINS THE SEVENTEENTH BOOK 


THE CAPTURE OF ASCALON OFFSETS THE 
FAILURE OF THE SECOND CRUSADE 


1. A general council is held at the city of Acre on the coast. 
The names of the princes who attended are given. 


Ir seems well worth while and quite in harmony with the present his- 
tory that the names of the nobles who were present at the council just 
mentioned, men who had come from lands of great importance, should 
be recorded here for the benefit of posterity. Foremost among these 
was the famous Conrad, king of the Teutons and emperor of the 
Romans. He was accompanied by the following ecclesiastical nobles 
of his court: Otto, bishop of Freising, his brother, a man of letters; * 
Stephen, bishop of Metz; and Henry, bishop of Toul, brother of Count 
Thierry of Flanders. Theotwin, bishop of Porto, the papal legate, a 
Teuton by birth, also accompanied the emperor’s train by command of 
Pope Eugenius. 

Among the secular princes present were Henry, duke of Austria, 
the emperor’s brother; Duke Guelf, a distinguished and powerful 
noble; and Frederick, the illustrious duke of the Swabians and Vin- 
delicians [probably Bavarians], son of the emperor’s eldest brother. 
The last-named prince was a young man of remarkable character who 
later succeeded his uncle Conrad and now rules the Roman Empire 
with vigor and courage. There were present also Hermann, margrave 
of Verona; Berthold of Andechs, later duke of Bavaria; [the elder] 
William, margrave of Montferrat, the emperor’s brother-in-law; and 
Guy, count of Blandras, whose wife was the sister of the margrave just 
named. The two nobles last mentioned, both great and distinguished 


1 Otto, bishop of Freising, the great German historian of the twelfth century, was 
a half brother of Conrad III. Their mother, widow of Conrad’s father, married the 
duke of Austria. Otto, one of the younger members of a very large family, had been 
destined for an ecclesiastical career. When he finished his studies at Paris he was con- 
verted to the monastic life and entered the new Cistercian order. He became an abbot 
and later was chosen bishop. He accompanied Conrad on the crusade and was in 
charge of one of the detachments on the march across Asia Minor. His account of the 
crusade, however, is very meager, consisting chiefly of incidental mention in his two 
chief historical works, the Chronicle and the Deeds of Frederick I. 


CAPTURE OF ASCALON 185 


princes, were from Lombardy. Other noted men of high rank, whose 
names and titles we do not recall, also attended.” 

Louis, most pious king of the Franks, of famous memory in the 
Lord, was also present. With him were Godfrey, bishop of Langres; 
Arnulf, bishop of Lisieux; Guy of Florence, cardinal-priest of the 
church of Rome, with title St. Chrysogonus, the legate of the apostolic 
see; Robert, count of Perche, the king’s brother; and Henry, count of 
Troyes, son of the elder Count Theobald and also son-in-law of the 
king, a young man of fine character. With the king also were Thierry, 
the magnificent count of Flanders, brother-in-law of the king of Jeru- 
salem; and Ives de Nesle from Soissons, a wise and loyal man. Many 
other important nobles of high rank were also present. All are worthy 
of remembrance, but since it would take too long to record them here, 
their names are intentionally omitted.® 

From our own lands there were present Baldwin, king of Jerusalem, 
a youth of great promise, and his mother, a wise and circumspect 
woman, strong of heart and not inferior in wisdom to any prince what- 
soever. They were accompanied by the Patriarch Fulcher; Baldwin, 
archbishop of Caesarea; Robert, archbishop of Nazareth; Rorgo, 
bishop of Acre; Bernard, bishop of Sidon; William, bishop of Beirut 
Adam, bishop of Banyas; Gerald, bishop of Bethlehem; Robert, master 
of the Knights of the Temple; and Raymond, master of the Hospital.* 

Among the lay nobles were: Manasses, the royal constable; Philip 
of Nablus; Elinandus of Tiberias; Gerard of Sidon; Walter of Caes- 
area; Payens, lord of the country which lies beyond the Jordan; the 
elder Balian; Humphrey of Toron; Guy of Beirut, and many others. 
To name each one individually would take far too long. All these great 


? William’s list of the German dignitaries is, as he confesses, not complete. The 
“Blandras” is probably Biandrate in Italy. Réhricht has added many names to this list 
(see R. Réhricht, Die Deutschen im Heiligen Land, pp. 27-41, and Geschichte des 
Kénigreichs Jerusalem, 1100-1291, Pp. 249). 

3 The author’s greater familiarity with the French is here definitely stated. It is 
also evident in the greater amount and accuracy of his information about them. This 
fact led to the belief that he had used a French source, the Gesta Ludovici, for his 
information. The conclusion of the scholars’ debate on this question, however, is that 
the Gesta Ludovici derived this portion of its chronicle from William’s account (see 
Introduction, note 4). 

* The archbishop of Tyre is missing from this nearly complete list of the prelates 
of Jerusalem. Ralph, the royal chancellor, who claimed the office, had not been con- 
firmed by the pope. It is not improbable that William, then a theological student 
about eighteen years old, was himself present at Acre. It is unfortunate that he did 
not report more of the discussion at the council in light of the later events. 


186 CAPTURE OF ASCALON 


men had assembled, as we have said, at the city of Acre for the pur- 
pose of considering, first of all, the best time and place when, by the 
will of God, they might endeavor to enlarge the kingdom and add 
to the glory of the Christian name. 


2. They decide to lay siege to the city of Damascus and march 
thither as agreed upon. 


AccorDINGLY, the matter was thoroughly discussed. Various opinions 
of diverse factions were offered and arguments pro and con presented, 
as is customary in matters of such importance. At last it was agreed by 
all that under the circumstances it would be best to besiege Damascus, 
a city of great menace to us. When this decision was finally reached, 
the herald was ordered to proclaim that upon the appointed day all 
with one accord must be ready to lead their troops to those parts. Ac- 
cordingly, the entire military strength of the realm, both cavalry and 
infantry, natives and pilgrims alike, was mustered. The two great 
sovereigns, beloved of God, also arrived with their forces. Then, on 
the twenty-fifth day of May, in the year 1147 of the Incarnation of 
our Lord, led by the Cross of Salvation, the united armies proceeded, 
as had been arranged, to the city of Tiberias.® Thence, the entire host 
was conducted by the shortest route along the sea of Galilee to Banyas, 
which is Caesarea Philippi. Here the leaders conferred with persons 
well acquainted with the situation of Damascus and the adjacent coun- 
try. Then, after consulting with their own leading men, they decided 
that the best way to blockade Damascus was first of all to take the 
orchards which surrounded the greater part of the city and afforded 
it much protection. When these had been seized the city itself could 
undoubtedly be easily taken. 

In pursuance of this plan, therefore, they resumed the march. Cross- 
ing famous Mt. Lebanon which lies between Caesarea Philippi and 
Damascus, they descended into the plain at the village of Daria, four 
ar five miles from the city. From this place the metropolis and the 
surrounding plain could be easily seen. 


® The year should, of course, be 1148. It is not certain whether this is merely z, 
copyist’s error or a mistake in William’s chronology. 


CAPTURE OF ASCALON 187 


3. The situation of Damascus is described. 


Damascus is the largest city of Lesser Syria, sometimes called also the 
Phoenicia of Lebanon. It is also the metropolis of that region, for, as 
we read, “the head of Syria is Damascus.” ° The name of the city is 
derived from its reputed founder, a servant of Abraham, and is, being 
interpreted, the bloody city or the city full of blood. It lies in a plain 
which is arid and sterile except as it is irrigated by ancient canals which 
bring the water from above for its benefit. From a neighboring moun- 
tain ridge in the upper part of that region, a river descends and is re- 
ceived in canals, whence its waters can be led at will through the plain 
and distributed over the various parts of the lands below to fertilize 
the sterile soil. Since the supply is very abundant, the river also waters 
the orchards on both banks, which are planted with fruit trees, and 
then continues on its course past the eastern wall of the city. 

At Daria, since the city was now so near, the sovereigns drew up 
their forces in battle formation and assigned the legions to their proper 
places in the order of march. For, if they advanced without method, 
quarrels might arise which would hinder the work before them. 

Because of its supposed familiarity with the country, the division 
led by the king of Jerusalem was, by the common decision of the 
princes, directed to lead the way and open a path for the legions fol- 
lowing. To the king of the Franks and his army was assigned the 
second place or center, that they might aid those ahead if need arose. 
By the same authority, the emperor was to hold the third or rear posi- 
tion, in readiness to resist the enemy if, perchance, an attack should be 
made from behind, and thus to guard the troops ahead from surprise 
in the rear. When the three armies had been arranged in this strategic 
order, they moved the camp forward and endeavored to approach close 
to the city. 

On the west, the direction from which our army was approaching, 
and also on the north, the orchards stretched out five miles or more in 
the direction of Lebanon and, like a dense, gloomy forest, encircled 
the city far and wide. To indicate the limits of each orchard and also 
to prevent trespassers entering at will, these groves are enclosed by 
walls of mud, for stone is scarce in that region. These enclose and pro- 
tect the orchards in such a way that the holding of each owner is clearly 


8Ts. 7:8. 


188 CAPTURE OF ASCALON 


defined. Paths and public ways are left free, narrow to be sure, yet 
wide enough to allow the gardeners and caretakers to pass through 
them with the pack animals which carry the fruit to the city. 

These orchards are of the greatest protection to the city. The vast 
number of trees planted close together and the narrow paths made it 
diffcult—in fact, well nigh impossible—for anyone to approach Da- 
mascus from that side. Yet, from the very first, our leaders had de- 
termined to lead the army through the orchards and in this way open 
an approach to the city. There were two reasons for this: first, because 
after the most strongly fortified places on which the people of Damascus 
placed their greatest hope had been taken, all else would seem light 
and easily accomplished; secondly, because they wished to give the 
troops the benefit of the fruit and the water. 

The king of Jerusalem, accordingly, was the first to lead his men 
through those narrow orchard paths. The army advanced with extreme 
difficulty, however, sometimes hindered by the narrow ways and again 
harassed by the wiles of the enemy who lay hidden in the copses. Oc- 
casionally, it was even necessary to engage in open conflict, for the foe 
had already blocked the approach and seized the winding paths. The 
people of the city had come out into the orchards as with one accord, 
that they might try to stop the passage of the army, both from cover 
and by open attack. 

Within the orchards themselves, moreover, rose high buildings well 
defended by men whose possessions lay close by and who were de- 
termined to fight for them. From these vantage points they kept up 
a constant downpour of arrows and other missiles which effectually 
protected the gardens and prevented all approach. Arrows shot from 
a distance also made the public thoroughfares very unsafe for travel. 
Nor did these formidable measures against our advance proceed from 
one part of the gardens only; from every direction there was equal 
danger for any incautious passer-by. Peril of instant death from an- 
other source was also to be feared. Along the wall inside lurked men 
armed with lances who, themselves unseen, could look out through 
small peepholes carefully arranged in the walls and stab the passer-by 
from the side. It is said that many perished miserably in this way that 
day. Innumerable other dangers of various kinds also beset all who 
tried to traverse those narrow ways. 


CAPTURE OF ASCALON 189 


4. The Christians force their way into the orchards and, m 
spite of the enemy’s efforts, take possession of the river with 
a strong hand. A remarkable feat of the emperor, well 
worthy of wonder, is described. 


Tue Christians, well aware of the situation, pressed on all the more 
fiercely. They broke down the barricades by force and eagerly took 
possession of the orchards. All persons found within the enclosures or 
in the houses there were either put to the sword or taken captive. On 
learning this, the townspeople who had come out to help defend the 
orchards departed in terror lest the same fate should overtake them 
and fled to the city in crowds. So, since the enemy had been either 
routed or slain, our troops entered without further opposition. 

It was realized that the Christians would presently advance from 
the orchards to besiege the city. Accordingly, the cavalry forces of 
Damascus and of their allies who had come to help them hastened to 
the river which flows by the city. By using their bows and ballistae they 
hoped to keep the weary soldiers from the river and to prevent them 
from relieving their intense thirst by means of its eagerly desired 
waters. On hearing that the river was so near, the Christians had, in- 
deed, hurried thither, intent on satisfying the cruel thirst which their 
strenuous labors and the clouds of dust raised by the feet of horses 
and men had induced. The sight of the large forces massed on the river 
bank caused them to halt for a little. Soon, however, they rallied. 
Necessity furnished them courage and boldness; once and again they 
strove to gain the river but without success. 

While the king and his knights were exerting themselves thus to no 
purpose, the emperor, in command of the forces following, demanded 
to know why the army did not advance. He was told that the enemy 
was in possession of the river and would not allow our forces to pass. 
Enraged at this news, Conrad with his knights galloped swiftly for- 
ward through the king’s lines and reached the fighters who were try- 
ing to win the river. Here all leaped down from their horses and 
became foot soldiers, as is the custom of the Teutons when a desperate 
crisis occurs. Holding their shields before them, they engaged the 
enemy in a hand-to-hand fight with swords. The Damascenes at first 
resisted bravely, but soon, unable to sustain the onslaught, they aban- 
doned the river and fled to the city with all possible haste. 


190 CAPTURE OF ASCALON 


During this engagement, the emperor is reported to have performed 
a memorable feat. He is said to have slain in a most remarkable way a 
Turkish knight who was making a strenuous and courageous resistance. 
With one blow of the sword, he severed from the body of his enemy 
the head and neck, the left shoulder with the arm attached, and also 
a part of the side. This indeed caused such terror, not only to those 
citizens who witnessed the feat but even to those who merely heard 
the story from others, that they lost all hope of resisting and despaired 
even of life itself.’ 


5. The citizens, in their despair, meditate flight. They bribe 
some of the Christian leaders, at whose instigation the army 
ts transferred to the opposite side of the city. 


So the river was won and the bank freely conceded. The Christians 
now encamped in widespread ranks around the city and, without oppo- 
sition, enjoyed at pleasure the river and the orchards thus won by 
force. The citizens were overwhelmed with astonishment at the num- 
ber and valor of the Christians. They began to doubt whether their 
strength was sufficient to withstand them, and in terror lest their foes 
should suddenly fall upon them, they took counsel together and, with 
that cleverness which ever attends those in adverse and distressing 
circumstances, resorted to desperate measures. With tall beams of im- 
mense size they barricaded all the streets on the side of the city where 
our camp was located, for their only hope lay in the chance that they 
might escape in the opposite direction with their wives and children, 
while the Christians were engaged in tearing down these barriers. 

To all appearance it seemed certain that, if divine power was pro- 
pitious, the city would soon be taken by the Christians. But He, who 
is “terrible in his doing toward the children of men,” ® judged other- 
wise. The city was in desperate straits, her citizens had lost all hope 
of resistance and were preparing to leave with all their effects in the 
hope of saving their lives. At this crisis, however, in punishment for 


* This feat recalls the similar feat of Godfrey at the siege of Antioch. Both appear 
legendary. Qalanisi, who was in Damascus during the siege, heard nothing of it (see 
H. A. R. Gibb, trans., The Damascus Chronicle, p. 283). Rohricht, however, is dis- 
posed to accept it, regarding the feat as another example of the proverbial “Schwaben- 
streich” (see R. A. J., p. 252, note 1). 

5 Ps. 66: 5. 


CAPTURE OF ASCALON 1gI 


our sins, the Damascenes began to work upon the cupidity of some of 
our people. By offering inducements, they attempted to capture the 
hearts of those whose bodily strength they could not hope to overcome. 
Skilful arguments led certain of our nobles to assume the role of the 
traitor Judas and induced them, on assurance of receiving a great sum 
of money already collected, to endeavor to raise the siege. Led on by 
avarice, the root of all evil, these men allowed themselves to be so 
corrupted by bribes and promises that they descended into the depths 
of crime. Their wicked suggestions persuaded the king and the pilgrim 
princes, who fully relied upon their loyalty and assiduity, to leave the 
orchards and move the armies to the opposite side of the city. In order 
to conceal their guilt under some plausible pretext, they said that on 
the opposite side of the city which faced south and east there were 
no protecting orchards and neither river nor moat to hinder the ap- 
proach to the fortifications. The low wall, built of unbaked bricks, they 
declared, could scarcely sustain the first attack. There would be little 
need of machines or strenuous efforts on that side, for the wall would 
fall at the first attempt and it would not be difficult to force a passage 
into the city. Their sole purpose in presenting these arguments was 
to cause the removal of the army from its present position, for here 
the city was particularly hard pressed and powerless to hold out, while 
on the other side the siege could not possibly be long maintained. This 
specious talk was believed by the kings and all the principal leaders 
of the united host. The position which had been won with great toil 
and loss of men was abandoned, and under the direction of the traitors 
all the legions were moved, and camp was established on the opposite 
side of the city. 

They soon perceived, however, that this position was far away from 
the abundant fruit and the convenient supply of water, and as food 
was already beginning to fail they realized that treachery had been at 
work. Then, all too late, they began to murmur that they had been 
maliciously induced to move from that most advantageous position.® 

° This maneuver as here described does little credit to the intelligence of the leaders 
of the expedition. None of the Arab writers mention such a shift of the Christian 
camp. Qalanisi, the best authority on the siege, gives a day-by-day description of the 
battles from Saturday to Thursday with a statement of the location. According to 
him, the Christians remained in the same general area until the day when they with- 


drew from the siege entirely (Gibb, CArovicle, pp. 282-87). Stevenson has refused 
to accept William’s statement about the change. 


192 CAPTURE OF ASCALON 


6. Food fails in the Christian camp. The wickedness of the 
traitors is revealed. The siege is raised and our people re- 
turn home. 


Foop now began to fail in the camp. Before setting out on the cam- 
paign, the Christians had been led to believe that the city would be 
taken without delay, and hence supplies for a few days only had been 
brought. This was especially the case with the pilgrims, and for it they 
could not be blamed, since they had no knowledge of the country. They 
had been persuaded to believe that Damascus would be easily taken at 
the first attack; in the meantime, even if all other food should be lack- 
ing, they had been assured that a vast army could be fed on the fruit 
which could be had for nothing. Great doubt and perplexity assailed 
the Christians in this emergency. Consultations were held openly and 
in private as to what course should be taken. To return to the position 
they had left seemed difficult, in fact, impossible. For as soon as the 
Christians departed, the enemy, their end accomplished, immediately 
entered in and established even stronger defenses than before. The 
roads by which the Christians had previously entered were now barri- 
caded with immense beams and heavy masses of rocks, and a large 
body of archers, located there, now prevented all possibility of entrance. 
On the other hand, to make the attack from the present position of the 
camp would require some delay, a matter which the inadequacy of the 
food supply would not permit. 

The pilgrim princes therefore took counsel with one another. All 
too clearly they now perceived the treachery of those to whose loyalty 
they had entrusted their lives and interests and abhorred the perfidy 
by which they had been deceived. Convinced that their undertaking 
had no chance of success, they determined to abandon it and return 
home. Thus, because of our sins, the kings and princes who had 
gathered in untold numbers were compelled to retreat without ac- 
complishing their purpose. Covered with confusion and fear, they 
returned to the kingdom over the same road by which they had come. 
Henceforward, as long as they remained in the Orient, and, indeed, 
ever after, they looked askance on all the ways of our leaders. They 
justly declined all their plans as treacherous and showed utter indiffer- 
ence about the affairs of the kingdom. Even when permitted to return 
to their own lands, the memory of the wrongs which they had suffered 


CAPTURE OF ASCALON 193 


still rankled, and they regarded with abhorrence the wicked conduct 
of those nobles. Not only was this true in regard to themselves, but 
their influence caused others who had not been present there to slacken 
in love toward the kingdom. As a result, fewer people, and those less 
fervent in spirit, undertook this pilgrimage thereafter. Moreover, even 
to the present day, those who do come fear lest they be caught in the 
same toils and hence make as short a stay as possible. 


7. Various opinions are expressed as to the responsibility for this 
great treachery. It is proposed to lay siege to Ascalon a second 
time, but the attempt is unsuccessful. 


I recat that I have often interviewed wise men and those whose 
memory of those times is still fresh, particularly with a view to using 
the information thus obtained in the present history.1° I endeavored to 
learn the reason for this great wrong; who were the instigators of such 
treachery; and how so detestable a crime could have been carried 
through. I found that the reports vary greatly in regard to this matter. 
Some think that a certain act of the count of Flanders was responsible ; 
for, as has been said, he was with the army on this expedition.’ After 
our legions arrived before Damascus, when the orchards and the river 
had already been seized by force and the city lay under siege, he is said 
to have approached each of the kings separately, one after another, and 
urgently demanded that the city when taken be given to him. It is said 
that this was granted. Although some of the great lords of our realm 
gave their consent, yet others, on hearing of it, were indignant. They 
resented the fact that this great prince, whose own possessions should 


10 William here reveals one of his favorite methods of obtaining information. Note 
his unwillingness to accept one account alone or even to indicate a strong personal 
preference. The failure of this crusade was a great blow to the expectations which 
Europe had entertained for it, not only because it was led by two great monarchs, 
but even more because it had been sponsored by Bernard of Clairvaux, who was already 
widely regarded as a saint. Only treachery would satisfy the latter’s many friends 
as the explanation of the failure. William apparently shared the feeling (see E. Va- 
candard, Vie de Saint Bernard, abbé de Clairvaux). 

11 Theodore, or Thierry, of Flanders visited the Holy Land at least three times 
(1137, 1148, and 1157), each time accompanied by a considerable force which did 
some fighting for the Latin states. Perhaps this led to the impression that he desired 
to gain territory there for himself. His wife, Sibylla, it must be remembered, was a 
daughter of King Fulk and therefore half sister of young Baldwin III. According 
to Robert of Torigni, she ultimately entered a convent in the Holy Land. There is 
no real basis for the charge here made. It does however reflect a chronic suspicion 
which the Latin nobles in the East felt toward the nobles from the West. 


194 CAPTURE OF ASCALON 


have sufhced for him and who was seemingly fighting without recom- 
pense for the glory of the Lord, insisted that so large a portion of the 
kingdom be given to him. They themselves were hoping that whatever 
increase accrued to the realm through the valiant efforts of these princes 
might be used to enlarge their own possessions. Actuated by resent- 
ment, therefore, they stooped to this wicked course, for they preferred 
that the Damascenes should keep their city rather than to see it given 
to the count. It seemed utterly unjust that they who had endured un- 
told privations and whose lives had been spent in fighting for the king- 
dom should now be passed over without hope of reward, while others 
who had only recently come should gather in the fruits which they 
themselves had earned by long-continued labor. 

Others say that the prince of Antioch used all his influence to cause 
the king’s enterprise to fail. He was incensed because the latter had 
parted from him in anger and, despite many kindnesses, had not as- 
sisted him in any way. Accordingly, he prevailed on some of the nobles 
in the army to manage affairs in such a way that the king was com- 
pelled to abandon the project and retire ingloriously. 

Still other stories are to the effect that nothing happened except that 
the enemy bribed certain persons by a vast sum of money to bring 
about this great disaster. They still speak of it as marvellous that after- 
wards all this money so wickedly obtained was found to be spurious 
and utterly worthless.?? 

Thus opinions differed as to the responsibility for this detestable 
act, but I have been unable to obtain definite information on the sub- 
ject. Whoever the guilty ones are, however, they may be sure that 
in due time they will obtain the reward which they justly deserve, un- 
less, indeed, they seek forgiveness, when God, in His gracious mercy, 
may grant them pardon.18 


1° This charge also appears somewhat legendary. Two later Syrian writers claimed 
that Elinandus or Helinandus of Tiberias was the guilty person, and that the fifty 
thousand gold pieces which he received from Damascus were later found to be spurious. 
It must be put to William’s credit that he refused to attach any name to the charge. 

18 The charge of treachery for the failure of the siege of Damascus and of the 
Second Crusade was also made by later writers against the Hospitallers, the Templars, 
and even Baldwin III, none of whom William includes in his list. One or two. very 
important facts have been regularly overlooked in the discussion. The army that be- 
sieged Damascus was not a very large one, probably no larger than the one which 
had attempted the same task twenty years before. There were more and greater names 
in the army, each betokening a large following in the West, but not here, because 
most of the leaders had come by boat from Attalia or other ports of Asia Minor, 


CAPTURE OF ASCALON 195 


Thus it was, as has been related, that our people returned without 
glory. The Damascenes rejoiced in their departure, for fear of the 
Christians had lain heavy upon them. As for our people, on the con- 
trary, “my harp also is turned to mourning, and my organ into the voice 
of them that weep.” 1 

On returning to the kingdom, the kings again called an assembly of 
the nobles and tried, but in vain, to arrange for undertaking some 
other work which would render their memory glorious in the eyes of 
posterity. It was suggested by some that they lay siege to Ascalon, 
which was still in the hands of the infidels. Since this city lay nearly in 
the center of the kingdom, everything necessary could easily be trans- 
ported thither and it would be a short and easy task, they maintained, 
to restore it to the Christian faith. Many similar proposals were made, 
but each was abandoned as the first had been, and almost before it was 
conceived it was rejected. For the Lord in His wrath seemed to render 
all their undertakings of no avail. 


8. The Emperor Conrad returns to his own land, but the king 
of the Franks tarries in Syria. 


Tue Emperor Conrad now perceived that the Lord had withdrawn 
his favor from him and had denied him the privilege of taking further 
part in the affairs of the kingdom. He therefore ordered his ships to 
be made ready, said farewell, and returned to his own realm. Within a 
few years after this, he died at Bamberg and was there buried with 
much magnificence in the great church. He was a man of fine appear- 
ance, ptous and merciful, distinguished for his lofty spirit and for his 
wide experience in military affairs. His life and character were ex- 
emplary in every respect, and his memory is held in benediction.’” 
Frederick, the illustrious duke of Swabia, who had been the in- 


while their less fortunate followers had to follow the land route and were cut down 
by famine, thirst, and Turks. The army which besieged Damascus, therefore, con- 
sisted of too many officers and not enough troops. Qalanisi adds a factor which un- 
doubtedly also played its part, namely, that Muslims summoned by letter were arriving 
in constantly increasing numbers and Nureddin himself was on the way to relieve 
Damascus, This news discouraged the Christians (see B. Kugler, Studien zur Geschichte 
des zweitten Kreuzzugs, p. 200; F. Lundgreen, Wilhelm von Tyrus und der Tem- 
plerorden, p. 84). 

14 Job 30: 31. 

19 Conrad III died in 1152 and was succeeded, as William states, by his nephew 
Frederick I, Barbarossa, who ruled until 1190. 


196 CAPTURE OF ASCALON 


separable companion of the emperor on his pilgrimage, suceeded him 
on the throne. He was a young man of fine character, the son of Con- 
rad’s eldest brother, and he it is who today rules the empire with vigor 
and success. 

The king of the Franks passed a year among us. Then, at the time of 
the spring crossing, after celebrating Easter at Jerusalem, he returned 
to his own land with his wife and nobles. On his arrival there, remem- 
bering the wrongs which he had suffered from his wife on the journey 
and, in fact, during the entire pilgrimage, he decided to put her away. 
An annulment was solemnly granted in the presence of the bishops of 
his realm on the ground of blood relationship.*® Immediately, without 
lapse of time, and even before she returned to Aquitaine, her paternal 
inheritance, she was taken to wife by Henry, duke of Normandy and 
count of Anjou. Shortly after the marriage, Henry succeeded Stephen, 
king of the Angles, who died without male children. 

The king of the Franks, happier in his second choice, then espoused 
Maria, daughter of the emperor of Spain, a maiden pleasing to God 
and highly esteemed for her saintly life and character.1” 


9. Nureddin invades the land of Antioch; Prince Raymond at- 
tacks him; a battle ensues; Raymond is slain. 


From this time, the condition of the Latins in the East became visibly 
worse. Our enemies saw that the labors of our most powerful kings 
and leaders had been fruitless and all their efforts vain; they mocked 
at the shattered strength and broken glory of those who represented 
the substantial foundations of the Christians. With impunity they had 
scorned the actual presence of those whose very names had formerly 
terrified them. Hence their presumption and boldness rose to such 


16 Louis VII returned to France in the summer of 1149. Suger, abbot of St. Denis, 
who had originally arranged the marriage, sought to prevent the separation of the 
estranged couple and was successful up to the time of his death in 1151. At the be- 
ginning of spring in 1152, however, Louis had the marriage declared void on the 
grounds of consanguinity. Eleanor was so much sought by ambitious suitors that she 
had to flee to avoid being captured. She selected Henry of Anjou as her husband and 
was married to him little more than a month after the annulment. He became king 
of England in 1154 and, with Eleanor’s inheritance, ruled over half of France as well. 

17 Her name was Constance, not Maria. She was the daughter of Alfonso VII, who 
is distinguished among the rulers of Castile and Leon as the “emperor.” He was crowned 
“emperor in Spain” in 1135 in the presence of many Spanish princes, both Christian 
and Muslim. The title had been claimed by other earlier rulers and its memory lin- 
gered on after his time, but Alfonso VII is the one with whom the title is peculiarly 
associated (see R. B. Merriman, The Rise of the Spanish Empire, 1, 89-91). 


CAPTURE OF ASCALON 197 


heights that they no longer feared the Christian forces and did not 
hesitate to attack them with unwonted vigor. Immediately after the 
departure of the two sovereigns, Nureddin, the son of Zangi who was 
mentioned above, mustered a vast army from all over the Orient and 
began to devastate the country around Antioch with unusual boldness. 
Perceiving that the land of the Latin princes was destitute of aid, he 
decided to invest the fortress called Neva.!® Reliable news of this 
movement was brought to Raymond, prince of Antioch. Without wait- 
ing for the escort of his cavalry which he had ordered to be called, he 
at once hurried rashly to the place with a few men, for he was a man 
of undaunted and impetuous courage who allowed himself to be ruled 
by the advice of no one in matters of this kind. He found Nureddin 
still intent on the siege of the castle named above. 

When Nureddin heard that the prince was coming, he hesitated to 
wait and encounter him, for he feared that Raymond might be bring- 
ing large forces with him. He therefore left the siege and retired to 
a place of safety. Here he remained until he could ascertain through 
repeated reports what kind of forces the prince had with him and’ 
whether still larger reserves were expected. 

Elated by his first success and, as usual, undertaking more than he 
should have done, the prince began to be somewhat careless.1® Al- 
though he possessed fortresses near by where he might have remained 
in safety with his followers and thence led them back without danger, 
he preferred to trust to the open plain. He deemed it unworthy that 
he should seem to have retired even temporarily, through fear of 
Nureddin, and preferred to expose himself to the wiles of the enemy. 
When Nureddin perceived that the prince had received no additional 
aid, he believed that he could easily conquer the forces that Raymond 
had brought with him. That night, therefore, he surrounded the 
prince’s company and stormed the camp as if he were besieging a city. 

When morning dawned, Raymond saw that he was ringed in by 

18 William fails to mention the earlier attack upon the fortress of Areima in Tripoli. 
According to Arab historians, Raymond II of Tripoli invited Nureddin and Anar, 
whose forces had been united when the former came to the relief of Damascus, to 
attack this fortress, which was then held by the widow and son of Alphonse of Tou- 
louse. Raymond feared their pretensions to his prinicipality. Nureddin and Anar cap- 
tured the fortress and carried off Bertram and his mother as prisoners. This happened 


shortly after the siege of Damascus had been abandoned (W. B. Stevenson, The Cru- 
saders in the East, p. 164). 


19 Nureddin’s campaign in the territory of Antioch late in 1148 had been unsuccessful. 
Raymond of Antioch had indeed gained a victory over a portion of Nureddin’s army. 


198 CAPTURE OF ASCALON 


the enemy’s hosts, and too late, alas, he began to feel doubtful about 
his own strength. Nevertheless, he drew up his lines in battle forma- 
tion, stationed his knights in order, and prepared to fight at close 
quarters. In this way the battle began; but Raymond’s forces, being 
inferior in strength, were unable to withstand the great numbers of the 
foe. They turned and fled. The prince was left with only a few of his 
men around him. He fought valiantly, like the high-spirited and 
courageous warrior he was, but finally, wearied by killing and ex- 
hausted in spirit, he was slain by a stroke of the sword in the midst of 
the slaughter which he had wrought. The Turks cut off his head and 
right arm and left the mutilated remains among the corpses of the slain 
on the field. . 

Among others who fell in that engagement was that great and 
powerful knight, forever regretted by his own land, Renaud of 
Marash, to whom the count of Edessa had given his own daughter in 
marriage. Other nobles also fell at the same place, but their names are 
lost. 

Raymond was a man of lofty spirit, one who had had much experi- 
ence in warfare; he was greatly dreaded by the enemy, yet he was 
unlucky. The many noble and valiant deeds which he wrought in the 
principality are worthy of a special account, but we must hasten to 
resume the general history and can not delay for details of this kind 
or allow the pen to linger over them. 

Raymond was slain in the year 1148 of the Incarnation of the Lord, 
on the twenty-seventh day of June, which is the feast day of the holy 
apostles Peter and Paul. He was in the thirteenth year of his rule.?° 
The place where he fell is called the Walled Fountain. It lies between 
the city of Apamea and the fortress of Rugia. The body of the prince 
was found among the other dead and was recognized by certain marks 
and scars. It was borne to Antioch and there interred with solemn rites 
amid the tombs of his predecessors, in the vestibule of the church of 
the Prince of the Apostles. 


°° This disaster occurred June 29, 1149. Nureddin followed up the victory by a 
successful siege of Apamea, which he captured July 26 (Stevenson, Crusaders, p. 165). 


CAPTURE OF ASCALON 199 


10. Nureddin treats the entire region according to his own pleas- 
ure. The king hurries thither to render aid. The sultan of 
Iconium invades the land of the count of Edessa. 


In token of his victory and to increase his own prestige, Nureddin 
sent Raymond’s head and right arm (which he had caused to be cut 
off for the purpose) to the caliph of Bagdad, the mightiest prince and 
monarch of the Saracens, as proof that the most formidable persecutor 
of the Gentiles was dead. It was then sent on to all the other Turkish 
satraps throughout the Orient. 

The people of Antioch, deprived of the support of their great leader, 
abandoned themselves without restraint to grief. With plaintive words 
and tearful lamentations they recalled the great achievements of that 
valiant man. The report of his death not only cast gloom over those in 
the vicinity, but to all far and wide it carried woe and filled the hearts 
of both great and small with bitter sorrow. 

Nureddin, like his father, was a mighty persecutor of the Christian 
name and faith. Since the prince of the land and the main part of his 
valiant forces had fallen in battle, he saw that the whole province lay 
at his mercy. Accordingly, he at once sent forth his troops and began to 
overrun the whole country in hostile fashion. After passing close to 
Antioch and burning everything in that vicinity, he went on to the 
monastery of St. Simeon, which lies high up on the mountains between 
Antioch and the sea. Here also he acted freely according to his own 
good pleasure and treated all with unrestrained license. From there he 
went down to the sea, which he now saw for the first time; and, in token 
that he had come as conqueror even to the sea, he bathed there in the 
presence of his army. On the return march, in passing, he seized the 
fortress of Harim, scarcely ten miles from Antioch, and at once care- 
fully strengthened it with arms, food, and soldiers, so that it might be 
able to endure a siege of many days. 

Panic now seized upon the entire people, and the land was humbled 
before him, because the Lord had given into his hand the flower of the 
army and the prince of the land. There was no one to offer powerful 
protection against the dangers which threatened them. Constance, the 
widow of Prince Raymond, had been left with two sons and two daugh- 
ters 2! in some charge of the state and principality, but there was no 


21 Constance was still a very young woman, scarcely twenty-two years old at the 


death of her husband. 


200 CAPTURE OF ASCALON 


leader to undertake the duties of the prince and to rouse the people 
from their state of dejection. In this emergency Aimery, the patriarch 
of Antioch, an able man of great wealth, came forward as protector of 
the deeply afflicted land. Contrary to his usual habits, he supplied 
money liberally to hire troops and thus provided temporarily for the 
immediate necessities of the land.°? 

The news of Raymond’s death and the desperate condition of Anti- 
och overwhelmed the king of Jerusalem with consternation. He at 
once mustered troops for the relief of his brethren in distress and has- 
tened to the land of Antioch. The disheartened people, who felt no 
confidence in themselves, were greatly comforted by his presence. He 
united the forces which he had led with him with troops from that 
entire region and called on the people to resist. To help them in regain- 
ing their wonted courage, he laid siege to the fortress of Harim, which, 
as was stated above, had been lately taken by the enemy. The place 
had been so carefully fortified, however, that, after spending several 
days there without success, he gave up the attempt and returned to 
Antioch. 

The sultan of Iconium, on hearing of the death of the prince, also 
went down into Syria with an immense host.?? He took many cities and 
fortresses in that land and finally laid siege to Turbessel, though Count 
Joscelin and his wife and children were within it. During this time, 
the king sent Humphrey the constable with sixty knights to protect the 
fortress of Ezaz and to prevent its being taken by the Turks. 

The count finally released all the sultan’s subjects whom he was 
holding as prisoners and, in addition, gave him twelve suits of armor. 
Thereupon, peace was concluded between them; the sultan departed 
and the count, delivered from the siege, proceeded the same day to 
Ezaz. Thence he hastened to Antioch to thank the king for the kind- 
ness which he had showed toward him. Then, after visiting that mon- 
arch, he said farewell and returned to his own land accompanied by 
the modest escort which he had brought with him.?4 

The king assumed the responsibility of the distressed country and 
for that purpose remained at Antioch until affairs were reduced to 

°2 Aimery, whose election William had not approved, was in difficulties with the 


papacy at this time. His aid, under the circumstances, is all the more commendable. 


“3 This was Masud, son of Qilij Arslan, who ruled the sultanate of Rum or Iconium 
TI16-1156. 


** This visit of Baldwin II and Joscelin II must be dated in the latter part of.1149. 


CAPTURE OF ASCALON 201 


order as far as time and place permitted. Then, when some degree of 
tranquillity had been established, he went back to his own land to at- 
tend to his private affairs. 


11. After the king’s departure from Antioch, the count of Edessa 
is captured by the enemy and dies ignominiously. 


JosceLin the Younger, count of Edessa, was far inferior to his father 
in character. He was a lazy, idle man, given over to low and dissolute 
pleasures, one who spurned good ways and followed base pursuits. He 
had pursued the prince of Antioch with insatiable hatred and regarded 
the fall of the latter as most fortunate for himself. He paid but slight 
attention to the truth of the saying, “When your neighbor’s house 1s 
burning, your own property is in danger.” 5 At the summons of the 
patriarch, it is said, he set out for Antioch at night. Attended only by 
a young man who was leading his horse, he had left his escort and 
turned aside to relieve the needs of nature, when, unknown both to 
those ahead and those following, he was attacked by brigands who 
rushed forth from ambush. He was seized and led in chains to Aleppo. 
There, overcome by the squalid conditions of the prison and the heavy 
iron chains, wasted by mental and physical sufferings, he reaped the 
result of his dissolute ways and came to a wretched end. 

At dawn, the members of his escort, entirely unaware of what had 
happened, anxiously sought for their lord but could not find him. 
When their search proved without result, they turned back and re- 
ported the disaster that had overtaken them. Again the whole land was 
dazed with consternation. Hitherto the people had felt no compassion 
for the misfortunes of their neighbors, but now, overwhelmed by dis- 
aster themselves, they learned, by a similar experience, how to svmpa- 
thize with the troubles of others. Some time later, it was learned from 
reliable sources that the count was a prisoner at Aleppo.?° 

His wife, a chaste and sober woman, one who feared God and found 
favor in His sight, was left with a minor son and two daughters. With 
the assistance of the principal men still left in the kingdom, she tried to 
govern the people to the best of her ability; and, far beyond the 

“5 Horace Ep, I. xvirr. 84. 

*8 Joscelin II had been captured by some of Nureddin’s troops. According to Arab 
accounts he was kept in prison at Aleppo for nine years until the time of his death 


and forced to endure tortures of various kinds (see R. K. J., p. 265). Qalanisi (Gibb, 
Chronicle, p. 300) dates his capture as May 5, 1150. 


202 CAPTURE OF ASCALON 


strength of a woman, she busied herself in strengthening the fortresses 
of the land and supplying them with arms, men, and food. 

Thus, in punishment for our sins, these two countries were deprived 
of the wise counsels of their princes and, under the government of 
women, were holding their own with difficulty. 


12. The king and the lords of the realm rebuild Gaza, near 
Ascalon. 


SHorTLY after these events occurred in the land of Antioch, divine 
mercy visited the kingdom. Rising out of the depths of depression into 
which they had fallen because of the repeated disasters that had over- 
taken them, the king and his nobles again took heart and resolved to 
rebuild Gaza. By this course, they hoped to put a more effective curb 
on their redoutable enemies, the people of Ascalon, and to prevent 
their disastrous raids. 

Gaza, a very ancient city, lay about ten miles south of Ascalon. It 
was now in ruins and entirely uninhabited. This place they resolved to 
reconstruct, so that Ascalon might be hemmed in on the south just as 
it was on the north and east by the fortresses they had built there. From 
this direction also repeated attacks against that city could be made and 
aggressive warfare carried on without ceasing. Accordingly, on the 
appointed day the entire people assembled as one man at the place 
designated. They attacked the work with concerted efforts and each 
vied with his neighbor in assisting to rebuild the place. 

This same Gaza, a most ancient city, was one of the five cities of the 
Philistines. It was celebrated for its buildings, and many handsome 
churches and spacious houses of marble and huge stones, though now in 
ruins, still gave splendid evidence of its ancient glory. Many reservoirs 
and wells of living water also still remained. It was built on a slight 
eminence and enclosed within its walls much widespread territory. 

The Christians realized that it would not be expedient to rebuild 
the whole city and also that their strength might not be sufficient for 
such a task at that time. They therefore took a part of the hill, laid 
foundations of suitable depth, and built a fortress notable for its wall 
and towers. Within a short time, by the help of God, the work was 
successfully completed. When entirely finished in all its parts, it was 
committed by general consent to the care of the Knights of the Tem- 


CAPTURE OF ASCALON 203 


ple, to be held by them in perpetuity together with all the adjacent 
district. This charge the brothers, brave men and valiant warriors, have 
faithfully and wisely guarded even to this time. Again and again they 
have vigorously assaulted Ascalon, sometimes openly and again by 
attacks from ambush. As a result, those enemies who formerly over- 
ran and desolated the whole region and made themselves dreaded 
by the Christians, now consider themselves most fortunate if, by en- 
treaties or money, they can obtain a temporary peace and permission 
to dwell quietly within their walls. 

Gaza proved useful not only in restraining Ascalon, for whose an- 
noyance it had been built, but, after that city had been conquered, it also 
served as a fortified boundary at the south and was a great protection 
to that district against the Egyptians. 

In the early spring, when the interior of the fortress was partly 
finished, the king and the patriarch returned to Jerusalem.?” They 
left at Gaza the Knights of the Temple, to whose care the castle was 
committed. Now, the Egyptians were in the habit of sending additional 
forces three or four times a year to reinforce the strength of the Asca- 
lonites.?® After the king’s departure, it happened that these forces ap- 
peared in large numbers before the stronghold at Gaza and made a 
furious attack on the place, whither the townspeople had fled through 
fear of the foe. After several days had been wasted in the siege, how- 
ever, the officers in command perceived that their efforts were in vain 
and departed for Ascalon. From that day the strength of the foe was 
apparently weakened and their power of injuring decreased until 
gradually they ceased to harry the lands around them. 

The Egyptian army, also, which, as we have said, had so often 
brought aid to the now afflicted city, presently began to come by sea 
only. They feared the ambuscades arising from the fortress lying on 
the way and stood in great awe of the knights. 

27 The building of this fortress must have occurred in the winter of 1149-1150. 
According to Qalanisi the king was still engaged in that work when he was summoned 
by Damascus to help repel Nureddin’s attack upon that city. Anar had died August 28, 
1149. The combination of unusually heavy rains in April and the coming of Baldwin III 
discouraged Nureddin at this time so that he signed a treaty of peace with Damascus 
May 1, 1150 (Gibb, Chronicle, pp. 299-300). 

28 William persists in his statement that the garrison was changed three or four 
times each year, though the settled policy of the Egyptians was to change it twice 


each year. The first serious test of this fortress occurred in 1152. Perhaps William has 
that in mind (Gibb, Chronicle, p. 312). 


204 CAPTURE OF ASCALON 


13. Serious discord arises between the king and his mother; he 
is crowned without her knowledge. 


Art this time, the affairs of the kingdom in the East were progressing 
satisfactorily and a certain degree of tranquillity prevailed. This con- 
dition was somewhat impaired, however, by the fact that the county 
of Edessa had passed into the power of our enemies and was thus lost 
to us; and, also because the land of Antioch was constantly subject to 
hostile attacks. Presently, Satan, the enemy of man, who is ready to 
sow the seeds of tares, began to look with envy upon our prosperity and 
sought to disturb our peace by exciting civil dissensions. The origin and 
cause of the trouble was as follows. As has been related, Queen Meli- 
send, of glorious and pious memory in the Lord, was left, on the death 
of her husband, with two children still under age. Acting as their legal 
guardian, she assumed as by hereditary right the care and administra- 
tion of the realm. With the advice of the barons of the realm, strenu- 
ously and faithfully, beyond the.strength and courage of women, she 
had ruled as regent up to that time. Her eldest son, Baldwin, of whose 
acts we are now writing, lived in entire harmony with her and wisely 
complied with her dictates, even after he ascended the throne. 

Among others on whose assistance and counsel she relied was her 
kinsman, Manasses, a man of high rank and her intimate friend. As 
soon as she undertook the government, she made him constable and 
put him in supreme command of the army. He, taking advantage of 
the queen’s favor, is said to have conducted himself very haughtily. 
He assumed an insolent attitude of superiority toward the elders of 
the realm and refused to show them proper respect. This roused in- 
tense hatred toward him on the part of the nobles, and, if the authority 
of the queen had not been exerted, they would have carried their ani- 
mosity into action. Manasses had married the widow of the elder 
Balian, a noble matron, mother of the three brothers, Hugh, Baldwin, 
and Balian of Ramlah. By this alliance he had acquired much wealth 
and had greatly increased his possessions. The king was foremost, both 
in feeling and act, among those who hated Manasses and claimed that 
the man was alienating his mother’s good will from him and thwarting 
her munificence. 

There were many who hated the power and evil domination of this 
man. They continually fanned the flame of the king’s dislike toward 


CAPTURE OF ASCALON 205 


him and constantly urged that he remove his mother from the control 
of the kingdom. Now that he had reached years of maturity, they said, 
it was not fitting that he should be ruled by the will of a woman. He 
ought to assume some of the responsibility of governing the realm 
himself.?° 

Influenced by the counsels of these advisers and others like them, 
the king determined to be crowned at Jerusalem on Easter day. The 
patriarch and other wise men who desired peace for the kingdom 
begged him earnestly to allow his mother to participate in his glory. 
By the advice of the counsellors just mentioned, however, he deferred 
the time which had been set for the ceremony in order that his mother 
should not be crowned with him. Then unexpectedly, on the following 
day, without summoning his mother he appeared in public, crowned 
with the laurel. 


14. The kingdom is divided between the mother and son. The 
king enters Jerusalem by force and makes his mother a pris- 
oner in the tower of Dawid. Peace and tranquillity are finally 
restored. 


WHEN the solemnity was over, the king called an assembly of his 
nobles, Count Ives of Soissons and Walter, the castellan of St. Omer, 
being also present. Baldwin went to his mother and demanded that 
she at once divide the kingdom with him and assign to him a portion 
of his ancestral heritage. After much deliberation on both sides, the 
inheritance was finally divided. The king was given the choice and 
took for his share the maritime cities in the lands of Tyre and Acre 
with their dependencies. Jerusalem and Nablus, also with the cities 
pertaining to them, were left to the queen. Thus they were separated 
from one another, and the people hoped that, for the sake of peace, 
the agreement determined upon might endure and that they would be 
contented with the portion which had fallen to each of them. At this 
time, also, the king appointed as his constable and commander of the 
army a certain magnificent noble, Humphrey of Toron, who had great 


29 Baldwin III reached the age of twenty-one in the year 1151. The legal age at 
which a king might reign in Jerusalem was fifteen. Baldwin III must have become 
increasingly restive under the rule of his mother and her able but unpopular constable. 
It would seem reasonable to expect this trouble in 1151, though Réhricht has put it 
in the following year (see R. K. J., pp. 268-70). 


206 CAPTURE OF ASCALON 


and extensive possessions in Phoenicia among the mountains which lie 
near Tyre. | 

But not even in this way was the wish to persecute the queen stilled. 
On the contrary, the stillsmouldering fire was rekindled on trivial 
pretexts and blazed forth into a conflagration far more dangerous than 
before. At the instigation of those same nobles to whose counsels he had 
formerly harkened, the king again began to make trouble for his 
mother. He proposed to seize that portion of the kingdom which she 
had received by the good will of both, and thus wholly exclude her. On 
learning of his design, the queen left Nablus in the care of some of her 
loyal nobles and hurried to Jerusalem. 

The king, in the meantime, mustered as large a force as possible and 
besieged Manasses in one of his own castles called Mirabel. The latter 
was forced to surrender and compelled to renounce the kingdom and 
all the region on this side of the sea [Palestine]. The king then seized 
Nablus and advanced to Jerusalem in pursuit of his mother. 

Certain nobles whose possessions lay within the queen’s domains 
and who were attached to her by merely nominal loyalty disregarded 
their oaths of fealty and withdrew from her. The few who adhered to 
her cause, however, preserved a strict loyalty. Among these were her 
son, Amaury, count of Jaffa, a very young man; Philip of Nablus; and 
Rohard the Elder, with a few others whose names are unknown. 

When the queen heard that her son was advancing with an army, she 
retired to the citadel with her household staff and loyal followers and 
trusted herself to the defenses of the fortress. But the Patriarch 
Fulcher, of good memory, perceived that dangerous times and days of 
peril were threatening. Desiring to intervene as peacemaker and plead 
for proposals of peace, he took with him religious and God-fearing men 
from among the clergy and went out to meet the king. He admonished 
him to desist from his wicked project, to abide by the terms of the 
agreement, and to suffer his mother to rest in peace. As these warnings 
were of no avail, however, he returned to the city in utter detestation 
of the king’s purpose. 

The king, bent on carrying out his intention, placed his camp before 
the city, and the citizens, to avert the royal wrath, finally opened the 
gates and admitted him with his troops. He at once laid siege to the 
citadel, whither his mother had retreated. He set up his engines in 
position for assault and, with ballistae, bows, and hurling machines, 


CAPTURE OF ASCALON 207 


stormed it in enemy fashion. So incessant were the attacks that the 
besieged were denied any chance to rest. They, on their part, resisted 
with all their might and strove to repel force by force. Using the same 
methods employed by the besieging force outside, they hesitated not 
to hurl back injuries upon their enemies and to work equal destruction 
upon them. 

The contest lasted for several days with great peril to both sides, for 
the king, although he made little progress in capturing the citadel, was 
still loath to withdraw. At length, however, certain individuals came 
forward as mediators of peace and amity. The queen was induced to be 
content with the city of Nablus and its territory and to resign Jerusalem, 
the capital of the kingdom, to the king. A guarantee was offered on 
the part of the king and a solemn oath given that he would not molest 
her in the possession of that city in perpetuity. Thus they were restored 
to the good graces of one another; and as the morning star which shines 
forth in the midst of darkness tranquillity again returned to the king- 
dom and the church. 


15. Lhe sultan of Icontum again invades the county of Edessa. 
The king repairs thither with all haste. 


News of the deplorable disaster which had resulted in the capture of 
the count of Edessa was brought to the king of Jerusalem, and from 
reliable sources he learned that Edessa, left entirely without a defender, 
was lying exposed to the wiles of the enemy. That entire province and 
the land of Antioch as well, abandoned to feminine rule, required the 
king’s care. In response to this urgent need, Baldwin took with him 
Humphrey the constable and Guy of Beirut and repaired to the land 
of Tripoli. From the queen’s domains he had been unable to obtain any 
response, although he had summoned each of her nobles by name. At 
Tripoli he was joined by the count of that land and his knights, and the 
whole force proceeded as rapidly as possible to Antioch. 

It was said everywhere, and it was in fact true, that a powerful 
Turkish prince, the sultan of Iconium, with immense cavalry forces 
had invaded that country and seized nearly all the region bordering 
on his own territory. The inhabitants, unable to resist and to withstand 
the might of his army, had surrendered to him all their cities and for- 
tresses on condition of being granted a safe and unhindered exit with 
their wives and children and safe conduct to Turbessel. That place was 


208 CAPTURE OF ASCALON 


better fortified than the others and had more inhabitants, the count had 
his permanent residence there, and it appeared to be, as yet, undis- 
turbed. But when he, the sultan, had seized all the district with the 
exception of a few fortresses, he was obliged to return home to attend 
to more important affairs. Even so, the hardships of the provincials 
were not lessened, nor was their anxiety diminished. For Nureddin, 
that most troublesome persecutor of our people and a very powerful 
Turkish prince, was harrying the entire region. So incessant were his 
attacks that no one dared to appear outside the fortresses. Thus that 
wretched people was continually ground, as it were, between two mill- 
stones. It was tortured beyond endurance by two exceedingly great 
princes, although barely able to endure the violence of one. 


16. The emperor of Constantinople sends an army to the land of 
Antioch. He demands that the county of Edessa be surren- 
dered to him. He obtains his demand. The fortresses are 
surrendered to the Greeks. The king leads the Latins forth.®° 


In the meantime, the emperor of Constantinople, learning of the 
desperate condition of Edessa, had sent thither one of his nobles with 
a great store of supplies and a large force of his own knights. He offered 
to the countess a fixed annual revenue sufficient to afford herself and 
her children an honorable livelihood always, if, in return, she would 
surrender into his control the fortresses still in her possession. Be- 
cause of his immense riches, he was confident that if the province were 
resigned to him he could protect it unharmed from the incursions of 
the Turks and without difficulty restore to his empire those parts which 
had been lost. 

When the king arrived at Antioch and the reason for the coming of 
the imperial envoys was disclosed, they themselves also explaining 
their mission, a disagreement arose among the nobles of that land. 
Some said that affairs had not yet reached such an extremity that this 
course was necessary; others maintained, on the contrary, that action 
must be taken before the land had fallen entirely into the hand of the 
enemy. In the midst of these uncertainties the king saw that the country 


3° Emperor Manuel’s attention had been aroused by the events of 1149. The situ- 
ation seemed to offer an unusual opportunity to realize ancestral claims upon the 
region. He not only reinforced his army in the neighborhood, but also prepared to 
extend his interests in both Edessa and Antioch. The transactions here recorded must 
be dated in 1150 (see F. Chalandon, Les Commnéne, Il, 424-25). 


CAPTURE OF ASCALON 209 


could not long continue in its present state; the responsibilities of his 
own kingdom would not permit him to remain there very long; nor 
had he sufficient forces to enable him conveniently to rule two provinces 
lying a journey of fifteen days apart. In consideration also of the fact 
that Antioch, midway between the two countries, had been for several 
years without the protection of a prince, he came to the conclusion 
that it was best to transfer to the Greeks, under the conditions proposed, 
the strongholds which still remained. He felt but little confidence that 
the province could be maintained in good condition by the Greek forces, 
yet he preferred that disaster should overtake it while it was under their 
power rather than that the downfall of a people already in jeopardy 
and the ruin of their imperilled country should be laid to him. With 
the consent of the countess and her children, therefore, a treaty satis- 
factory to both parties was concluded, based on the terms stated above. 
A day was also set when the king should go down to that county with 
all his forces to surrender all the fortresses and put the emperor’s men 
in possession. At the appointed time, according to agreement, the king, 
accompanied by the count of Tripoli and noblemen both from the king- 
dom and from Antioch, marched into the land of the count of Edessa 
to Turbessel. The Greek deputies attended him. There he took under 
his protection the countess and her children and all others of both 
sexes, whether Latins or Armenians, who wished to leave, and sur- 
rendered the land to the Greeks. The fortresses which up to this time 
remained in the possession of the Christians were: Turbessel, Hantab, 
Ravendal, Ranculat, Bile, Samosata, and possibly some others. All 
these were given over into the power of the Greeks. 

The king then prepared for the march. With him went all the peo- 
ple who desired to leave, together with their pack animals and a great 
amount of baggage, for each man proposed to take with him his entire 
household and domestic staff as well as all his furniture. So with this 
great crowd of unwarlike people and an enormous amount of baggage, 
the king hastened to depart, that he might lead them to a place of 
safety. 


210 CAPTURE OF ASCALON 


17. Nureddin meets the king on the way and succeeds im stop- 
ping the exodus. The king returns to Antioch with some 
difficulty. Nureddin thrusts forth the Greeks and seizes the 


entire region. 


Tue news that the people of Edessa, in despair of retaining the land, 
had surrendered their fortresses to the mild and effeminate Greeks 
and that the king had marched thither to conduct the people away 
reached Nureddin. The consciousness of the fear felt by the Christians 
made him still bolder. He at once mustered armed forces from all the 
adjacent regions and descended suddenly upon those parts where he 
hoped to encounter the king with the people who had so greatly dis- 
trusted their own strength. If he could meet them under such circum- 
stances, hindered as they were by an excessive amount of baggage, it 
would be greatly to his advantage. Accordingly, scarcely had the king 
reached the city of Tulupa, not more than five or six miles from Tur- 
bessel, when Nureddin poured forth his forces over the whole land. 
There was a fortress near by, however, called Hantab, past which the 
Christians were to pursue their course. Realizing their danger and wish- 
ing to hasten, they drew up their lines in battle formation and arranged 
their forces in good order in expectation of an immediate encounter. 
The enemy’s troops, also in battle formation, eagerly awaited our ap- 
proach as if confident of victory. Yet matters turned out contrary to 
their expectation. Our army, led by the mercy of God, reached that 
fortress in safety, and there the weary men and beasts were permitted 
to rest all that night. Meanwhile, the leaders, in council assembled, 
deliberated on the plan of march for the following day. 

Certain of the principal nobles demanded that the fortress be given 
over to their charge; with the help of God they believed that their 
strength was sufficient to hold the place against the attack of the Turks. 
Among those from the kingdom who held this view was Humphrey of 
Toron, the royal constable,** a man of high courage. Robert de Sour- 
deval, a powerful noble from the principality of Antioch, also con- 
curred in this opinion. The king, however, was convinced that neither 
of the two had strength or power sufficient for the task; he rejected the 

81 There is a slight chronological confusion here. Humphrey of Toron was made 
constable by Baldwin III when the latter assumed sole rule in 1151 or 1152, whereas 


the transfer of these fortresses of Edessa to the Greeks was made in 1150. Humphrey 
of Toron was no doubt with Baldwin but not yet constable. 


CAPTURE OF ASCALON 211 


offer of both as unworthy of consideration and insisted on keeping the 
treaty. The place was delivered to the Greeks and the people ordered 
to prepare to continue the march. 

In that throng were to be seen men of high birth and noble matrons 
with highborn maidens and little children. With tears and sobs, they 
were leaving their native soil, the homes of their ancestors and the 
land of their fathers and, in deep distress, were migrating to the land 
of strangers. Hearts of adamant might well have been moved by the 
groans and lamentations of this people as they went forth into exile. 

When day again returned, the baggage was arranged and the march 
resumed. The enemy also formed in line of march and advanced along 
with them on either side, ready to swoop down upon the column from 
every direction. When the Christians saw that great array in marching 
order, they rearranged their own battalions with the five hundred 
knights whom they had with them and assigned regular places to all. 
The king was to march ahead with the vanguard and direct the advance 
of the crowds on foot. The count of Tripoli and the royal constable, 
Humphrey, were assigned to protect the rear divisions. With the 
largest and strongest forces they were to sustain the attacks of the foe 
and defend the people from their violence. The nobles of Antioch were 
placed on the left and the right of the column, that a strong force of 
brave men and armed knights might encircle the multitude who had 
been placed in the center. 

Throughout that entire day, until sunset, the Christians advanced 
in this order. Without intermission, they were harried by intolerable 
evils, repeated attacks, and skirmishes at close quarters. Showers of 
arrows rained upon the advancing troops until all the baggage bristled 
with darts like a porcupine. Dust and heat, always prevalent in August, 
exhausted the people beyond endurance and, in addition, severe thirst 
assailed them. Finally, just as the sun was sinking to rest, the Turks, 
who had no food supplies with them and who had, moreover, lost some 
of their nobles, gave the signal for retreat. Overcome with wonder at 
the incomparable perseverance and steadfastness of the Christians, they 
now ceased to follow our army. 

Humphrey, the constable, armed with his bow, was pursuing the 
retreating infidels a little apart from the army when a soldier from 
the enemy’s ranks approached him. Laying down his arms, he clasped 
his hands, first on one side, then on the other, in sign of reverence. He 


212 CAPTURE OF ASCALON 


was a confidential retainer of a very powerful Turkish noble who was 
bound to the constable in a fraternal alliance and that very closely. 
This man had been sent to greet Humphrey and to inform him of con- 
ditions in the hostile army. He reported that Nureddin intended to 
return with his army to his own land that very night, for all the pro- 
visions in his camp were exhausted and he could not pursue the Chris- 
tians farther. The messenger then returned to his own people, and the 
constable went back to the camp. He communicated the news that he 
had received to the king, and, as night was now at hand, the entire 
company encamped at a place called Joha. There was no further trouble. 
During the following days, the king conducted the people through the 
wood called Marrim, to territory which was under the jurisdiction of 
the Christians. He then returned to Antioch. 

Nureddin now perceived that the land of the count was left without 
the aid of the Latins. Accordingly, taking advantage of the unwarlike 
character of the Greeks to whose charge it had been resigned, he began 
to trouble it sorely. The Greeks found themselves unable to sustain 
his repeated attacks. In the end, he sent large forces and laid siege to 
the strongholds. The Greeks were driven out by force and, within a 
year, he had seized the whole region.*? 

Thus, because of our sins, that exceedingly wealthy province, full 
of streams, woods, and pastures, a land with most productive soil and 
abounding in all kinds of commodities, a place capable of affording 
sufficient support for five hundred knights, passed into the enemy’s 
hands and even to the present day is alienated from our jurisdiction. 

The church of Antioch suffered the loss of three archbishoprics in 
that land, namely, those at Edessa, Hierapolis, and Coritium. These 
churches, much against their will, are still held by the infidels in the 
superstition of the Gentiles. 


18. The king advises the princess to marry one of the princes to 
rule her realm, but his advice is not heeded. He goes thence 
to Tripoli on his way home. 


Great was the anxiety of King Baldwin of Jerusalem at this time on 
behalf of Antioch and the lands adjacent to it. He feared lest, deprived 


°° Territories were soon lost, it is true, but most of them were captured by Masud 
in the next three or four years. Nureddin acquired many of them after the death of 
Masud in 1155 or 1156. : 


CAPTURE OF ASCALON 213 


as it was of the protection of its prince, it might fall into the hand of 
the enemy and suffer the pitiable fate of Edessa, as just related. This 
would cause still more trouble and bring intolerable loss upon the 
Christian people. He himself was not free to remain longer at Antioch, 
since the responsibilities of his own kingdom required his return. He 
therefore repeatedly advised the princess to choose one of the nobles 
as a husband, by whose counsel and efforts the principality might be 
governed. 

There were in the land at that time a number of noble and distin- 
guished men attached to the camp of the king. Among them were Ives 
de Nesle, count of Soissons, a distinguished man, wise and discreet, of 
great influence in the kingdom of the Franks; Walter de Falkenberg,** 
castellan of St. Omer, who was later lord of Tiberias, a discreet man 
and very courteous, wise in counsel and valiant in arms; and also Ralph 
de Merle, a noble of the highest rank, experienced in the practice of 
arms and noted for his good sense. Any one of these seemed with justice 
quite capable of protecting the region. The princess, however, dreaded 
the yoke of marriage and preferred a free and independent life. She 
paid little heed to the needs of her people and was far more interested 
in enjoying the pleasures of life.*4 

The king, well aware of her predilection, called a general council 
at Tripoli, consisting of the nobles of the kingdom and the principality. - 
To this he invited the patriarch of Antioch and his suffragans and also 
the princess with her nobles. His mother, Queen Melisend, was also 
present, attended by the princes of the kingdom. After subjects of 
general interest had received careful attention, the matter of the mar- 
riage of the princess was given consideration. Neither the king nor the 
count, her kinsmen, neither the queen nor the countess of Tripoli, her 
two aunts, was able to induce her to yield and thus provide for herself 
and her land. 

It was rumored, however, that she was guided by the advice of the 
patriarch. He, being a very artful and subtle man, is said to have sup- 
ported her in this mistake, in order that he might have a freer hand 
in the government of the land—a thing which he greatly desired. Since 


33 Walter de Falkenberg was a member of the famous family of castellans of St. Omer, 
one of whom, Hugh, had been the second lord of Tiberias (R. Grousset, Histoire des 
croisades et du royaume franc de Jerusalem, 11, App. 13 see also note 40). 

34 Emperor Manuel was quite as much interested in having Constance accept a 
suitable husband as was Baldwin III. His choice, however, was a Greek, Caesar John, 
his own brother-in-law (Chalandon, Les Comnéne, Il, 426). 


214 CAPTURE OF ASCALON 


nothing could be accomplished in respect to this matter, the assembly 
broke up and all returned home.*® 


19. The king and his mother meet at Tripoli to try to effect a 
reconciliation between the count and his wife, but without 
results. The count is killed by the Assassins at the city gate. 


Durinc this time an enmity arising from jealousy sprang up between 
the count of Tripoli and his wife, a sister of Queen Melisend. It was 
in the hope of settling this unpleasantness and at the same time of 
visiting her niece, the princess of Antioch, that Queen Melisend had 
come thither. Since she had met with but little success in patching up the 
matter, however, she determined to take her sister back with her, and, 
with this end in view, the two had already left the city of Tripoli. The 
count accompanied the princess for a time on her journey; then, after 
a little time, he took leave of her and returned. As he was entering 
the city gate, without thought of evil mishap, he was struck down by 
the swords of the Assassins at the entrance to the gate between the 
barbican and the wall and perished miserably. With him was slain also 
that distinguished nobleman mentioned above, Ralph de Merle, and 
one of his knights, both of whom had chanced to be with the count on 
that journey. 

During this time the king, free from care, was enjoying himself over 
a game of dice in the city, unconscious of all that had happened. At 
the news of the count’s murder, the whole city was roused. The people 
flew to arms and without discrimination put to the sword all those who 
were found to differ either in language or dress from the Latins. In 
this way it was hoped that the perpetrators of the foul deed might be 
found. 

Roused by the sudden uproar, the king learned of the count’s mur- 
der. Saddened and greatly depressed, he could not refrain from tears 
and sighs, and ordered that his mother and aunt be recalled at once. 
On their return, the body was committed to the tomb with due mag- 
nificence amid the lamentations and tears of all. By the king’s order, all 


the nobles of those parts then swore allegiance to the countess and her 
children. 


°° The time of this meeting at Tripoli is not clear. It might have occurred on 
Baldwin’s return from the north late in 1150, but the events of the next chapter are 
apparently intertwined with this and involve the death of Raymond II of Tripoli, 
which cannot be placed earlier than 1151 (see Stevenson, Crusaders, p. 170, note 5). 


CAPTURE OF ASCALON 215 


The count left a son of the same name, Raymond, hardly twelve 
years old, and a younger daughter called Melisend. When the king had 
arranged affairs in this way, he returned to the kingdom accompanied 
by his mother and the nobles of his court. 


20. A great army of Turks advances against Jerusalem to take 
it, but the Christians march forth and defeat them with 
much valor. 


Nor very long after this, certain Turkish satraps surnamed Huaroquin, 
powerful men of distinguished lineage among their own people, as- 
sembled a great number of Turks and determined to go to seize Jeru- 
salem as belonging to them by hereditary right.°° For, prior to its 
deliverance by the Christians, the sacred city is said to have belonged 
to them by ancestral heritage. Their mother was a zealous advocate of 
this course and reproached her sons because they had allowed them- 
selves to be exiled for so long from their hereditary possessions. 

Moved by the incessant admonitions of their aged mother, they set 
out on the march at the head of a large number of knights with the 
intention of accomplishing their desired end, if the Lord should so 
permit. At Damascus they tarried for a while to refresh their troops 
and recruit their strength. The people of that city tried in vain to divert 
them from their foolish project, but they refused to listen. They re- 
plenished their supplies, rearranged the baggage, and again resumed 
their march to Jerusalem, as if without doubt of success. With their 
numerous train they crossed the Jordan and went up into the moun- 
tainous country where the holy city lies and came to the Mount of 
Olives, which towers above Jerusalem and is adjacent to it. Thence 
they could gain an unobstructed view of all the venerable places and 
especially of the temple of the Lord, which they hold in peculiar 
reverence; in fact, the outlook embraced the whole city. 

Most of the armed forces of the region had gone to Nablus, where 
they feared the enemy might assemble since the city itself was without 
fortifications. When the people who were left at Jerusalem saw the 

36 This interesting undertaking by descendants of the Turks who had held Jerusalem 
up to 1098 is not mentioned by Qalanisi. The leader whom William calls Hiaroquin 
(probably for Yaruk) has been identified as Timurtash of Maridin, of the Ortuqid 
dynasty. Both Réhricht and Stevenson accept the identification. Despite William’s 


statement that the expedition stopped at Damascus on its way, it is not mentioned in 
the Damascus Chronicle (see R. K. J., p. 271). 


216 CAPTURE OF ASCALON 


army of Turks advancing, they feared that it would soon descend upon 
them. They at once seized their weapons and, invoking aid from 
heaven, marched zealously forth against the enemy, eager to engage 
them. 

The road which goes down from Jerusalem to Jericho and thence 
to the Jordan is very rough and dangerous. The many steep and 
precipitous places render both the ascent and the descent very difficult 
for travellers even when the road is unchallenged and there is no 
reason for fear. When the foe entered this road, the Christians fell 
furiously upon them and put them to flight in panic. Many fell head- 
long and perished without the aid of the sword, for the cliffs and 
narrow defiles afforded no easy passage to fugitives. Some who had 
taken to the more level roads tried to continue their flight, but here 
too they encountered the swords of the Christians and, mortally 
wounded, met sudden death. Their horses, fatigued by the hardships 
of the long march, were unable to endure the rough road; they gave 
out utterly and refused to obey their riders. The Turks were thus forced 
to become foot soldiers. Burdened by their arms and wholly unac- 
customed to hardships, they were cut down like sheep by the swords 
of their pursuers. So terrible was the massacre of both men and horses 
that the progress of the Christians was hindered. Yet all the more 
eagerly they pursued their advantage. Scorning thought of plunder, 
they passed by the spoils and continued the fierce slaughter, for it was 
regarded as the supreme reward to be bathed in the blood of the foe. 

As soon as the people who had assembled at Nablus heard that this 
enemy was marching to attack Jerusalem, they left as with one accord 
and rushed to the fords of the Jordan to prevent the Turks from cross- 
ing. They attacked on the side those who had escaped their pursuers, 
caught them off guard, and slew them. The hand of the Lord was 
indeed heavy upon our enemies that day, for, as it is written, “That 
which the palmer-worm hath left, hath the locust eaten.” 87 Those 
who thought they had escaped their pursuers, thanks to the speed of 
their horses or in some other way, fell by the swords of the Christians 
who attacked them from another direction. Others who had entered 
the Jordan ahead of the main line, through their ignorance of the 
fords, were seized by the tumultuous waves and drowned in the river. 
Thus the host which had gone up with many thousands, strong in the 

37 Joel 1:4. 


CAPTURE OF ASCALON 217 


pride of their might, relying on the strength of their cavalry, returned 
to their own land reduced to a small number and covered with con- 
fusion and terror. It is reported that about five thousand of the enemy 
were killed that day. 

This happened on the ninth day before the Kalends of December 
[November 23] in the year of the Incarnation of the Lord 1152 and 
the ninth year of the reign of King Baldwin, the fourth king of Jeru- 
salem.*® 

Laden with the spoils of the foe and driving before them as trophies 
much plunder in the shape of cattle, the Christians returned to Jeru- 
salem to offer solemn sacrifice of thanksgiving to the Lord. 


21. The king and the barons of the realm repair to Ascalon with 
the intention of devastating the orchards which encircle the 
city. Improving on their original plan, however, they lay 
siege to the city. 


Tuis victory, granted by divine favor, raised the hopes of the Chris- 
tians greatly. Accordingly, the Lord directing their purposes, it was 
“unanimously resolved, by the wish of the least as well as the greatest, 
to try in some way to injure their enemies in that vicinity who had so 
often brought serious trouble on them, namely, the people of Ascalon. 
It seemed the most satisfactory plan for the time being to try to 
destroy with a strong force the orchards in the vicinity of Ascalon. 
These were of great value to the citizens, and, in this way, some loss 
might be inflicted upon the insolent foe. With this purpose in view, the 
entire strength of the realm was gathered in large numbers before the 
city just mentioned. If this plan could be successfully carried out they 
felt that it would be sufficient. 

But divine mercy in marvellous fashion attended the Christians 
assembled before that city and suddenly began to spur them on to 
greater things. Scarcely had our forces taken up a position before the 
city when a panic seized on the townspeople. In great haste they re- 
treated within the city, and not a man dared venture outside the walls 
to meet our soldiers. Taking advantage, therefore, of the enemy’s 
terrified condition, the Christians, directed by divine grace, decided 

88 This statement of the date is formal and appears to be correct. William has not 
applied his determination to Count Godfrey as the first king, which would have made 


Baldwin III the fifth king. The reckoning of 1152 as the ninth regnal year of Bald- 
win III serves as a point of comparison with other formal dates used by William. 


218 CAPTURE OF ASCALON 


to besiege the city also. Messengers were at once sent throughout the 
kingdom to announce the plan, inspired by God, and to summon those 
who had remained at home, that no one might fail to be present on 
the day appointed. 

Those who had been called assembled joyfully and without delay. 
They joined their comrades who had preceded them and encamped 
with the others around the city. And that all might continue steadfast 
in their undertaking without thought of wavering, they bound them- 
selves by solemn oath, one to another, that they would not abandon 
the siege till the city had been taken. Thus the whole strength of the 
kingdom having been convoked and the people assembled with una- 
nimity of purpose, the king and the patriarch with the other nobles 
of the realm, both secular and ecclesiastic, accompanied by the life- 
giving and venerated sign of the Cross of the Lord, encamped before 
Ascalon under happy auspices on the eighth day before the Kalends of 
February.*® 

There were present the following prelates of the church: Fulcher, 
the lord patriarch of Jerusalem; Peter, archbishop of Tyre; Baldwin, 
archbishop of Caesarea; Robert, archbishop of Nazareth; Frederick, 
bishop of Acre; and Gerald, bishop of Bethlehem. There were certain 
abbots present also. Bernard de Tremelay, master of the Knights 
Templars; and Raymond, master of the Hospital, also attended. 

Among the lay princes present were: Hugh d’Ibelin, Philip of 
Nablus, Humphrey of Toron, Simon of Tiberias, Gerard of Sidon, Guy 
of Beirut, Maurice of Montreal, Renaud de Chatillon and Walter of 
St. Omer. These last two served the king for pay.*° 

The tents were set up and arranged in a circle and definite and suit- 
able quarters assigned to each noble. They then applied themselves 
loyally to the work in hand, with wisdom and foresight putting forth 
the efforts which so important a task demanded. 


39 January 25, 1153. : 

*° It is interesting to note that nobles of some importance, such as Walter, castellan 
of St. Omer, served for pay. Both of these men were noble adventurers each of whom 
gained a place in Latin Syria through marriage. There is a very brief collection of 
references to Walter de Falkenberg, castellan of St. Omer, by Giry (see A. Giry, “Les 
Chatelains de Saint-Omer 1042-1386,” Bibliothéque de PEcole des chartes, XXXV 
[1874], 341-43). Renaud de Chatillon is the subject of an extended biography (see 
G. Schlumberger, Renaud de Chétillon). 


CAPTURE OF ASCALON 219 


22. The situation of the city is described and its advantages set 
forth. 


AscaLon is one of the five cities of the Philistines. It lies upon the sea- 
coast in the form of a semicircle, the chord or diameter of which extends 
along the shore, while the arc or bow lies on the land looking toward 
the east. The entire city rests in a basin, as it were, sloping to the sea 
and is surrounded on all sides by artificial mounds, upon which rise the 
walls with towers at frequent intervals. The whole is built of solid 
masonry, held together by cement which is harder than stone. The 
walls are wide, of goodly thickness and proportionate height. The city 
is furthermore encircled by outworks built with the same solidity and 
most carefully fortified. There are no springs within the confines of 
the walls, nor are there any near by, but wells, both without and within 
the city, furnish an abundant supply of fresh water fit for drinking. As 
a further precaution, the citizens had constructed within the town 
cisterns to receive the rain water. 

There are four gates in the circuit of the wall, strongly defended 
by lofty and massive towers. The first of these, facing east, is called 
the Greater gate and sometimes the gate of Jerusalem, because it faces 
toward the Holy City. It is surmounted by two very lofty towers which 
serve as a strong protection for the city below. In the barbican before 
this gate are three or four smaller gates through which one passes to 
the main entrance by various winding ways . 

The second gate faces the west. It is called the Sea gate, because 
through it the people have egress to the sea. The third to the south 
looks toward the city of Gaza, to which reference has been made above, 
whence also it takes its name. The fourth, with outlook toward the 
north, is called the gate of Jaffa from the neighboring city which lies 
on this same coast. 

Ascalon is at a disadvantage, however, from the fact that its location 
admits of neither a port nor any other safe harborage for ships. The 
shore is very sandy, and the violent winds make the surrounding sea 
so tempestuous that it is generally feared by all who approach it except 
in very calm weather. 

The soil of the fields surrounding the city is overlaid with sand and 
is consequently unfit for agriculture, yet it is well adapted to the culture 
of vineyards and fruit trees. There are, however, a few valleys on the 


220 CAPTURE OF ASCALON 


north which, when well fertilized and irrigated with water from the 
wells, furnish the townspeople with a certain amount of fruits and 
vegetables. 

There was a large population in that city, even the least of whom— 
and, indeed, according to the general report, even the youngest babes 
—received pay from the treasury of the caliph of Egypt. That monarch 
and his princes felt the utmost solicitude for Ascalon, realizing that if 
it should fall and come into the power of the Christians there would 
be nothing to prevent our leaders from invading Egypt without let or 
hindrance and seizing that kingdom by force. 

They regarded Ascalon as a bulwark, therefore, and four times a 
year ‘1 with lavish munificence they furnished assistance to the city, 
both by land and by sea. As long as Ascalon held out and our people 
exhausted their zealous efforts upon it, the Egyptians themselves might 
enjoy the coveted peace. At great expense, therefore, they furnished 
the city with everything needful and at regular intervals sent arms, 
food, and fresh troops, for while the Christians were occupied with 
Ascalon the Egyptians felt less anxiety over our dreaded strength. 


23. Siege operations are begun; officers are placed in command 
of the fleet and also of the land army. 


For fifty years and more after the Lord had given the rest of the 
Land of Promise into the hands of the Christian people, Ascalon had 
resisted all our attempts and shown itself a formidable rival to us. The 
Christians finally resolved to besiege the place. This was an arduous 
and almost impossible feat, for Ascalon was well defended by walls 
and barbicans, towers and embankments, and equipped with an in- 
credible amount of arms and provisions. In addition, it had a large 
population well trained and thoroughly versed in the practice of arms. 
In fact, from the very beginning of the siege even unto the end the 
number of defenders was double that of the besieging host. 

The king, the patriarch, Peter, archbishop of Tyre, our predecessor, 
and other great men of the realm, princes as well as prelates of the 
church, and the citizens of each city set up their tents separately and 
blockaded the city by land. The fleet of fifteen ships, beaked and 


equipped to sail, was placed in the command of Gerard of Sidon, one of 


*1 See Book XVII, note 28; Book XIII, note 39. 


CAPTURE OF ASCALON 201 


the great barons of the realm.*? He was to prevent any approach from 
the sea and likewise to frustrate all attempts at egress from the city. Al- 
most daily our people, now the knights and again the foot soldiers, made 
attacks upon the city. The townspeople, however, met these attempts 
with courage and resisted with spirit, for they were fighting for their 
wives and children and, what is far more important, for liberty itself. 
In these engagements, as usually happens under such conditions, vic- 
tory fell now to the citizens and again to the Christians, but on the 
whole success more often fell to the lot of our forces. 

There was said to be such security in that camp, such opportunities 
of buying all kinds of commodities, that the people in their tents and 
pavilions lived as they were accustomed to do at home in their walled 
cities. 

The townspeople guarded the city with especial care at night. Re- 
lays of watchers were employed, and even the leading men of the city 
took their turn at patrolling the walls, passing the greater part of the 
night without sleeping. Along the walls and on the ramparts of the 
towers were placed glass lamps fed by oil and provided with trans- 
parent covers to protect the flame. These made it as bright as day and 
assisted the watchers while they were making the rounds of the walls. 

In the Christian camp detachments of sentinels were also provided 
for the protection of our troops. The watch never ceased, for it was 
feared that the citizens might attack the camp under cover of night. 
There was also danger that the Egyptians, hastening to the aid of 
Ascalon, might suddenly and unexpectedly fall upon the army, al- 
though scouts had been stationed in many places around Gaza to give 
timely warning of the enemy’s approach. 


24. During the second month of the siege, a crossing of pilgrims 
occurs. This ts of great assistance to the Christians in carry- 
ing on the blockade. 


THE siege continued for two months without change. About Easter 
time, the customary crossing took place which brought great numbers 
of pilgrims thither. After taking counsel together, the Christians dis- 
patched messengers from the army forbidding all sailors and pilgrims, 


#2 This is one of the clearest indications of the existence of a royal fleet. Whether 
the ships were built or bought for the occasion or were part of a permanent force is 


not stated, though the appointment of Gerard of Sidon as commander would seem 
to be purely temporary. 


222 CAPTURE OF ASCALON 


by the king’s command, to return home. All, under promise of pay, 
were invited to take part in the siege, a labor so acceptable to God.** 
All vessels also, whether great or small, were ordered to sail to Ascalon. 
Within a very few days, therefore, all the ships that had come in that 
crossing arrived before the city, sped by a favoring breeze, and great 
forces of pilgrims, both knights and foot soldiers, joined our ranks. 
Thus, day by day, the strength of the army increased. Great was the 
joy in camp, and hope of winning the victory was unbounded. 

Among the enemy, on the contrary, grief and anxiety prevailed ever 
more and more. They began to feel less confident of their own strength 
and, although more frequently challenged, sallied forth less often to 
the conflict. Again and again they besought the caliph of Egypt to send 
them aid as soon as possible, for otherwise they must soon give way. 
Accordingly, the caliph took active measures for their relief. He 
ordered the nobles responsible for such work to prepare a fleet and 
muster an army. He had the tall ships loaded with arms, provisions, 
and engines of war, appointed commanders, and provided for the neces- 
sary expenses, all the while chiding delay and commanding haste. 

In the meantime, the Christians had purchased ships for a great sum 
and removed the masts. Workmen were then called in and ordered to 
build a very high tower of the wood. This was carefully protected 
against fire and other untoward accidents by wickerwork and hides, 
both inside and out, that the fighters who were to attack the city from 
it might be quite safe. The material which was left from the wooden 
ships was used to construct hurling engines, which were then placed in 
strategic positions for battering down the walls. Covered sheds were 
also made from the same material under protection of which the em- 
bankments might be approached and levelled in safety. All these prepa- 
rations were duly made and the section of wall to which the engines 
could be most easily applied carefully considered. Then when the 
greater part of the embankment had been levelled, as mentioned above, 
the tower was moved with loud shouts to the wall. From its top a view 
of the entire city could be gained and a hand-to-hand fight with the 
defenders in the towers near by carried on. The townspeople, however, 
now from the walls and now from the mounds, boldly and persistently 
used their bows and arrows to harass those concealed within the mov- 

48 The use of money had become increasingly common in the conduct of warfare 


in the East by this time. It could purchase many forms of service ranging from manual 
labor to responsible military aid. 


CAPTURE OF ASCALON 222 


able towers. All their efforts were in vain, however, for they were 
unable to harm those who were pushing the engine forward. A great 
crowd of defenders was then massed at the section of the wall opposite 
the tower, and the bolder spirits among them were ordered to try their 
strength there in a continual fight with the assailants in the movable 
tower. 

Incessant fighting was also going on at the same time at various 
points elsewhere along the walls. Scarcely a day passed without carnage, 
to say nothing of the great number of wounded on both sides. We have 
heard stories of memorable deeds wrought at that siege by certain 
individuals and of the remarkable valor shown both by the enemy and 
the Christians. Since we are writing a general history, however, little 
attention can be paid to incidents of this kind. 


25. During the fifth month of the siege, the Egyptian fleet ar- 
rives at Ascalon, an event which affords much consolation 
to the besieged. 


For five consecutive months our leaders had persevered in the siege, 
and the strength of the foe was apparently becoming somewhat im- 
paired. The prospect of taking the city seemed brighter than usual, 
when suddenly the Egyptian fleet, borne by. favoring breezes, appeared 
before the city. At sight of it the Ascalonites raised their hands to the 
heavens and, with loud shouts, cried out that the Christians would now 
have to retreat or soon perish. When Gerard of Sidon, the commander 
of the Christian fleet, perceived that the ships were nearing the city, 
he tried to hinder their progress by attacking them with his small 
number of galleys. At last, however, alarmed at the large numbers of 
the foe, he turned back again and took measures for life and safety by 
flight. 

The enemy’s force sailed boldly toward the city with the long- 
deferred assistance for the beseiged. The fleet consisted, according to 
report, of seventy galleys and some other ships laden to the limit with 
men, arms, and food. The vessels were of immense size and had all 
been sent for the aid of the city by the Egyptian prince mentioned 
above. Thus reinforced, the enemy once more began hostilities, and, 
as with strength renewed, more boldly and more frequently they now 
challenged us to fight. The citizens themselves, who well knew the 
prowess of our men, were somewhat wary, but the rougher element and 


224 CAPTURE OF ASCALON 


the newcomers thirsted for glory and longed to show their strength 
and courage. They rushed into the conflict without caution and fell 
in large numbers, until, having experienced the steadfast courage of 
the Christians, they learned to deliver their attacks with more caution 
and to sustain our onslaughts with more moderation. 


26. Constance, princess of Antioch, weds Renaud de Chatillon. 
Nureddin seizes the kingdom of Damascus by force. Amal- 
rich is placed over the church at Sidon. 


Wuite these things were happening in the camp before Ascalon, the 
Lady Constance, widow of Prince Raymond of Antioch, who, after 
the fashion of women, had refused many distinguished nobles, secretly 
chose as her husband Renaud de Chatillon, a knight in the pay of the 
king. She did not wish this to be made public, however, until she had 
secured the authority and consent of the king, her cousin, under whose 
protection her principality lay. Accordingly, Renaud hastened to the 
army to communicate her intention to the king and, after obtaining his 
consent, returned to Antioch and married the princess. Many there 
were, however, who marvelled that a woman so eminent, so distin- 
guished and powerful, who had been the wife of a very illustrious 
man, should stoop to marry an ordinary knight.** 

During this time also, Nureddin, a man of much foresight and dis- 
cretion, learned of the death of his father-in-law, Anar.*® This dis- 
tinguished man, the commander in chief of the army of Damascus and 
the administrator of the king’s affairs, had always strenuously resisted 
all the projects of his son-in-law. Nureddin was aware that the king of 
Jerusalem with all the chivalry of the land had been for some time 
engaged in beseiging Ascalon, and he felt confident that Baldwin would 
not willingly abandon that undertaking to respond to the appeals of 
the Damascenes for assistance against himself. He therefore seized the 
opportunity and marched against Damascus with a large army to take 
the kingdom by force. The people received him with favor, however, 


44 This statement is somewhat inconsistent with both William’s earlier statement re- 
garding Walter of St. Omer and his list of prominent leaders at Ascalon among whom 
he included both Renaud de Chatillon and Walter, castellan of St. Omer. 

*5 Anar had died August 28, 1149, according to Qalanisi, who describes the event 
in some detail (Gibb, Chronicle, pp. 294-95). Nureddin made attempts to gain 
Damascus after Anar’s death as well as before. He finally succeeded in April, 1154, 
having agi the way by a sort of blockade of foodstuffs (Gibb, Chronicle, pp. 
320-21). 


CAPTURE OF ASCALON 225 


and surrendered voluntarily; whereupon he removed their monarch, 
a dissolute and worthless man, from power and forced him to fly to 
the Orient, a fugitive and exile over the earth. This change was de- 
cidedly disastrous to the interests of the kingdom. In place of a man 
without power, whose weakness rendered him harmless to the Chris- 
tians and who up to this time, as if subject, had rendered them an an- 
nual tribute, a formidable adversary arose. For just as “Every kingdom 
divided against itself is brought to desolation,” *® according to the 
words of the Saviour, so many kingdoms when united tend to gain 
strength from one another and rise with greater strength against a 
common foe. 

Thus, after Nureddin had taken Damascus and subdued all the 
region round about, he desired to assist Ascalon as far as was possible 
from such a distance. Taking advantage of the preoccupation of the 
Christians, he besieged the city of Banyas, which lies at the extreme 
end of the kingdom. He hoped that our people, on being summoned to 
the relief of the beleaguered city, would abandon the siege of Ascalon. 
But by the mercy of God which guided us, his great hopes were not 
realized, and neither of his projects succeeded. For he was unsuccessful 
in the siege of Banyas, and the Christians, by the aid of the Lord, com- 
pelled Ascalon to surrender.*? 

About this time, also, Bernard, bishop of Sidon, of blessed memory, 
died, and Amalrich, of pious memory in the Lord, was chosen in his 
place. Amalrich was abbot of the regular canons of the order of the 
Premonstratensians in the monastery of St. Habakkuk, or St. Joseph 
of Arimathea. He was a sincere and God-fearing man of godly life. 
Since no one was allowed to go far away from the besieged city, he is 
said to have received the gift of consecration in the church at Lydda 
from the hands of Peter, archbishop of Tyre, of revered memory. 


27. The besiegers make a furious assault upon the city. The 
citizens try to burn the machine outside the walls. A por- 
tion of the city wall falls. Some of the Christians, while at- 
tempting to rush in, are killed. Our army abandons hope. 


MEANWHILE, those who were engaged in this campaign pressed on 
their project with great energy and kept up vigorous assaults on the 


46 Mat. 12:25. 
“7 Nureddin had called upon the people of Damascus to aid him in the siege of 
Banyas under the terms of his latest treaty with them. Though they joined him, it 


226 CAPTURE OF ASCALON 


city without intermission. This was especially the case around the 
Greater gate, as it is called, where the attacks were renewed again and 
again with results most disastrous to the citizens. Volleys of mighty 
rocks hurled from the casting machines threatened to weaken the walls 
and towers and to overthrow from their very foundations the houses 
within the city. Great was the slaughter which resulted. With their 
bows and arrows, the soldiers in the movable tower also wrought great 
destruction not only upon the defenders who were resisting them from 
the top of the towers and walls, but also on those who were forced by 
necessity to move about the city. In comparison with the ills which as- 
sailed them from this tower all the trials which the citizens endured 
at other points, however hard, appeared light. 

They took counsel, therefore, with one another. Profiting especially 
by the advice of those who had had much experience in matters of this 
nature, they resolved, no matter at what risk and danger, to destroy 
that machine. Dry wood and other material suitable for kindling and 
increasing the flames were to be thrown between the wall and the 
tower. This was to be set on fire stealthily and the tower burned. There 
seemed to be no other hope, nor had they courage to resist longer, for 
they were now reduced to the lowest depths of despair. 

Certain brave men, noted for their strength and courage, men who 
considered the safety of their fellow citizens before their own, imme- 
diately responded to the appeal and offered to undertake the dangerous 
task. Wood was carried to the part of the wall nearest to the tower and 
thrown over into the space outside between the wall and the machine. 
When a great pile of wood had been built up, sufficient in their judg- 
ment to burn the tower, they poured upon it from above pitch, oil, 
and other liquids provocative of fire, anything which would make a 
fiercer flame. As soon as it blazed up, however, divine clemency was 
manifested toward us; for, although the flames at once increased in 
violence, a strong wind from the east sprang up which turned the entire 
fury of the flames against the walls. This wind, then, by its own fury, 
drove the fire against the wall, and an incessant gale, which continued 
throughout the entire night, reduced it to ashes. About dawn an entire 
portion of the wall, between two towers, crumbled away entirely with 
a noise that roused the whole army. 


was with a feeling of distrust which finally led to quarrels between them and the 
abandonment of the siege in June, 1153 (see Gibb, Chronicle, pp. 315-16). 


CAPTURE OF ASCALON 227 


But the mass as it fell struck against the tower with such force that 
some of the necessary parts of the machine, which the fire had been un- 
able to injure, were shattered. The sentinels on duty at the top and on 
the projections were almost thrown to the ground. Roused at the sound 
of the crash, the entire army seized arms and rushed to the place, eager 
to enter at once as if an entrance had been opened from on high. But 
Bernard de Tremelay, the master of the Templars, and his brethren 
had reached there much before the rest; he held the opening and al- 
lowed none but his own men to enter. It was charged that he kept the 
rest back in order that his own people, being the first to enter, might 
obtain the greater and richer portion of the spoils and plunder.*® For 
when a city is taken by assault, custom among the Christians has made 
it a law, even to this day, that whatever anyone on entering seizes for 
himself, that he may hold in perpetual right for himself and his heirs. 
If all had entered with equal chance, the city might have been taken 
and the spoils would have been sufficient for all. But “Gt is rare that 
an enterprise bad in inception and perverse in purpose has a good end- 
ing,” for “Gain basely obtained brings no good results.” #9 Through 
cupidity, they refused to allow their comrades to share in the booty, 
therefore they alone justly suffered peril of death. About forty entered, 
but the rest were not able to follow. 

Up to this time the citizens had feared for their very lives and were 
prepared to endure extreme measures without resistance. Now, how- 
ever, perceiving that these few were cut off from their comrades, they 
fell upon them with renewed strength and courage and killed them. 
They then rallied their forces and, as with courage reborn, again seized 
the arms which they had laid down as if defeated and rushed with one 
accord to the place where the wall had fallen in. There, by joining to- 
gether immense beams and huge blocks of wood, of which the ships af- 
forded a large supply, they filled the breach, closed the opening, and 
with the utmost ardor made the place impenetrable. 

After strengthening the towers next to the burned area on both sides, 
which had been abandoned because of the furious flames, they again 
girded themselves for the combat and renewed the fight. Of their 
own accord, as if with no thought of their former reverses, they chal- 

48 This charge of cupidity against the Templars is regarded by Lundgreen as a 
reflection of William’s prejudice against the order, and unjustified by the facts, which 


could be explained in other ways. 
49 Ovid Am. 1. x. 48. 


228 CAPTURE OF ASCALON 


lenged us to battle. The fighters in the tower, however, knowing that 
its foundations had been weakened and that the lower part of the solid 
frame had been injured, felt no confidence in it and accordingly fought 
with little energy. 

The enemy, for our undoing, suspended the bodies of our slain by 
ropes from the ramparts of the wall and, with taunting words and 
gestures, gave vent to the joy which they felt. But deepest grief soon 
took the place of this joy, and the events which followed plainly showed 
how true is the saying, “Pride goeth before destruction and an haughty 
spirit before a fall.” 5° 

The Christians, on the contrary, were prostrated in mind and heart. 
Overcome by grief, in bitterness of spirit, they became faint-hearted 
and lost all hope of ultimate victory. 


28. Again the Christians are comforted; they are encouraged 
to continue the siege and press on more zealously than ever. 


In the meantime, the king, appalled at the terrible calamity, called 
the chiefs together. When they had assembled in his tent (the patri- 
arch and the archbishop of Tyre and other prelates of the church being 
also in attendance), he placed before them the Life-giving Cross and 
anxiously inquired what was to be done in such a great change of for- 
tune. As, in the fear of God, they deliberated with the utmost solicitude, 
there arose a division of opinion which split the assembly into two par- 
ties. For some, doubtful of their power to win the city, maintained that 
they had wasted their efforts there for a long time in vain. Their forces 
had been slain in large numbers, the leaders either wounded or taken 
prisoners; even their resources had given out. They contended that 
the city was impregnable; the citizens had an abundance of all commodi- 
ties, their strength was frequently repaired, while ours was failing. 
They advised a return. 

Others, of a saner mind, counselled that they persevere, hoping in 
the mercy of the Lord, who was not wont to abandon those who with 
pious long-suffering trusted in Him. It was of little use, they said, for 
an enterprise to have a good beginning unless it was brought to a like 
end. Much time and expense had indeed been employed, but it was 
with the hope of a more abundant reward of which, though it seemed 


50 Pr, 16:18. 


CAPTURE OF ASCALON 229 


deferred, God would not deprive them. Their forces had indeed fallen, 
but yet the hope remained that they would find a glorious resurrection; 
for the promise to the faithful was: “Your sorrow shall be turned into 
joy” *! and “Seek, and ye shall find.” *? Reasoning in this way, they 
advised against returning and strove to induce the Christians to per- 
severe as strong men in this task. Almost all the lay princes upheld the 
opinion of the first faction; the king, also, wearied by adverse fate, 
seemed to lean toward that view. 

The patriarch, the archbishop of Tyre, and all the clergy, also Ray- 
mond, the master of the Hospitallers, and his brethren agreed with 
the opposite faction. 

Thus the assembly was divided and all gave various reasons support- 
ing opposite opinions. But divine mercy, ever present with them, caused 
the opinion of the patriarch to prevail, for it seemed to have greater 
merit and promised more glory.®? It was therefore unanimously re- 
solved to return to the Lord and, after imploring aid from Heaven, to 
persevere in the task they had undertaken until the Dayspring from 
on high should visit them and look with favor upon their labors. 

Accordingly, with unanimity of purpose, all seized their arms and, 
returning to the task in hand, ordered the trumpets to sound the signal. 
The clarion’s call and the voice of the herald soon summoned the 
whole people to battle. Eager to avenge the wrongs of their murdered 
brethren, the people gathered before the city with unusual fervor and 
with avidity challenged the foe to battle. To survey our ranks, it was 
as if they had suffered no loss or had, at least, received fresh reinforce- 
ments. Seized with a mad fury for extermination, they rushed upon the 
enemy and attacked them so fiercely that the foe marvelled and stood 
dumbfounded before the evidence of our insuperable strength and 
indomitable perseverance. Although they made desperate efforts to 
retaliate with equal fury, it was all in vain, for they could not stand 
against the shock of our troops or avoid their swords. The battle that 
day was waged between far from equal forces, yet knights and foot 
soldiers alike won the palm of victory everywhere and triumphed at 
every point over the foe. 

51 Jno. 16: 20. 52 Mat. 7: 7. 

58 Tt is of interest to note at this point not only another instance of the aggressive, 
vigorous attitude of Patriarch Fulcher, but also of the codperation of Fulcher with 


the Hospitallers, who were apparently the only military group strongly in favor of 
continued operations. 


230 CAPTURE OF ASCALON 


Thus great slaughter was wrought upon the enemy, and the injury 
suffered by the Christians three days before was returned in overwhelm- 
ing measure. There was not a household in the city whose domestic 
circle was not touched with deepest anguish. The city was covered with 
confusion, and the woes already experienced seemed light by compari- 
son with the present peril. At no time, from the beginning of the siege 
even to that time, had similar disasters befallen them, nor had they 
ever experienced equal losses. For, since the flower of their kingdom 
was destroyed and the rulers of the city killed, they lacked counsel, 
valor languished, and all hope of resistance vanished. 

By general consent, therefore, certain of their principal leaders were 
sent to the king as ambassadors. They were to ask a temporary truce 
for the purpose of exchanging the bodies of the dead, that each side 
might have the privilege, according to its own custom, of rendering the 
last honors with fitting funeral rites. 

The terms demanded met with the approval of the Christians. ‘The 
bodies of the dead were exchanged and committed to the tomb with 
solemn obsequies. 


29. The people of Ascalon give way to despair; y 8 general con- 
sent they are disposed to surrender. 


Wuen the people of Ascalon saw the evidence of the slaughter of 
their host and perceived the mighty strength which the Lord had di- 
rected against them, the grief and consternation of their hearts was 
renewed, and, in proportion to the magnitude of their distress, their 
courage melted away. Moreover, that nothing might be lacking to 
the sum of their misfortunes, that same day a further disaster overtook 
them. Forty of their gallant soldiers were dragging a mighty beam to 
a place where it was needed when a huge stone, cast by our hurling 
machine, fell upon the beam and crushed it completely, together with 
the men moving it. 

Then, in bitterness of heart, struggling under the weight of troubles, 
the surviving elders of the city called the people together. With tears 
and lamentations they assembled; among the throng were women 
clasping their little ones to their breasts and feeble old men whose last 
breath was almost spent. Then, with the general consent of all, certain 
wise and eloquent men addressed the assembled people as follows: 
“Men of Ascalon, you who dwell within these gates, you know, and no 


CAPTURE OF ASCALON 231 


one better than you, how we have for fifty years waged a dangerous 
and difficult struggle against this redoubtable people, so persistent in 
their purpose. You know full well by actual experience how often they 
have overthrown our sires in battle and how many times, stepping into 
the places of their fathers, our sons have renewed the struggle to repel 
their injuries. The hope of preserving this spot whence we derived 
our origin, of defending our wives and children and that far greater 
privilege, liberty, has ever led us on. For forty-four years this strife 
has continued, since the time when that people, so troublesome to us, 
came upon us from the most remote regions of the West and with a 
strong hand took violent possession of the whole region from Tarsus 
of Cilicia even unto Egypt. This city alone, by reason of the valorous 
efforts of our forefathers, has remained intact, in the midst of such 
strong adversaries, even unto the present day. Yet the hazards en- 
dured up to this time, when compared with those now threatening us, 
may be deemed little or nothing. Even now, not one among us has less 
inclination to resist, but the army is wasted away, the supplies are ex- 
hausted, the burden of hardships is unendurable. The mighty host of 
the enemy is ever on the watch and exceedingly persistent; their con- 
stant molestations have weakened our strength, both of body and mind, 
and deprived us of the power to prolong the struggle. 

“Accordingly, it seems expedient to the chief men of Ascalon, if 
you also agree, that we try to extricate ourselves at this time from our 
present sufferings. Let us send envoys on behalf of the whole people 
to that powerful king who is besieging us, and endeavor to obtain on 
definite terms permission to depart freely with our wives and children, 
servants and maidservants, and all our goods. In return, we, on our 
part, will agree to surrender the city to him—with groans do we utter 
these words—in order to put an end to such terrible misfortunes.” *4 


30. Envoys chosen from the leading men of the city are sent to 
the king. They obtain from him permission to depart freely 
with their wives and children and all their substance. The 
city 1s surrendered. 


Tus speech seemed good in the eyes of all, and it was approved with 
loud shouts of assent, as is usual under such circumstances. Wise and 
54 This speech must, of course, be regarded as William’s own imaginative recon- 


struction. It offers an interesting instance of his sympathetic appreciation of the plight 
of the enemy. 


232 CAPTURE OF ASCALON 


discreet men of venerable and revered appearance were chosen from 
the assembled people to convey to the king and his nobles the proposi- 
tion which they had decided upon. These envoys, on receipt of permis- 
sion to advance under safe conduct, issued forth from the gate and 
approached the presence of the king. 

When all the princes had assembled, as requested by the envoys, the 
proposition was placed before them, and the terms stipulated were ex- 
plained in detail. The ambassadors were then asked to retire for a 
time while the king conferred with his leading counsellors as to their 
advice. They, however, burst forth into tears of joy and, with eyes and 
hands raised aloft to heaven, returned profound thanks to their Creator, 
who had deigned to bestow upon them, all unworthy as they were, such 
abundant favor. 

The messengers were then recalled. A unanimous answer was given 
them, namely that the terms offered would be accepted, if, within the 
three following days, they should vacate the entire city. To this the en- 
voys assented, but asked that it be confirmed by an oath to give strength 
to the treaty. An oath was accordingly taken with due solemnity, the 
king and certain chosen nobles giving their hand that, in good faith, 
without evil designs, they would keep all the terms of the aforesaid 
agreement. They then surrendered the hostages, whom the king had 
demanded by name, and returned joyfully to their own domains. A 
number of Christian knights accompanied them to place the king’s 
standard over the loftiest tower of the city in token of victory. 

When our army, who were waiting in eager expectation, saw the 
royal standards floating from the highest towers, a great shout burst 
from the exultant company. Cries of praise not unaccompanied by tears 
rose to heaven as from one voice, saying, “Blessed be the God of our 
fathers who has not deserted those who trusted in Him; and blessed 
be the Name of His Majesty which is holy, because today we have 
seen wondrous things.” 

Although according to the treaty a truce of three successive days had 
been granted to the townspeople, yet so greatly did they fear the pres- 
ence of the Christians that within two days all their preparations were 
completed. Then, girt for the journey, they set out with their wives 
and children, servants and maidservants, and all kinds of paraphernalia. 
In accordance with the agreement, the king furnished them guides as 


CAPTURE OF ASCALON 233 


far as al-Arish, an ancient city lying in the desert, and sent them away in 
peace. 

The king and the patriarch, accompanied by the other princes of the 
realm and the prelates of the church, together with all the clergy and 
the entire people, then entered the city with hymns and spiritual songs, 
led by the Cross of the Lord. The Cross was borne into the principal 
chapel of the Turks, a building of exceeding beauty, later consecrated 
in honor of the apostle Paul. After the divine rites and services of 
thanksgiving had been solemnized there, all withdrew to the quarters 
assigned to them and passed a joyous day, memorable forever.®® 

Within a few days thereafter the patriarch organized the church in 
Ascalon. He established there a definite number of canons and gave 
them fixed incomes called prebends. He also ordained as bishop of the 
city one Absalom, a regular canon of the church of the Sepulchre of the 
Lord, although Gerald, bishop of Bethlehem, vigorously protested 
against this appointment and forbade that it be made. Later the case 
was referred by appeal to the pope at Rome. The latter removed the 
bishop consecrated by the patriarch and granted to the bishop of Beth- 
lehem the church at Ascalon with all its possessions, to be held by him 
and the church at Bethlehem in perpetual right.°° 

By his mother’s advice, the king distributed possessions and the 
lands dependent thereon both within and without the city to those 
who had well deserved them; to some, also for a price.” The city of 
Ascalon he generously bestowed upon his young brother Amaury, 
count of Jaffa. Ascalon was taken on the twelfth day of August in the 


°° William had seen this chapel before he wrote this account, which is another evi- 
dence of his unusual interest in architecture. The vividness of his description of the 
siege almost suggests that William himself was present during part of it, though he 
nowhere indicates his presence. He was about twenty-three years old at the time and 
still a student, probably at Jerusalem, which was not very far away. 

58 The relationship of Bethlehem and Ascalon was thus reversed from its traditional 
organization. However, this problem had arisen during the First Crusade, and the 
precedent was then established for the papal action (see Book IX, chap. 1, note 2; Book 
XI, chap. 12). Ascalon might have been maintained as a separate bishopric, but the pro- 
tests of Gerald and Ralph, who became his successor in the bishopric of Bethlehem, 
succeeded in having it made subject to that see. The question was decided by Pope 
Hadrian IV. 

57 Tt is of interest to note that the king’s mother had not lost her interest in the 
management of affairs despite her defeat a year or two before. The sale of privileges 
indicated by William reflects the importance of the commercial element in the Latin 
states, 


234 CAPTURE OF ASCALON 


year 1154 of the Incarnation of the Lord and the tenth year of the 
reign of King Baldwin III.5° 

A deplorable calamity overtook the unfortunate people of Ascalon 
on their journey down to Egypt. When the men who had been ap- 
pointed by the king to guide them on their way and to see that no one 
molested them departed, the refugees were attacked by one Nocquinus, 
a Turk, strong in arms but of evil life and utterly disloyal. This man 
had shared their hardships and for a long time had fought with them 
for pay. He pretended that he wished to accompany them on the jour- 
ney to Egypt. When he saw that the guides had left them, however, he 
scornfully cast aside all good faith and humanity and fell upon them. 
Then, after robbing them of all their goods, he departed and left them 
to wander in the wilderness.®° 

58 The errors in this date may be due to copyists. The year should be 1153 and 
the day of the month probably August 22 instead of 12 (see Stevenson, Crusaders, 
p. 171, note 3). 

59 No other accounts mention this incident of Nocquinus, but such raids were proba- 


bly too common to arouse comment by Arab historians, even though this one did arouse 
William’s sympathy. 


HERE ENDS THE SEVENTEENTH BOOK 


HERE BEGINS THE EIGHTEENTH BOOK 


LATIN JERUSALEM AT ITS HEIGHT UNDER 
BALDWIN III: THE LURE OF EGYPT 


1. The patriarch of Antioch is shamefully abused by Renaud 
de Chatillon. He takes refuge in the kingdom. A severe 
famine spreads over the land. 


RENAUD DE CHATILLON had married the widow of Raymond, prince 
of Antioch, as has been related above. From the first he had perceived 
that this marriage was displeasing to the patriarch, and as the prelate 
continued to maintain the same attitude, Renaud looked with suspicion 
on all he did.t The patriarch, a very rich and powerful man whose au- 
thority was supreme, often expressed himself rather freely, both in 
public and in private, about Renaud and his doings, and, as is usually 
the case, these remarks were reported to the prince by persons who 
sought to increase the hatred between the two. Thereupon, Renaud 
was moved to violent and inexorable wrath. He laid violent hands 
upon the patriarch and with diabolic daring caused the venerable man 
to be seized and ignominiously conducted to the citadel which towers 
high above Antioch. Then—a most abominable act—he forced the 
aged priest, a successor of Peter, the chief of the apostles, although an 
almost helpless invalid, to sit in the blazing sun throughout a summer’s 
day, his bare head smeared with honey. No one, for piety’s sake, offered 
him any relief from the relentless rays of the sun or tried to drive 
away the flies. 

When news of this outrage reached the king of Jerusalem, he was 
overwhelmed with amazement and dismay at the mad conduct of the 
foolish prince. Almost beside himself with consternation, he dispatched 
to Renaud two venerable envoys, Frederick, bishop of Acre, and Ralph, 
the chancellor. They were the bearers of a letter in which the king, by 
virtue of his royal authority, reproved the prince for his outrageous 
act and warned him to turn from his wicked ways. When the prince 

1 This episode of the quarrel of Renaud de Chatillon and Patriarch Aimery extended _ 
over a number of years. William’s reason for placing it here is doubtless the fact that 


Renaud married Constance in 1153. The incidents which he recites, however, extended 
all the way to 1160 if not beyond. 


236 JERUSALEM UNDER BALDWIN III 


had heard the messengers and perused the king’s letter, he released 
the patriarch, but not without heaping much abuse upon him. The 
goods which had been taken by violence from the prelate and his people 
were also completely restored. In the end, however, the patriarch left 
the land of Antioch and repaired to the kingdom of Jerusalem. He 
was kindly received by the king and his wise mother, as indeed by the 
patriarch and all the bishops of the kingdom, and there he remained 
for several years. 

In the following year, a severe famine spread over the whole land.* 
The Lord, filled with anger toward us, took away our main support, 
bread, so that a measure of wheat was sold for four gold pieces. In fact, 
had it not been that a supply of grain was found in Ascalon when that 
city was taken, famine would have invaded the land and the people 
would have almost wholly perished. For fifty years, through fear of 
hostilities, the fields around Ascalon had lain without cultivation. But 
during the years following its capture, the land was under the care of 
the farmer, and the people of that district, relieved from fear of the 
enemy, could freely cultivate the ground. Hence the entire kingdom 
enjoyed such abundance that all former years, in comparison with the 
present, might with justice be called sterile and fruitless. The soil, so 
long uncultivated and deprived of the care of the plough, had retained 
within itself all its strength; as a result it responded to the farmer’s 
care with multiplied interest and produced a sixtyfold crop. 


2. On the death of Anastasius, Hadrian is elected pope. Em- 
peror Frederick is crowned at Rome. A serious enmity arises 


between the pope and King Wilham of Sicily. 


Wui e these events were happening in the lands of the Orient, Pope 
Anastasius IV died at Rome and Adrian III [Hadrian IV] was chosen 
in his stead.? This pope was English by birth, from the castle of St. 
Albans. He had been abbot of the regular canons in the church of St. 


* This famine of 1154 is also mentioned as occurring in Damascus in that year. 
Qalanisi, however, ascribes it there to a deliberate blockade of Damascus by Nureddin, 
who forbade the usual export of grain from the north (H. A. R. Gibb, The Damascus 
Chronicle, p. 317). 

§ Hadrian IV (not-III), Nicholas Breakspear, was elected pope toward the end of 
the year 1154. He was the first and thus far the only pope of English birth. The main 
events of his life as given here are substantially correct, though the place of his birth 
is usually given as Langley, near St. Albans (see Dictionary of National Biography; 
also Catholic Encyclopedia). 


JERUSALEM UNDER BALDWIN III 337 


Rufus, near the city of Avignon, in Provence, in the diocese of Arles. 
Thence he was called to the church of Rome by Pope Eugenius of 
precious memory and was ordained bishop of Albano under the name 
Nicholas. Later, he was sent as legate by Anastasius, the successor of 
Pope Eugenius, to Norway, the most remote province of the West. On 
his return after the death of this pope, he was present at the election 
and was unanimously chosen pope by the clergy and people and given 
. the name Hadrian. 

This same year, it happened that Frederick, king of the Teutons, al- 
though not yet emperor, went down into Italy with large forces and 
laid siege to Tortona, a city of Lombardy. The siege was long continued, 
but when the place was finally taken, he determined to go to Rome and 
there be crowned emperor.* 

During the same time, also, serious enmity arising from various 
causes developed between Pope Hadrian, of whom we have been speak- 
ing, and William, king of Sicily, son of Roger of good memory. The 
discord between the two had reached a point of such open animosity 
that the pope hurled the sentence of excommunication against the king 
and began deadly warfare against him.® 

Nevertheless, Frederick, bent upon his purpose, hastened on his way 
_and within a few days advanced from Lombardy to Rome, where his 
sudden arrival gave rise to some suspicion in the minds of the pope and 
the whole Roman church. At last, however, through the work of cer- 
tain mediators, the customary terms were arranged, and on the sixth 
day before the Kalends of July [June 26] Frederick was crowned with 
great ceremony in the church of St. Peter and proclaimed emperor.*® 

Three days later, on the feast day of the holy apostles Peter and 
Paul, the king, adorned with the imperial insignia, and the pope, wear- 
ing the distinctive decorations of the supreme pontifical office, joined 


*Tortona was captured April 18, 1155, after a siege of nine weeks. After a short 
rest in Genoa, Frederick moved toward Rome, visiting a number of towns, including 
Bologna, on the way (see H. Simonsfeld, Jahrbiicher des deutschen Reiches unter 
Friederich I, 1, 301-36). 

5 The trouble between William I of Sicily and the papacy had begun before the 
election of Hadrian IV. Hadrian refused to recognize William as king and continued 
the struggle which now became open warfare (see F. Chalandon, Histoire de la 
domination normande en Italie et en Sicile, Il, 194 ff.). 

6 The meeting of Hadrian and Frederick was attended with a series of misunder- 
standings. The famous incident of Frederick’s refusal to hold the pope’s stirrup oc- 
curred at this time. The coronation of Frederick as emperor took place somewhat 
earlier than William’s date—June 18, 1155 (see Simonsfeld, Ja/rbiicher, I, 335-36). 


238 JERUSALEM UNDER BALDWIN III 


forces at a place called the Lucan bridge, near the city of Tivoli. Thence, 
amid the rejoicing of clergy and people and crowned with the laurel, 
they proceeded on their way together, and when the festal day was 
over parted from one another in good accord. The emperor hastened 
to Ancona, whither the affairs of the empire called him, and the pope 
proceeded to the vicinity of Rome, where he tarried for a while in 
the hill cities. 

Meanwhile, the king of Sicily had ordered his nobles to lay siege 
to the city of Benevento, which was the peculiar property of the Roman 
church, and to blockade the town as closely as possible. The pope was 
annoyed beyond measure at this action. Desirous of repaying an ill 
turn with equal measure, he endeavored to stir up the king’s own nobles 
against him, nor were his wishes in that respect ungratified. Success 
attended his efforts, for he persuaded the most powerful count of Sicily, 
Robert of Bassavilla, the son of the king’s aunt, and many other nobles 
besides to rise against their lord by promising that they should never 
lack the aid and counsel of the Roman church.’ Moreover, many il- 
lustrious and powerful nobles who had been deprived of their patri- 
mony and driven from the realm as exiles by William and his father 
were induced by the pope’s admonitions to return to the kingdom and 
resume possession of the property which belonged to them by heredi- 
tary right. In the number were Robert of Sorrento, prince of Capua, 
Count Andreas of Rapacanina, and many others. To all these the pope 
gave his solemn assurance as pope that the church of Rome would 
never fail them. Notwithstanding this promise, he urged both the 
Roman emperor and the emperor of Constantinople—the former, who 
was still in Italy, openly by word of mouth and the latter privately 
by letters—to seize the kingdom of Sicily.® 

* The revolt of William’s cousin, Robert of Loritello, and other nobles of south- 
ern Italy created a critical situation into which either Frederick Barbarossa or Manuel 
might inject a decisive influence. Manuel’s representatives were quick to take ad- 


vantage of the situation, although Manuel was too occupied elsewhere to send any 
considerable army. 

8 Whether Hadrian negotiated with both at the same time or with Manuel after 
Frederick had indicated his inability to interfere at the moment is uncertain. There 
is some question whether the initiative in the relations between Hadrian and the 
ria was taken by the former or the latter. (F. Chalandon, Les Comméne, Il, 358- 
60). 















































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































am | i 
i 

wil i | i 
\ a 
AU ATT af: il 

| HNN , 

































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































THE REGIONS OF 
<«« WILLIAM OF TYRE 


: 3 | 


\ 
a al gf! 


JERUSALEM UNDER BALDWIN III 239 


3. An altercation arises between the patriarch and the brethren 
of the Hospital over the question of tithes and also over cer- 
tain injuries done to the churches by that order. 


Wuite the churches of Italy were in this unsettled state and affairs 
in the kingdom of Sicily were likewise disturbed, our part of the Orient 
was not free from troubles. For, at the very time when, by divine favor, 
the city of Ascalon was restored to the Christians, when the affairs of 
the kingdom also were progressing satisfactorily and crops were abun- 
dant, the enemy of man, begrudging the tranquillity granted by the 
Lord, began to sow tares. For Raymond, master of the house of the 
Hospital, together with his brethren who were also filled with the same 
spirit (although in other respects he seemed to be a religious and God- 
fearing man), began to cause great trouble to the patriarch and the 
other prelates of the church over matters of parochial jurisdiction and 
tithes. The Hospitallers were in the habit of receiving to the celebra- 
tion of the holy sacrament, without discrimination or question, those 
who had been excommunicated by their own bishops or interdicted by 
name and who, thus, in punishment for their sins, were cut off from the 
church. Neither did they refuse the viaticum and extreme unction to 
these same persons when sick, or deny them burial. When, because of 
crimes committed, silence was imposed upon all the churches or upon 
those of a certain city or castle, the Hospitallers were wont to ring 
their bells and call more loudly than usual, to summon those under 
interdict to divine service. This they did that they themselves might 
enjoy the offerings and other revenues which rightly belonged to the 
mother churches, that, while others were sorrowing, they alone might 
rejoice.® They forgot the words of the illustrious preacher who said, 
“Rejoice with them that do rejoice, and weep with them that weep.” 1° 

Moreover, they did not present their priests to the bishop of the 
place, according to the ancient law of the sacred canons, that they might 
have the consent of their superiors to celebrate the holy ofhces in their 
dioceses. Nor did they, when it became necessary to remove a priest 


® Great friction between the secular and regular clergy usually arose shortly after 
the founding of each new order. This was aggravated by the greater mobility of 
the later orders. When the military orders were given the right to have their own 
chaplains and their exemption from local prelates, instances of conflicting jurisdic- 
tion were certain, William here recites a nearly complete list of grievances which 
the local prelates held against the military orders. 

tO RO: TAP TS: 


240 JERUSALEM UNDER BALDWIN III 


from his parish, whether justly or unjustly, make this known to their 
bishops. They absolutely refused to give tithes from their own bene- 
fices and from all the revenues devolving, by whatever right, upon 
them. All the bishops had this grievance against them; all the cathe- 
dral churches everywhere suffered this same loss. The most intolerable 
wrong of all, however, a thing abhorrent to all Christians, was done to 
the patriarch and the holy church at Jerusalem. For, before the very 
doors of the church of the Holy Resurrection, to show their insolent 
contempt for the church itself, they began to erect an edifice far higher 
and more costly than that church which had been consecrated by the 
precious blood of our Saviour, who hung upon the cross—the church 
which afforded Him an acceptable sepulchre within its walls after the 
agony of the crucifixion.!? 

Moreover, whenever the lord patriarch went up to speak to the 
people, according to custom, from the place where the Saviour of man- 
kind hung for our salvation and thus bought complete redemption for 
the whole world, they endeavored to hinder the celebration of the office 
entrusted to him. With intentional malice they set their many great 
bells ringing so loudly and persistently that the voice of the patriarch 
could not rise above the din, nor could the people, in spite of all his 
efforts, hear him. The patriarch often complained to the citizens of the 
outrageous conduct of the Hospitallers, which was perfectly obvious. 
Yet, though many besought them to cease, they remained incorrigible, 
and even threatened that eventually they would use measures still 
more strenuous. This threat they carried out; for they carried their 
presumption to such extremes that, in a spirit of audacious fury, they 
armed and, breaking into the church beloved of God as into the house 
of a common person, hurled forth showers of arrows, as if against a 
den of robbers. These arrows were later collected and tied into a bun- 
dle, and we ourselves as well as many others saw them hanging from 
a rope before the place of Calvary where the Lord was crucified.?? 


11 This was the main building of the Hospitallers in Jerusalem, probably in all 
Palestine. It had to be large to meet their expanded needs, the housing of their 
knights, the care of the sick, as well as their business interests. Rabbi Benjamin of 
Tudela, who visited Jerusalem about 1163, describes it as housing four hundred 
knights in addition to the sick and visiting pilgrims. Probably no offense was in- 
tended by this enlargement of their building, but during the quarrel the secular 
prelates so interpreted it. 

12 Such an outrage would seem to represent an advanced stage in the friction between 
the Hospitallers and the secular church, near the time of the appeal to Rome. The 
incident attests William’s own presence in Jerusalem about this time. 


JERUSALEM UNDER BALDWIN III 241 


Those who have made a careful study of this subject believe that the 
Roman church was primarily responsible for this great evil, although 
perhaps unwittingly and without having given sufficient consideration 
to the privilege which was demanded. For it was the church which un- 
justly removed the house of the Hospital from the jurisdiction of the 
patriarch of Jerusalem, to whom it had been rightly subject.1? Hence 
the Hospitallers have neither reverence toward God nor regard for any 
man except those whom they fear. Yet not indiscriminately do we ac- 
cuse all of arrogance, a sin most odious to God, and the mother of all 
vices. We believe, indeed, that in so large a body it would be almost 
impossible that all should proceed by the same path without any varia- 
tion of conduct. 

In order to explain in this history how from a modest beginning this 
house has developed so powerfully and how unjustly it has acted and 
still continues to act against the churches of God, it is necessary to begin 
the story somewhat farther back; this, with the help of God, we shall 
endeavor to do without deviating in the least from the truth. 


4. The origin and development of the house of the Hospital is 
described. 


In the time of the Roman Emperor Heraclius, according to ancient 
histories, the power of the people of Arabia became very great against 
him. Asa result, the kingdom of Jerusalem, with all Syria and Egypt 
and the adjacent provinces, because of our sins fell into the hands of 
enemies of the Christian faith and name. Nevertheless, although the 
holy places were thus under the power of the enemy from time to time, 
many people from the West visited them for the sake of devotion or 
business, possibly for both. Among those from the West who ventured 
at that time to go to the holy places for the purpose of trade, were cer- 
tain men from Italy who were known as Amalfitani from the name of 
their city.** 

13 The reference is to the various papal privileges from that of Innocent II, 
March 29, 1139, to that of Anastasius IV, February 17, 1154. Each of these grants 
involved some extension of privilege, and it was doubtless the one of Anastasius IV 
which precipitated the trouble in Jerusalem (see F. Lundgreen, Wilhelm von Tyrus 
und der Templerorden, App. I, 183-85). 

14 Amalfi was one of the principal commercial cities of the western Mediter- 
ranean before the crusades. Its affiliations were with Constantinople, but it was prac- 
tically independent (see W. von Heyd, Histoire du commerce du Levant au moyen- 
age, I, 98-108). 


242 JERUSALEM UNDER BALDWIN III 


The city of Amalfi lies between lofty mountains and the sea. To the 
east, about seven miles distant by sea, is the noble city of Salerno. To 
the west lie Sorrento and Naples, the city of Virgil; to the south, about 
two hundred miles away across the Tyrrhenian sea, is Sicily.° The 
people of Amalfi, as has been said, were the first who, for the sake of 
gain, attempted to carry to the Orient foreign wares hitherto unknown 
to the East. Because of the necessary articles which they brought thither, 
they obtained very advantageous terms from the principal men of those 
lands and were permitted to come there freely. The people also were 
favorably disposed toward them.?¢ 

At that epoch the prince of Egypt held all the coastal region from 
the city of Jabala, situated on the shore near Laodicea in Syria, as far as 
Alexandria, the last city in Egypt. Over each city was placed a governor 
who made the power of the prince feared far and wide. The Amalfitani, 
however, enjoyed the full favor of the king as well as of his nobles and 
were able to travel in perfect safety all over the country as traders and 
dealers in the useful articles which they carried. Faithful to the tradi- 
tions of their fathers and the Christian profession, these merchants were 
in the habit of visiting the holy places whenever opportunity offered. 
They had no house of their own at Jerusalem, however, where they 
might remain for a while, as they had in the coast cities. To carry out 
a long-cherished plan, therefore, they assembled as many people of 
their own city as possible and visited the caliph of Egypt. They gained 
the good will of the people of his household, presented a petition in 
writing, and received a favorable response, in accordance with their 
desires. 


5. How the caliph of Egypt, at the petition of the Amal fitani, 
ordered a place to be set aside for them where they might 
build a church. 


A wRITTEN order was accordingly sent to the governor of Jerusalem, 
directing that a very ample area at Jerusalem, in that part of the city 
occupied by the Christians, be designated at their request for the people 


15 Here, as in a number of places, William reveals a familiarity with southern 
Italy which suggests a personal acquaintance. Why he regards Naples as Virgil’s city 
is not clear. 

18 William’s sympathetic appreciation of commerce appears here as elsewhere. It 
is doubtful whether the people of Amalfi were the first or only people to bring the 
products of the West to the Levant, but their definite connection with Jerusalem 
condones this exclusive notice by William (Heyd, Histoire du commerce). 


JERUSALEM UNDER BALDWIN III 243 


of Amalfi, friends and carriers of useful articles. There they were to 
erect such a building as they desired. The city was divided at that time, 
as it is today, into four almost equal parts; of these that quarter alone 
which contains the Sepulchre of the Lord had been granted to the faith- 
ful as the place of their abode. The rest of the city, with the Temple of 
the Lord, was occupied exclusively by infidels. 

In accordance with the caliph’s command, a place sufficiently large 
for the necessary buildings was set aside for the people of Amalfi. Of- 
ferings of money were collected from the merchants, and before the 
door of the church of the Resurrection of the Lord, barely a stone’s 
throw away, they built a monastery in honor of the holy and glorious 
mother of God, the Ever Virgin Mary.1” In connection with this there 
were suitable offices for the use of the monks and for the entertainment 
of guests from their own city. 

When the place was finished, they brought an abbot and monks from 
Amalfi and established the monastery under a regular rule as a place of 
holy life acceptable to the Lord. Since those who had founded the place 
and maintained it in religion were men of the Latin race, it has been 
called from that time until this the monastery of the Latins. 

Even in those days it often happened that chaste and holy widows 
came to Jerusalem to kiss the revered places. Regardless of natural 
timidity, they had met without fear the numberless dangers of the way. 
Since there was no place within the portals of the monastery where such 
pilgrims might be honorably received, the same pious men who had 
founded the monastery made a suitable provision for these people also, 
that when devout women came they might not lack a chapel, a house, 
and separate quarters of their own. A little convent was finally estab- 
lished there, by divine mercy, in honor of that pious sinner, Mary Mag- 
dalene, and a regular number of sisters placed there to minister to 
women pilgrims. 

During these same perilous times there also flocked thither people 
of other nations, both nobles and those of the middle class.1® As there 


17 This procedure may or may not have been followed at the time, but the state- 
ment suggests what was probably the procedure in such matters in William’s own 
time. Heyd believes that most of the credit for these establishments at Jerusalem 
should be given to a certain lord of Amalfi, Maurus, who died in 1071 (Heyd, 
Histoire du commerce, 1, 104-6). He would date the rebuilding of these mon- 
asteries between 1063 and 1071 during the reign of Caliph Mustansir. 

18 Literally of the second class, secundae classis. Social classes were more clearly 
differentiated in William’s time than they had been earlier, even as late as 1100. 


244 JERUSALEM UNDER BALDWIN III 


was no approach to the Holy City except through hostile lands, pil- 
grims had usually exhausted their travelling money by the time they 
reached Jerusalem. Wretched and helpless, a prey to all the hardships 
of hunger, thirst, and nakedness, such pilgrims were forced to wait be- 
fore the city gates until they had paid a gold coin, when they were per- 
mitted to enter the city. Even after they finally gained admission and 
had visited the holy places one after another, they had no means of 
resting even for a single day, except as it was offered in a fraternal 
spirit by the brothers of this monastery. All the other dwellers in 
Jerusalem were Saracens and infidels with the exception of the patri- 
arch, the clergy and the miserable Syrian people. These latter were 
so overburdened by daily exactions of manifold corvees and extra serv- 
ices, and by work of the most menial nature, that they could scarcely 
breathe. They lived in the direst poverty and in continual fear of 
death. 

Since there was no one to offer shelter to the wretched pilgrims of 
our faith, thus afflicted and needy to the last degree, the holy men 
who dwelt in the monastery of the Latins in pity took from their 
own means and, within the space allotted to them, built a hospital 
for the relief of such pilgrims. There they received these people, 
whether sick or well, lest they be found strangled by night on the 
streets. In addition to offering shelter in the hospital, they arranged 
that the fragments remaining from the food supplies of the two mon- 
asteries, namely, of the monks and of the nuns, should be spared for 
the daily sustenance of such people. 

Furthermore, they erected in that place an altar in honor of St. 
John the Almoner. This John was a native of Cyprus, a holy man 
and worthy of praise in every respect. Later, because of his merits, 
he became patriarch of Alexandria. He was especially noted for his 
works of piety, and his devoted zeal and generous almsgiving will 
ever be celebrated by each church of the saints. Hence he was called 
by the holy fathers Eleymon, which, being interpreted, is “merciful.” 1° 

This venerable foundation which thus stretched out the hand of 
charity to its fellow men had neither revenues nor possessions; but 
each year the citizens of Amalfi, both those at home and those who 
followed the business of trading abroad, collected money from their 
own number as a voluntary offering. This they sent to the abbot of 


19 See Book I, note 52. 


JERUSALEM UNDER BALDWIN III 245 


the hospital, whoever he might be at the time, by the hands of those 
who were going to Jerusalem. From this money food and shelter were 
provided for the brethren and sisters and the remainder was used to 
extend some assistance to the Christian pilgrims who came to the 
hospital.?° 

For many years this place existed under those conditions, until it 
pleased the Supreme Maker of the world to purge from the supersti- 
tions of the Gentiles that city which He had made clean with His own 
blood. There came at last a Christian people, led by chiefs under the 
protection of God, to whom the Saviour willed that the kingdom be 
surrendered. At that time there was found in the convent for women, 
serving as aboess, a certain holy woman devoted to God, named Agnes. 
This noble woman, a Roman by birth and of high lineage according 
to the flesh, continued to live at Jerusalem for some years after the 
city was restored to the Christian faith.?! | 

In the hospital also was found one Gerald, a man of upright life 
who, under the orders of the abbot and monks, had long rendered 
devoted service to the poor in that place during the supremacy of 
the enemy. Gerald was later succeeded by that Raymond of whom 
we are now speaking.?? 


6. The patriarch, with most of the bishops of the East, goes to 
Rome to visit Pope Hadrian. 


From this modest beginning the importance of the brethren of this 
house increased so greatly that first they withdrew from the jurisdic- 
tion of the abbot, and then, as their wealth multiplied greatly, they 
were released from the hand and power of the patriarch by the Roman 
church.?® After this dangerous liberty was obtained, they never again 
showed any reverence to the prelates of the church and absolutely 


20 William has oversimplified the support of these monasteries. There is evidence 
that collections of money were made in southern France and doubtless elsewhere 
to support this work (see Heyd, Histoire du commerce, I, 105). 

21 Agnes and Gerald are semilegendary persons, whose memory is treasured in 
the history of the Hospitallers because of their mention here. William has mentioned 
Gerald earlier (Book VII, chap. 23; see E. J. King, The Knights Hospitallers in 
the Holy Land, chap. 2 passtm. Fulcher of Chartres wrote an epitaph for Gerald 
at the time of his death, 1120 (H. Hagenmeyer, ed., Fulcheri Carnotensis historia 
Hierosolymitana, pp. 641-42, note 25). 

22 Raymond du Puy, second master of the Hospital, 1120-1160. For a brief sketch 
of his life and administration of the order, see King, Hospitallers, chaps. 3 and 4. 

23 See note 13. 


246 JERUSALEM UNDER BALDWIN III 


refused to give tithes from any of their estates regardless of conditions 
under which these had come into their possession. Influenced by this 
example, many of those places which are called venerable, both mon- 
asteries and hospitals, eventually fell away from their allegiance be- 
cause of their wealth.2* Many of these the church had originally es- 
tablished out of pure liberality, in her usual spirit of piety, and had 
led them along to an enviable state of prosperity. But they abandoned 
their pious mother, who had at first nourished them like babes on 
her own milk and later, as time went on, had supplied them with more 
solid food; so that with justice may the church complain of them, “I 
have nourished and brought up children, and they have rebelled against 
me.” °° May the Lord spare such and permit them to return to their 
right mind, that they may learn to serve with reverence the mother 
whom they have abandoned. May He be even more indulgent than 
to that one who, although he himself had an hundred sheep, desired 
the one ewe lamb of the poor man. To that man the Lord said, “Hast 
thou killed and also taken possession?” 7° Woe to that one, whoever 
he may be! For according to the word of the prophet, “He is a man 
of blood.” 

Again and again the patriarch and other prelates of the church de- 
manded their rights from these same brethren, but ever in vain, until 
at last, as has been said, both parties had recourse to the court of the 
pontiff at Rome. The patriarch, although a very aged man, indeed 
almost a centenarian, set out thither. He took with him some of the 
prelates of the church: namely, Peter, archbishop of Tyre, with his 
suffragans; Frederick, bishop of Acre; and Amalrich, bishop of Sidon; 


24 Doubtless such establishments as the bishopric of Bethlehem, that of Nazareth, 
and many monasteries such as those on Mt. Sion, Mt. Tabor, Mary of the Valley 
of Jehoshaphat are included under this characterization. William never was disposed 
to recognize the difficulties which these foundations caused the church. Pious pil- 
grims from all parts of Christendom insisted upon making bequests to these establish- 
ments. These grants were usually in the form of income from properties equally 
scattered, or even of pieces of land. There was no adequate method of insuring 
the permanence of such grants except through the papacy, whose authority was ac- 
knowledged universally. The patriarch of Jerusalem was scarcely in a position to 
guarantee such protection. Hence the several establishments sought privileges from 
the papacy. As has been indicated a number of times, the papal curia was uncertain 
of the aspirations of the patriarchs, whether of Jerusalem or Antioch, and hence was 
all the more ready to grant such privileges and with them exemption from the juris- 
diction of the patriarch and from that of local bishop and archbishop. It was this last 
fact which Archbishop William especially resented. 

757s, 1:2, 267 Ki, 21:19. 


JERUSALEM UNDER BALDWIN III 247 


Baldwin, archbishop of Caesarea; Constantine, bishop of Lydda; Re- 
nier, bishop of Sebaste; and Herbert, bishop of Tiberias. As soon as 
the pleasant spring weather returned and the turbulence of the wintry 
waves began to subside under the influence of the west wind, they 
set forth on their journey and, after a prosperous voyage, by the 
will of God, came safely to the coast city of Otranto in Apulia.27 


7. The emperor of Constantinople, with the pope’s consent, 
invades Apulia. The patriarch arrives at the court with his 
escort. 


Art the time when the lord patriarch and the bishops of the Orient 
landed in Apulia, as has been related, the emperor of Constantinople, 
at the suggestion of the pope, had sent some of his nobles with a vast 
sum of money to invade that region by armed force. This was done 
with the consent of the chief men of those parts. Consequently, when 
the patriarch and his suite arrived at Brindisi from Otranto, the em- 
peror’s people were already in possession of that city. The entire place 
had been surrendered by the citizens with the exception of the citadel, 
where a few faithful adherents of the king still remained. Moreover, 
Count Robert, who was mentioned above, together with those who 
had joined him more through hatred of the king than through at- 
tachment to himself, had seized by force the two famous cities, Taranto 
and Bari, with all the coast region to the very boundaries of the king- 
dom. Robert, prince of Capua, and Count Andreas, great and dis- 
tinguished men, had taken possession of the entire land of Campania, 
commonly called the Land of Labor, as far as Salerno, Naples, and 
San Germano. The whole country, in fact, was in such an unsettled 
state that those who wished to pass through it found no peace or se- 
curity anywhere.?® Frederick, the emperor of the Romans, was still 
in the vicinity of Ancona with his legions, but the forces which he had 
brought with him into Italy had suffered great losses; many of the 
greatest and most noble princes of the empire had perished, so that 
barely a tenth of his host remained.?® The survivors wished to return 

27 This journey must have occurred in the spring of 1155 to fit in with the events 
in Italy to which William alludes. 

28 These events of the war in southern Italy are described at length by Chalandon 
(see Chalandon, Normans, Vol. II, chap. 7). 


29 Frederick had been approached both by emissaries of the pope and later of Em- 
peror Manuel to interfere in southern Italy. He was sorely tempted and only reluctantly, 


248 JERUSALEM UNDER BALDWIN III 


to their own land, and the emperor, since he could not hold them 
‘back, was preparing to return also; very unwillingly, however, for 
many matters still remained which required his presence, most im- 
portant of all the campaign against the king of Sicily. 

The patriarch and his fellow travellers, therefore, anxiously con- 
sidered by what route they might most safely pass through such an 
unsettled country in order to reach the pope, for war and sedition 
everywhere seemed to cut off all approach to him. The shortest road 
was by way of Benevento, but that city was under siege by Arsequinus, 
chancellor of the king of Sicily.2° The patriarch sent messengers thither 
to ask for an escort, but the chancellor absolutely refused to allow 
the party to pass through that region. Finally, by the advice of cer- 
tain wise men, Patriarch Fulcher decided to follow the shore route 
and arrived at Ancona with all his suite. Thence he sent some of his 
bishops to convey his salutations to the emperor of the Romans (who 
was now on the eve of departing for his own country, as has been 
stated) and to obtain from him imperial letters for the pope, in con- 
nection with his own mission. In this the envoys were successful, al- 
though the emperor, anxious to return home, had already passed 
beyond the cities of Sinigaglia and Pesaro.** 

The patriarch with all his cortége then directed his journey toward 
Rome, in close pursuit of the pope, who had already left the city 
of Narni. At Rome the party remained for several days; learning, how- 
ever, that the pope had stopped at Ferentino, the patriarch hastened 
thither in the hope of accomplishing the matter which had brought 
him to Italy.*? 

Some said that the pope intentionally avoided the patriarch in order 
to weary him and increase the burden of his expenses. They asserted 
that long ago the Hospitallers had visited him and had bribed him 
by the lavish use of gifts so that he was most favorably inclined toward 
them. Others said that the pope had hastened his journey in be- 
half of Benevento, which was under siege. The fact was plain, how- 
through force of circumstances, declined their invitation (see Simonsfeld, Jahrbiicher, 
I, 367 et passim). 

80 This was Asclettin, according to Chalandon. 

31 The envoys of Patriarch Fulcher overtook Frederick, probably early in August, 
1155. William appears to be familiar with this famous old Roman road whose se- 
quence of towns he lists correctly (Simonsfeld, Jahrbiicher, 1, 471). 


82 Hadrian must have reached Benevento about October 1, 1155 (Chalandon, Nor- 
mans, Vol. Il, chap. 7 passim). 


JERUSALEM UNDER BALDWIN III 249 


ever, that the pope and his entire court had received the Hospitallers 
with great cordiality, but had, on the contrary, repelled the patriarch 
and his people with contemptuous wrath, like illegitimate and un- 
deserving sons.*% 


8. Pope Hadrian hurries to Benevento. The patriarch also 
makes haste thither and lays the case before him, but the 
court, bribed by lavish gifts, refuses justice. The patriarch 
returns without accomplishing his object. 


On his arrival at Ferentino, the patriarch at once presented himself 
before the pontiff, according to custom. He was not favorably re- 
ceived, and the treatment accorded him was still worse. The cardinals 
were, for the most part, opposed to him. He arrived, therefore, at a 
clear understanding of the pope’s attitude toward him. Nevertheless, 
being a man of resolute character, he acted on the advice of some of 
his wise counsellors and concealed his feelings. He was constantly in 
attendance on the pope and appeared assiduously in the consistory on 
feast days surrounded by his train of reverend bishops. He was always 
assisted by a throng of advocates ready to do their office whenever it 
should be necessary.*4 

An audience was finally granted to the two parties, and the matter 
was argued for many days without result. At last the patriarch per- 
ceived, and indeed was informed by some of his intimate friends, that 
he had no chance of success. He therefore took leave and started on 
his return journey in embarrassment and fear, his situation rather in- 
jured than improved. Of all the throng of cardinals only two or three 
were found who, following after Christ, piously desired to aid His 
servant in that cause. These were Octavius and John of St. Martin, 
who had been an archdeacon of the patriarch when the latter was 
archbishop of Tyre.®* All the others, led astray by gifts, followed the 


38 The treatment of Patriarch Fulcher on this occasion is not unlike that received 
by other Latin patriarchs at the papal court. That the Hospitallers, like the Templars, 
were in great favor there at the time is certain. 

34 The presence of advocates at the papal court to aid appellants for papal attention 
and favor reflects the enormous increase of business which claimed the pope’s atten- 
tion. These “advocates” professed to know how to reach the pope’s presence and offered 
their services for a price, which was soon to lead to charges of venality at the court. 

35 This recital affords an intimate glimpse of the practical operation of the papal 
curia. In the course of time, the widespread church orders tended to depend upon cer- 
tain cardinals for aid. The secular hierarchy whose business with the curia was more 
intermittent were usually not so fortunate. 


250 JERUSALEM UNDER BALDWIN III 


ways of Balaam, the son of Bosor. But the pope, actuated by responsi- 
bilities at home, crossed Campania and repaired to Benevento. 

Inthe meantime, William, king of Sicily, had been informed through 
numerous messengers of the troubles in Italy. He learned that Count 
Robert of Bassavilla, aided by the Greeks, had seized the land of 
Apulia by force of arms; that the prince of Capua and Count Andreas 
were extending their rule far and wide in Campania; and that the 
pope had repaired to Benevento, whence he was supplying forces and 
encouragement to all the rulers just mentioned. Thereupon William 
immediately levied troops from all parts of Sicily and Calabria and 
marched into Apulia at the head of a very large force. Count Robert 
immediately fled. In the first battle near Brindisi, William defeated 
the Greek forces and, after completely destroying that army, took 
their commanders captive and bound them in chains. Thus by force 
of arms, attended by good luck, he turned into his own coffers the 
vast treasures which the Greeks had brought with them. Then, having 
regained the whole region which had revolted from him and restored 
the people to favor, he laid siege to Benevento. There he brought 
great trouble upon the pope and his cardinals as well as upon the city 
itself; for the food supply began to fail and all became exceedingly 
anxious about their safety. Through envoys acting as mediators, peace 
was finally concluded between the pope and the king, under certain 
secret terms. All those, however, who, at the pope’s solicitation, had 
become involved in these great dangers and hardships were excluded 
from the treaty.*® 

Perceiving that matters had turned out contrary to their expecta- 
tions and that the pope had made a peace for himself and the church 
of Rome without obtaining grace for them from the king, the nobles 
realized that they were in a desperate plight. Anxiously they sought 
to find some way by which they might be able to retire from the 
kingdom in safety. Robert and Andreas, with certain other nobles, 
hurried into Lombardy and presented themselves before the emperor. 
The prince of Capua, more unfortunate than the others, was taken 
prisoner by his own bearers, while he was preparing to cross the 
Gariglano river by boat. He had sent his people on ahead and was 

36 There is some uncertainty about the exact dates of these events. The defeat of 


the Greeks at Brindisi is dated in April, 1156, the treaty of Hadrian with William I, 
June 18, 1156 (Chalandon, Les Comnéne, Il, 361-70). 


JERUSALEM UNDER BALDWIN III 251 


himself waiting with a few knights to cross to the opposite shore when 
he was seized. He was handed over to loyal subjects of the king and 
carried to Sicily, where he was cruelly blinded and confined in prison 
until his miserable existence ended.37 


9. A civil outbreak occurs in Egypt. The sultan flees and is slain 
by the Christians. His son, Nosceredinus, is taken prisoner. 


Ar this time, by the mercy of God, the kingdom of Jerusalem was 
enjoying a fair degree of prosperity, but the neighboring regions on 
either side were greatly agitated because of an unexpected occurrence. 
The caliph, the ruler of the land, whom the Egyptians are accustomed 
to cherish and revere as a supreme divinity, was treacherously slain 
by a certain powerful Egyptian lord who held the office of vizier and 
as such had charge of his lord’s private affairs.?* One day this man 
came to the caliph familiarly in one of the most retired rooms of the 
palace and treacherously slew him. He is said to have committed this 
crime in the hope of raising his own son Nosceredinus [Nasr al-Din] 
to the caliphate, that thus he himself, under the rule of his son, might 
continue to administer the kingdom without care or trouble. He trusted 
that the deed would not be discovered for several days, until he had 
seized the greater palace and gained possession of the entire treasure. 
Then, with the aid of a band of friends and retainers whom he had 
assembled, he expected to be strong enough to resist those who would 
put him to death for the murder. But the affair turned out quite dif- 
ferently. For within a short time the crime became known, and a 
crowd of people, both great and small, gathered as one man. They 
completely surrounded the house to which he had fled after com- 
mitting the crime, and with one voice demanded that the man of 
blood, the dastard who had assassinated the lord of the land, should 
be given up for punishment. These threats were so persistently con- 
tinued that, finally, seeing no other way of escape, he ordered the 


37 For a more extended account of William’s treatment of the conquered country, see 
Chalandon, Normans, Il, 232-35. 

38 Abbas, a member of a famous north African family, had gained prominence at 
Cairo as a military commander. He had been ordered to take command of the garrison 
in Ascalon in 1153 but refused and murdered the vizier, who was his father-in-law, 
and seized his office. His position, however, was insecure, and he therefore plotted to 
murder the caliph, Zafir. Even the murder of Zafir and the substitution of young Faiz 
was not sufficient, so he had to flee for his life as here indicated. 


252 JERUSALEM UNDER BALDWIN III 


gold, gems, and whatever other valuables he possessed to be thrown 
out of the window to the howling mob. He hoped that while they 
were busy picking up the spoils, he might find some way of escape. 
What more need be said? In spite of the besieging mob, he succeeded 
in escaping from the city and, attended by a noble escort of sons and 
nephews, took the road toward the desert, bound for Damascus, it 
was said. The avengers were not slow in pursuing him and made 
vigorous attempts to prevent his escape. But his oldest son and some 
of his retainers, wise and valiant men, kept the foe back at some distance, 
sustained the attacks themselves, and prevented the pursuers from 
gaining on the fugitive. From time to time, also, they craftily left 
behind vases of gold and silver, precious robes and silken stuffs of 
great value, in order to tempt those following to stop and gather 
them up, whereby a quarrel might arise over the division of the spoils.*? 

The Egyptians finally realized that pursuit was futile and returned 
home baffled. The vizier, believing himself safe and confident that 
no further trouble would arise, continued on his way. While fleeing 
from Scylla, however, he fell into Charybdis. For the Christians, 
apprised of his approach, had laid an ambush for him, a common 
device for injuring an enemy; and there they were stealthily lying 
in wait. The vizier, all unsuspecting, fell into the trap. At the first 
encounter he was fatally wounded by a sword thrust and at once 
perished. The name of this noble Egyptian was Habeis [Abbas].*° 
His son Nasr and all his household, together with the immense riches 
which they had carried away with them out of Egypt, fell into the 
hands of the Christians, and the booty was divided among them ac- 
cording to custom. Consequently, our people returned home laden 
with the richest spoils, indeed fairly bending under the burden of 
treasures hitherto unknown to our land. 

Among others who participated in that affair were many Knights 
Templars. These, by virtue of their numbers, carried off the largest 
portion of the plunder, including slaves. In the distribution of the 


29 The best source of information about these events is the account of Usamah, who 
was in Cairo at the time and an intimate friend of Abbas (P. K. Hitti, 4 Arab-Syrian 
Gentleman and Warrior in the Period of the Crusades, Memoirs of Usamah ibn- 
Mungqidh, pp. 43-55). 

4° Habeis is William’s approximation of Abbas and Nosceredinus for Nasr al-Din or 
Nasr. These were father and son as William states. The battle and death of Abbas 
are dated June 7, 1154. 


JERUSALEM UNDER BALDWIN III 253 


spoils, beside other things there fell to them by lot Nasr, the son of 
Abbas, a man of great daring and unusual military prowess among 
the Egyptians. His very name was dreaded by the people of that region, 
and at sight of him their hearts quailed with terror unspeakable. The 
brothers of the Temple held this man a prisoner for a long time. He 
professed an ardent desire to be reborn in Christ and had already 
learned the Roman letters and been instructed in the rudiments of 
the Christian faith when he was sold by the Templars for sixty thou- 
sand pieces of gold to the Egyptians, who demanded him for the death 
penalty. Heavily chained hand and foot, he was placed in an iron 
cage upon the back of a camel and carried to Egypt, where, to satisfy 
their savage passions, the people literally tore him to pieces bit by 
bit with their teeth.*? 


10. Prince Renaud seizes the island of Cyprus by force of arms 
and despoils the inhabitants. 


Durinc the following year, Renaud de Chatillon, prince of Antioch, 
on the advice of evil men by whom he was too greatly influenced, was 
again guilty of a shameful deed. He sent forth his legions as against 
an enemy and laid violent hands on Cyprus, the neighboring island 
which had always been useful and friendly to our realm and which 
had a large population of Christians. The causes leading to this out- 
rageous invasion seem to have been as follows. In the land of Cilicia, 
near Tarsus, there dwelt a powerful Armenian noble, called Thoros. 
This man by his capricious and unloyal acts had often fallen under 
the displeasure of the emperor and incurred his rebuke. Since his 
lands were far distant from the empire and his residence in the high 
mountains was difficult of access, he often descended into the plain 
of Cilicia and carried off booty and spoils. He preyed without scruple 
upon the land of his lord in every way and brought heavy and un- 
merited trouble upon the faithful subjects of the empire, without re- 
gard to rank or condition. The emperor, on being informed of this 
situation, wrote to Renaud to send forth his knights and keep Thoros 
away from the lands of the empire, that the possessions of his Cilician 
subjects might be safe from such raids. If money were needed for the 

#1 The details of this story, especially those which reflect on the Templars are denied 


by Lundgreen as preposterous (see Lundgreen, Wilhelm von Tyrus und der Templer- 
orden, pp. 93-96). 


254 JERUSALEM UNDER BALDWIN III 


purpose, he himself would send a sufficient sum from his own treasures 
at a convenient season. 

In obedience to the imperial command, Renaud at once summoned 
a large force of cavalry and proceeded to Cilicia, where he repulsed 
Thoros and completely destroyed his army. But the honorable rec- 
ompense which he hoped to receive for his valiant deed seemed slow 
in arriving; hence, impatient of delay, he committed the crime alluded 
to above.*? 

The people of Cyprus had been warned of the danger by some of 
the faithful, and all the forces of the island, such as they were, had 
been assembled; but Prince Renaud, marching upon them, at once 
defeated their army and shattered their forces completely so that 
thereafter no one might dare to raise a hand against him. He then com- 
pletely overran the island without meeting any opposition, destroyed 
cities, and wrecked fortresses. He broke into monasteries of men and 
women alike and shamefully abused nuns and tender maidens. Al- 
though the precious vestments and the amount of gold and silver 
which he carried off were great, yet the loss of these was regarded as 
nothing in comparison with the violence done to chastity.** 

For several days Renaud’s forces continued to ravage the whole 
country; and, since there was none to offer resistance, they showed 
no mercy to age or sex, neither did they recognize difference of con- 
dition. Finally, laden with a vast amount of riches and spoils of every 
kind, they returned to the seashore. When the ships were ready, they 
embarked and set sail for Antioch. There, within a short time all the 
wealth which had been so wickedly acquired was dissipated; for, as 
says the proverb, “Booty wickedly acquired brings no good results.” #4 

42 There is some uncertainty regarding the date of these events. William places 
them “in the year following” the death of Abbas, which would presumably be in 
1155. After defeating Thoros and recovering several castles for the Templars, Renaud 
seems to have formed an alliance with the Armenian, and the two collaborated in the 
raid on Cyprus (see Chalandon, Les Commmnéne, Il, 436-39). 

48 This charge of atrocities committed by Renaud de Chitillon is confirmed by 
Syrian historians. To what extent William’s recital was influenced by the fact that 
Renaud was a political opponent of Raymond of Tripoli is difficult to determine, for 


Renaud’s ruthless treatment of opposition is abundantly attested by others. This expe- 


dition occurred either late in 1155 or early in 1156 (Chalandon, Les Comméne, Il, 438). 
44 Ovid Amor. I. x. 48. 


JERUSALEM UNDER BALDWIN III 255 


11. The king captures certain Turks and Arabs in the forest of 
Banyas in defiance of the treaty which he had previously 
made with them. 


Axsout this same time an immense company of Arabs and Turko- 
mans, in far larger numbers than ever before, had assembled in a 
forest near the city of Banyas. These people, like the Arabs, habitually 
live in tents and sustain life on milk.*® The forest is now generally 
known as the forest of Banyas from the city of that name, but in 
olden times the entire tract, including those parts which extend toward 
both north and south as well as that which covers Lebanon itself, was. 
called the forest of Lebanon. It is written in the scriptures that in this 
forest Solomon built a magnificent mansion of marvellous workman- 
ship which was called the house of the forest of Lebanon.*® Now, 
however, as has been said, the entire forest is called by the name 
of the neighboring city. Into this wood, after first obtaining the king’s 
permission and a solemn treaty of peace, the people just mentioned 
had driven a large number of animals, principally horses, because of 
the excellent pasturage it afforded. 

But certain wicked men, sons of Belial, who had no fear of God 
before their eyes, approached the king and easily persuaded him to 
fall in with their evil schemes. They suggested that, regardless of 
his faithful promise and the treaty made with these nomads, he should 
make a sudden attack upon them after they had driven their flocks 
and herds into the forest to graze and give them and their beasts as 
prey to his own people. This plan was adopted. The king, burdened 
by debt and held fast by many obligations which he had no means of 
satisfying, easily inclined to this as to any scheme by which he might 
relieve the pressure upon him. He lent a ready ear to the wicked 
counsellors and acquiesced in their suggestion. Led astray by the 
counsel of evil men, he summoned his knights and made a sudden 
raid upon those people. Finding them unprepared, without thought 
of any attack, he charged them as enemies and delivered them over 
to the rapacity of his followers. Some, thanks to their swift horses, 
were able to save their lives by flight; others, spurred on by necessity, 

45 Turkomans, a branch of the Iranian Turks, were devoted to horse breeding, and 


the milk referred to was probably mare’s milk or possibly camel’s. 
46] Ki. 10: 173 II Chron. 9: 20. 


256 JERUSALEM UNDER BALDWIN III 


escaped by hiding in the woods; but all the rest were either slain by 
the sword or led into cruel servitude.*7 

It is said that the number of captives and the amount of booty taken 
in this raid was never equalled in our land. A very large number of 
horses was distributed by lot, and in this division every individual, 
even those of the lowest rank, shared. Yet this deed brought no glorious 
or laudable renown to our people, for they had violated a treaty of 
peace and had maltreated, as they would, an unsuspecting people— 
men who relied upon the good faith of the king and who had, more- 
over, no means of resisting. 

But the Lord, the God of vengeance, He who brings just retribu- 
tion on sinners, did not suffer us to enjoy the rewards of our sin long; 
indeed He soon made it plain that, even with infidels, faith must be 
kept. As punishment for that crime, He took vengeance upon us 
to our undoing and, for our many sins, He doubled our punishment 
and brought confusion upon us, as will be shown in the following pages. 


12. Humphrey, the constable, grants to the Hospitallers a half 
part of the city of Banyas. Supplies which are being brought © 
thither are captured by Nureddin, and the city itself is 
besieged. 


Axsout the same time, Humphrey of Toron, the king’s constable, 
became weary of the continual responsibility and expense which de- 
volved upon him in the care of the city of Banyas, his hereditary 
possession. Since he could not without aid suitably rule and protect 
it, with the king’s consent he decided to share it equally with the 
brothers of the Hospital. The terms agreed upon under this arrange- 
ment were as follows: the brothers were to own one half of the city 
and all outlying dependencies, they were to pay one half of the 
expenses for all necessary and useful outlay, and to bear due responsi- 
bility for one half the city. 

Banyas lay on the confines of the enemy’s country and very close to 
it, so that no one could approach or leave the city without danger unless 
in a strong company or by following secret ways. After the brothers 


+” Nureddin, according to Qalanisi, had made a truce with Baldwin III for a year 
beginning September, 1156. This raid, which the same writer also describes, occurred 
in February, 1157. His explanation of Baldwin’s act is that the arrival of new troops 
from the si had emboldened him to disregard the truce (see Gibb, Chronicle, 
pp. 327-28). 


JERUSALEM UNDER BALDWIN III 257 


had assumed the charge of their part of the city, they desired to put 
the place in a good state of defense and for that purpose assembled 
supplies of provisions and arms and also a body of troops. On a cer- 
tain day, with an adequate train of camels and other pack animals 
loaded with supplies under convoy of a body of knights who were 
to conduct the entire expedition to the city by force (if necessary), 
they were proceeding to Banyas with the intention of provisioning 
the place with all necessary supplies for a long time thereafter. As 
they drew near the city with all their train, however, the infidels, who 
had been advised of their approach, fell upon them. Vigorously using 
their swords, the Turks broke up the Christians’ line of march and 
killed many of their number. They then seized the baggage, while 
the survivors fled for their lives. Those whom the furious attack of 
the foe prevented from escaping were either slain by the sword or 
made prisoners. Thus, all the supplies which had been collected for 
provisioning the city fell into the hands of the infidels to be used 
against it. After this disaster, the brothers, fearing the cost of similar 
misfortunes, withdrew from the agreement which they had made and 
returned Banyas with its burdens and emoluments to the constable.*® 
Elated by this success, Nureddin decided to take advantage at once 
of the opportunity to invest Banyas while it was prostrated by the 
catastrophe. He summoned his cavalry, had his engines of war moved 
to the place, and suddenly appeared before the city. The forces were 
placed in a circle around it and siege operations begun. There was a 
citadel in one part of Banyas well equipped with arms and men and 
with sufficient food for a short time. This would have afforded refuge 
for the citizens even if the city were taken. But the people had great 
confidence in the fortifications of their city, especially as they had 
frequently suffered similar attacks, and accordingly they decided to 
make a vigorous attempt to defend the place. They might, in fact, 
have succeeded as they hoped, had they not felt too much confidence 
in themselves and so proceeded to act without due discretion. 
Nureddin attacked with the machines and hurling engines and at 
the same time kept up a steady, incessant shower of arrows which gave 


48 The destruction of this band of Hospitallers and Templars was a cause of great 
rejoicing at Damascus. Nureddin’s brother led the Muslim detachment which had 
gained the victory, and the captives as well as the severed heads of the slain were 
carried through the city in a great procession. The battle occurred April 26, 1157 
(Gibb, Chronicle, pp. 330-32). 


258 JERUSALEM UNDER BALDWIN III 


the besieged no respite. Night and day they were forced to fight with- 
out intermission until they were exhausted to the point of fainting. 
For so many had been slain and so many fatally wounded. that few 
were left to carry on the work of defense. Had not the constable and 
his son, who nobly emulated his father’s valor, shown themselves 
ready to fight zealously for their hereditary possessions and by their 
example encouraged others to resist, without doubt the citizens, ex- 
hausted by their heroic efforts, would have given way before the su- 
perior strength of their foes. But, as has been said, the presence of 
their lords restrained them, .and the unflagging courage of their su- 
periors, successful in animating others, restored their failing strength 
and gave them fresh courage for resistance. 

One day, while the foe was pressing them more fiercely than usual, 
the besieged opened the city gate and made a sally against the enemy 
outside. Since they offered battle without due caution, however, they 
roused a multitude of the enemy against them. The Turks rushed 
upon them, and the citizens, unable to maintain their position, tried 
to withdraw into the city. The gate could not be shut, however, be- 
cause the pressure of the crowd trying to enter was so great. Con- 
sequently, the enemy, intermingling with the townspeople, entered 
in such numbers that the town was taken by force. The Christians, 
at great risk and with much loss of life, were forced to retreat to 
the citadel.* 

Meanwhile the king had learned that Banyas was suffering dire 
straits at the hand of Nureddin—that it was, in fact, about to fall. As 
quickly as possible, he mustered all the troops available at the time, both 
knights and foot soldiers, and marched rapidly to Banyas with his 
legions. He was determined either to raise the siege or to try the fortune 
of battle with Nureddin. 


13. The king hastens to Banyas and raises the siege. On the 
return march our army advances without due caution and 
falls into dangerous ambushes. 


As soon as Nureddin learned that the king was coming with a fixed 
purpose, he raised the siege, for he was unwilling to trust himself to 
49 According to Qalanisi, Humphrey had already offered to capitulate provided he 


and his men in the citadel be permitted to withdraw in safety, an offer which Nureddin 
rejected. Baldwin’s arrival, recounted in the following chapter, thus saved Humphrey. 


JERUSALEM UNDER BALDWIN III 259 


the uncertain chances of battle. Before he retired, however, he under- 
mined and set fire to the city which he had taken by assault. He did 
not, however, permit the forces which he had assembled to disband, 
but, with keen foresight, kept them with him. He summoned even 
larger forces and lay in ambush in the neighboring forest to await 
the outcome of events. 

The arrival of the king at Banyas brought the succor so eagerly 
desired by the besieged. He promised that he would remain until the 
fallen places had been raised, the breaches mended, and the city, its 
walls repaired, restored to its former state. From the neighboring cities 
and the whole region, he summoned masons and all who had some 
experience in the art of building. The walls and towers were thor- 
oughly repaired and the ramparts renewed. Within the circuit of the 
walls, the houses of the inhabitants were rebuilt and the public build- 
ings restored to their original condition, for Nureddin, during his 
occupancy of the city, had taken great care to destroy them completely. 

When all was finished, the king and his nobles felt that a longer 
sojourn there in the interests of the citizens was unnecessary. Every- 
thing was now entirely restored and the fortress sufficiently equipped 
for the time being with arms, food, and men. He accordingly dis- 
missed the infantry forces and determined to return to Tiberias ac- 
companied by the cavalry squadrons only. Setting out from Banyas, | 
he directed his march toward the south and encamped by a lake called 
Michel. There the army rested that night, but without taking proper 
precautions or observing the regulations for camps, in fact, far other- 
wise than the requirements of military discipline demanded. 

It often happens that when affairs are moving successfully and hap- 
pily people become somewhat careless. In adversity men ordinarily 
exercise more care in their affairs.°° The same thought is contained 
possibly in this well-known saying, “A thousand shall fall at thy side” 
(at the left, probably) “and ten thousand at thy right hand.” ®! For 
under prosperous conditions, the majority, elated by success, generally 
rush headlong to destruction; while, on the contrary, those who are ex- 
hausted by losses and misfortune have been taught by their own danger 
to conduct themselves prudently under dubious conditions and always 





Banyas had been under siege almost a month, May to June, 1157 (Gibb, Chronicle, 
PP. 333736). 
50 Ovid Met. vi. 576. 51 Ps, gt: 7. 


260 JERUSALEM UNDER BALDWIN III 


to distrust fortune, which, as their own experience shows, is often cruel. 

Reflecting on the fact that he had forced this great prince to with- 
draw from the siege of Banyas, the king felt confident that Nureddin 
was now far away with his forces and could not readily reassemble 
so many nations against him and his people. Accordingly, he began 
to exercise too little caution, as we have said, and was inclined to be 
too indulgent to the whims of individuals. News soon reached the 
enemy who were lurking in ambush that the king’s infantry forces 
had been dismissed and that the rest of the army was encamped in a 
careless and unguarded fashion near lake Michel. Some of the leaders, 
as Philip of Nablus and various others, were also reported to have 
left with their contingents. Perceiving, therefore, that matters had 
turned out according to their wishes, the infidels speedily moved their 
camp. Their shrewd leader hastened matters along, as he knew was 
expedient, and led the army at a rapid march in that direction. They 
soon arrived at the Jordan, which lay between the two armies, crossed 
the river, and placed themselves in ambush at a spot commonly called 
Jacob’s ford, on this side Jordan, where the king’s army would cross 
the following day. 

At daybreak, the Christian army, all unaware of the ambush laid 
during the night and of the schemes of their foes, resumed their march 
toward the place which the Turk had already secretly taken. They 
were marching along in fancied security, fearing no untoward accident, 
when suddenly those who had been stationed there for the purpose 
of surprising the incautious Christians rushed forth from their hiding 
places. As the Christians advanced, carefree and without apprehension 
of danger, they were met by the drawn swords of an enemy intent on 
either slaying or wounding. Roused to the danger, although too late, 
the Christians perceived that a serious encounter was imminent; they 
ceased their trivial chatting, ran to their horses, and took arms. Before 
they could range themselves in battle formation, however, and rally 
for defense, their ranks were broken; the foe attacked them furiously 
at close quarters with sword play, so that it was impossible for our 
men to hold together anywhere, except in very small groups. 


JERUSALEM UNDER BALDWIN III 261 


14. The king flees from the field of battle and retires to the 
fortress of Safed. The army is defeated, and most of the 
commanders are captured. 


Tue king remained surrounded by a few knights who still clung to 
him. He perceived, however, that the lines were broken and that the 
army, disorganized, was everywhere exposed to the fury of the enemy. 
Moreover, the strength of the enemy was increasing from every direc- 
tion while our ranks were giving way, as in fact had been the case 
from the beginning. Accordingly, he wisely withdrew to a hill near 
by, to provide for his own safety. From there, with great difficulty 
avoiding the enemy now on his right and again on his left, he suc- 
ceeded, thanks to the horse which carried him, in reaching the fortress 
of Safed, which is on the same mountain. A very large number of our 
leaders were taken prisoners that day, but very few were killed. For 
all indiscriminately, warriors renowned for wisdom and experience 
in war and common soldiers alike, to save their miserable lives sur- 
rendered without resistance like the lowest slaves, utterly regardless 
of the shameful yoke of slavery and the ignominy which would cling 
to their names forevermore. 

Among the prisoners were the noble and distinguished Hugh 
d’Ibelin; Eudes de Saint-Amand, the king’s marshal; John Gotmanus; 
Rohard of Jaffa and Balian, his brother; Bertrand de Blanquefort, the 
master of the Knights of the Temple, a religious and God-fearing 
man; and many others whose names are unknown to us. 

Justly as our ways deserved, the Lord rendered to us the fruits of 
our evil doing; and we, who in scorn of the laws of humanity had 
wrongfully oppressed the innocent and those who relied on our good 
faith, were ourselves overwhelmed with confusion in like measure. 
As penalty for our sins, our illustrious leaders were made a reproach 
to the Gentiles and were exposed to the derision of the enemy. “Thou 
makest us a by-word among the heathen, a shaking of the head among 
the people.” °? 

Yet in His great compassion, not wholly without pity hath He dealt 
with us, neither hath He withheld His mercy in anger, since He saved 
the king. If our lord had fallen that day, the whole realm would, 
without question, have been plunged into the deepest peril. Which may 


52 Ps, 44:14. 


262 JERUSALEM UNDER BALDWIN III 


God avert! For in the case of a knight, however great, the fortune of 
one man only is concerned; but the peril of the king involves danger 
to the entire nation. Thus, loyal David, when full of anxiety about 
his king, implored, “Lord, preserve the king.” 

During this time, rumors of varying import concerning the king’s 
safety caused great anxiety throughout the realm. Some said that he 
had perished by the sword, others that he had been carried away cap- 
tive among the other prisoners, although the enemy were not aware 
of his identity. It was also rumored that, through the protection of 
divine mercy, he had escaped uninjured from the tumult of battle. 
The entire people felt deep concern on their king’s behalf like that 
of a devoted mother for an only son. Ignorant of his fate, they imagined 
the worst that could happen and in their loving sympathy feared lest 
this had been his fate. 

When he found himself at some distance from the enemy, the 
king, with the few who had followed him to Safed and some others 
who had escaped the perils of the previous day, hastened to Acre, 
where the people welcomed him with enthusiastic shouts of joy as 
one returned from the dead. 

This happened in the fourteenth year of King Baldwin, in the month 
of June, on the thirteenth day before the Kalends of July.®* 


15. Nureddin besieges Banyas a second time, but without suc- 
cess, for the king marches forth against him. 


NureEppIN, an indefatigable warrior, eager to continue his successes, 
overran the entire country and enriched himself with booty, taken 
now in one place and now in another. Again he called forth his bat- 
talions and caused still larger forces to be levied from Damascus and 
from all the lands subject to his control, for he was determined to 
besiege Banyas a second time. Nothing was further from his thoughts 
than that the king and the. nobles whose forces he had utterly crushed 
would again come to the rescue of the besieged. In pursuance of his 
design, therefore, he again established a blockade around Banyas and 
set up his numerous engines in strategic positions. The mighty blows 


°8 William’s date here agrees exactly with that of Qalanisi, June 19, 1157, which 
was the fourteenth year of Baldwin’s reign. The latter, however, says that Baldwin 
did not rebuild the walls of Banyas. He also says that the Muslims thought they had 
slain Baldwin but were unable to find his body. The parade of prisoners and booty 
was held at Damascus five days after the battle (see Gibb, Chronicle, pp. 336-37). 


JERUSALEM UNDER BALDWIN III 263 


of the stone missiles shook the towers and weakened the walls. At the 
same time, showers of darts and arrows fell like hail and prevented 
all resistance on the part of those within. The people of Banyas, how- 
ever, remembering how futile had been their earnest efforts to save 
the city during the siege just past, voluntarily retreated to the citadel 
in a body to forestall a similar experience. 

When the constable left the city to attend to other affairs, he had 
placed in supreme control a kinsman of his own called Guy of Scanda- 
lium, a man of wide experience in war, but of doubtful loyalty and 
one who feared not God. This man, for the sake of him who had 
placed him in charge and also with a view to his own reputation, lest 
the fame which his warlike prowess had won him might be diminished, 
endeavored by word and example to inspire the others to resistance. 
He assured them that relief would soon arrive and that a glorious 
renown forevermore awaited those who should deserve it. As a re- 
sult, all fought as for their personal advantage, and their ability to 
endure long vigils and continual hardships excited the wonder and 
admiration of the enemy. Nevertheless, the Turks, determined to fight 
with all their might against an adversary who likewise resisted to 
the utmost, inflicted endless woes upon the defenders. Their numbers 
were larger, and they could relieve each other in turn. The Christians, 
on the contrary, had no reserves with which to recruit their strength, 
and the daily pressure was forcing them almost to the point of giving 
way. 

Meanwhile news reached the king that Banyas was in dire straits, 
nor was that fact hidden from the nobles of the kingdom who still 
survived. Messengers were immediately dispatched to the prince of 
Antioch and the count of Tripoli to urge that they hasten without 
delay to the relief of the city. Heralds were also sent out by the 
king to summon the few remaining knights in the kingdom. Thus, 
it happened by divine mercy that within a short time, indeed sooner 
than was. expected, both these illustrious princes with their noble 
retinues arrived at the royal camp. From this position, which was 
located near Chastel Neuf, at a place called Noire Garde, the be- 
sieged city could be seen not far away.** 

Nureddin was soon informed that the two leaders had joined the 


54 This second attack on Banyas is not specifically mentioned by Qalanisi, who al- 
ludes only vaguely to Nureddin’s efforts to follow up the earlier victory over the king. 


264 JERUSALEM UNDER BALDWIN III 


king and were preparing to march with him to Banyas. The prince 
was a man of much foresight and discretion in the management of his 
affairs. Although he had already succeeded in making many breaches 
in the stronghold and the besieged had lost all hope of resistance, yet 
he thought it wise to avoid the vicissitudes of battle with its perils and 
uncertainties. He therefore abandoned the siege and withdrew to a 
remote part of his own kingdom. 


16. Thierry, count of Flanders, lands. Ambassadors are sent to 
Constantinople to seek a wife for the king. 


Tuus many events of widely differing character were taking place 
in the kingdom, and, since most of our leaders were in captivity, the 
land was lying in desolation. Just at this time it chanced, by divine 
mercy, that Thierry, count of Flanders, landed at the port of Beirut 
with his wife Sibylla, the king’s half sister by the same father. The 
visits of this eminent and distinguished man had more than once been 
of much assistance and solace to us. 

The entire people welcomed him with great joy, for his arrival with 
his following seemed to promise that the intolerable distress of the 
realm would now be relieved in large measure. Nor were the ardent 
hopes of those who so devotedly longed for the peace of the kingdom 
disappointed, for immediately on his arrival, like an angel of good 
counsel, he assumed the direction of their affairs and led them forward 
for the good of the realm and the glory of the Christian profession, 
as will be related hereafter.*® 

About this time, the fact that the king, although he had now arrived 
at the age of manhood, was still unmarried began to be a matter of 
much concern to the princes of the realm, both secular and ecclesiastical. 
It was most important that he have children, that a son might succeed 
him as the legitimate heir to the kingdom. They accordingly met to 
deliberate about an honorable marriage for their lord, who was as yet 
childless. After long consideration, the various opinions were brought 
into harmony, and it was unanimously agreed to confer with the 
emperor of Constantinople on this matter. In his palace there were 


°° Thierry’s arrival must be dated toward the end of the summer, 1157. Several 
circumstances caused the scene of activities to shift to northern Syria, where Qilij 
Arslan II had invaded the territory of Antioch, while Nureddin, who had gone to the 
relief of the earthquake-stricken cities along the upper Orontes, found it more con- 
venient to attack the same territory from the south. 


JERUSALEM UNDER BALDWIN III 265 


many noble maidens closely related to him by ties of blood, and 
furthermore it would be possible for him, as the most powerful and 
wealthy prince of the world, to relieve from his own abundance the 
distress under which our realm was suffering and to change our poverty 
into superabundance. By common consent, therefore, envoys were sent 
to carry out this design, with the aid of God. Attard, archbishop of 
Nazareth, and Humphrey of Toron, the royal constable, were chosen 
for this task. After providing for their affairs meanwhile, they pro- 
ceeded to the coast and there embarked.*° 


17. The king, accompanied by the count of Flanders, hastens 
to Antioch with all the forces of the kingdom. Nureddin is 
stricken with a serious malady. 


Ir was the unanimous opinion that the arrival of such a great prince 
with so many noble and valiant men in his train ought not to be futile 
and without result. It was therefore determined by common consent, 
under the inspiration of divine grace, that they proceed to the land of 
Antioch with the united fighting forces. This purpose was communi- 
cated to the prince of that land and to the count of Tripoli, and both 
were cordially invited to have their troops in readiness on an appointed 
day to invade the enemy’s country. Accordingly, led by divine favor, 
all the Christians from the various parts assembled at a place known as 
La Boquea, in the land of Tripoli. Thence in battle array, they marched 
into hostile territory. At first, however, success did not attend them. 
A vigorous attack was made upon one of the enemy’s strongholds 
called Chastel Rouge, but nothing was accomplished. “Better luck fol- 
lowed a.poor beginning,” ®** however. Accordingly, at the suggestion 
and earnest entreaty of Renaud, prince of Antioch, the assembled 
princes proceeded, under more favorable auspices, toward the land of 
Antioch. 

While they were tarrying there to work out the plan most expedient 
under the circumstances, a messenger charged with most agreeable 
news came to the king and the lords. He affirmed as a fact that Nured- 
din, our most powerful enemy, who had been encamped with a great 
host near Castle Nepa, was either dead or lying desperately ill of an 


56 This embassy, according to the context, must have started for Constantinople 
shortly after the arrival of Thierry, perhaps in September, 1157, though it may have 
been later. 

57 Ovid Met. vil. 518. 


266 JERUSALEM UNDER BALDWIN III 


incurable disease. In proof of his assertion, the messenger stated that 
on the day previous he had witnessed great confusion in Nureddin’s 
camp. Apparently his slaves, even his most trusted retainers, and all 
his private possessions, had been given over indiscriminately to be 
pillaged at the will of anyone. He furthermore reported that the 
troops, weeping and wailing in deepest sorrow, had dispersed hither 
and yon in the utmost confusion.§ 

The report brought by the messenger proved in fact to be true. 
Nureddin had been attacked by a most serious malady; the ranks had 
become disorganized, and, as is the custom among them when the 
master dies, plundering and unrestrained violence was rife in his army. 
Nureddin himself, disabled in body and entirely helpless, had been 
carried in a litter to Aleppo by his faithful attendants. 

At this report of the state of affairs, the Christians perceived that 
all things were working together for the success of their enterprise. 
By unanimous agreement, therefore, messengers were dispatched to 
Thoros, a very powerful Armenian prince, with a most friendly invi- 
tation that he deign to join them in an undertaking which promised to 
be very fruitful. The envoys were instructed to use every means to 
induce him to cast aside all excuses and join the allied forces at Antioch 
with reinforcements. Thoros received the message with alacrity. A man 
of prompt and energetic character, he at once assembled a great army 
and made a forced march to Antioch. The Christians greeted him with 
rejoicing; the troops were immediately led forth from the city and 
the march directed toward Shayzar. 


18. Shayzar is besieged and, within a short time, ts taken by 
storm. 


Tue city of Shayzar lies upon the same Orontes river which flows 
by Antioch. It is called by some Caesarea, and by them is believed to be 
the famous metropolis of Cappadocia over which the distinguished 
teacher St. Basil once presided; but those who hold this view are in - 
grave error. For that Caesarea is a fifteen days journey or more from 
Antioch. This city is in Coelesyria, a province which is separated from 
Cappadocia by many intervening provinces. Nor is the name Caesarea, 
but rather Caesara. It is one of the suffragan cities belonging to the 


°8 This severe illness overtook Nureddin early in October, 1157, and led to the 
confusion here described (see Gibb, Chronicle, pp. 341-42). 


JERUSALEM UNDER BALDWIN III 267 


patriarchate of Antioch. It is very conveniently situated. The lower 
part extends along the plain, while upon the heights of the upper part 
is the citadel, fairly long in extent but rather narrow. It is well fortified, 
for in addition to its natural defenses, the river protects it on one side 
and the city on the other, so that it is entirely inaccessible. 

The Christians advanced with ranks drawn up according to the rules 
of military discipline. As soon as they reached the city the several lead- 
ers at once disposed their troops in the best order and blockaded the 
place. Fear of the enemy caused the citizens to withdraw within the 
walls as soon as the siege began. The king and those encamped outside 
immediately set up their engines and hurling machines. Never for a 
moment did they relax their efforts but endeavored to do all possible 
harm, that the strength of the defenders might be exhausted by unre- 
mitting toil and hardship. Each commander exerted himself valiantly 
in the special sector to which he had been assigned at the outset and by 
words of encouragement and promises of reward cheered his men on 
to ever more vigorous efforts. Each desired to be the first to break 
through into the city, and each sought to win for himself the glory of 
being the first to enter. Hence they wrought such havoc that death 
seemed to threaten the townspeople from every direction. 

The inhabitants of Shayzar had but little knowledge of arms; their 
attention was devoted almost entirely to trading. Furthermore, com- 
pletely ignorant of the recent misfortune, there was nothing they 
feared less than a siege. They had confidence in the defenses of their 
city and in the strength of their lord, who was, as they supposed, in 
good health. Hence they were unable to sustain burdens of this kind 
and could not hold out under the continual assaults and skirmishes. 
After a few days, they gave way under the constant pressure of their 
assailants; whereupon the Christians, breaking through the fortifica- 
tions, rushed into the midst of the city and took it by force. The people 
retreated to the citadel, all that remained of the lower city was aban- 
doned, and everything without exception was given over to the enemy 
for pillage. For several days, therefore, the Christians used the houses 
of the people with all that they contained, according to their own good 
pleasure. 

But just when it seemed certain that, under the continued pressure, 
the citadel also might be taken easily together with all who had fled 
thither for refuge, an insignificant but most annoying source of friction 


268 JERUSALEM UNDER BALDWIN III 


arose among our leaders: The king was anxious to provide for the wel- 
fare of the lands. Knowing that the count of Flanders with his large 
force of knights and abundant means would be fully able to protect 
the city against the strength and intrigues of the Turks, he had, from 
the first, destined Shayzar for him. With this in view, therefore, he 
determined to make a more vigorous assault upon the citadel, that he 
might put both the city and the fortress under the protection of the 
count, to be held by him as a hereditary possession forever. This ar- 
rangement seemed most suitable to all the leaders, and they unani- 
mously agreed to it. 

Prince Renaud alone raised difficulties; he declared that Shayzar 
with its dependencies had, from the beginning, formed a part of the 
heritage of the prince of Antioch; hence, whoever held it must pledge 
loyalty to him as lord. Although Count Thierry was ready to do loyal 
homage to the king for the possession of Shayzar, he absolutely refused 
to swear fealty to the prince of Antioch, whether it be to Renaud, 
who was now administering the principality, or to the young Bohe- 
mond, who, it was hoped, would soon take over the power. Never, he 
said, had he done homage except to kings.*® 

In punishment for our sins, a controversy thereupon arose among 
the leaders over this question. The enterprise, so important and almost 
within their grasp, was abandoned, and the Christians returned to An- 
tioch with their legions, laden with plunder and booty even to the point 
of satiety. 


19. The brother of Nureddin moves against us. Fulcher, patri- 
arch of Jerusalem dies. The fortress cave beyond Jordan is 
restored to us. The king lays siege to the castle of Harim, in 
the country of Antioch, and takes it. 


Axsout this time, Mirmiran [Musrat al-Din], Nureddin’s brother, 
learning of his brother’s misfortune and believing him dead, came to 
Aleppo. The citizens immediately surrendered the city to him without 
making any difhculty. But, while he was vigorously storming the cita- 
del to force the surrender of that also, he heard that his brother was 


°° This new failure of the Christians to capture Shayzar, Qalanisi again ascribes 
to the arrival of Muslim reinforcements (Gibb, Chronicle, p. 342). 


JERUSALEM UNDER BALDWIN III 269 


still living. Accordingly, he at once disbanded his troops and de- 
parted.°° 

At this same time also, Fulcher, the eighth Latin patriarch of Jeru- 
salem, a religious man who feared God, went the way of all flesh. His 
death occurred in the twelfth year of his patriarchate, on the twelfth 
day before the Kalends of December.*! 

About the same time, likewise, the Christians regained a stronghold 
on the other side of Jordan in the land of Gilead. This place, a well- 
fortified cave, through the carelessness of our forces had been taken 
a few years earlier by the trickery of the enemy. Its recovery was 
largely due to the zealous efforts of Queen Melisend, aided by the 
vigorous work of those who were left in the kingdom; in particular, 
by the care and vigilance of Baldwin de Lille, to whom the king had 
entrusted the responsibility of the realm during his own absence. News 
of this success was sent to the king; it brought great joy to the entire 
army and was a source of much happiness to all. 

In the meantime, the Christian leaders were still lingering at Anti- 
och. Notwithstanding the fact that they had been somewhat at variance 
before Shayzar, they had now, by the grace of God, arrived at una- 
nimity of spirit. They therefore resolved in the bonds of peace to 
undertake again some notable work which would be worthy of re- 
membrance forever. With the approval and aid of all, it was deter- . 
mined to lay siege to a fortress about twelve miles from Antioch. This 
place exercised great power and jurisdiction over the villages, called 
casalia, and was very troublesome to the city itself. Accordingly, upon 
the day of the Lord’s nativity, the entire army, as with one mind, re- 
paired thither and encamped before the place. 

Meanwhile, Nureddin was still held in the grasp of the illness 
which had attacked him. The wisest physicians had been summoned 
from all over the Orient, but his infirmity still failed to respond 
to the remedies which they applied and his life was now despaired of. 
This seemed to the Christians an especially favorable manifestation of 
the divine will, working with them in their undertaking. For, had 
Nureddin been in the enjoyment of his usual health and strength, it 


60 Amir Miran, Musrat al-Din, the brother of Nureddin, had been the victor over 
the Hospitallers early in 1157. William’s account of his seizure of Aleppo and volun- 
tary withdrawal is almost a summary of Qalanisi’s version (Gibb, Chronicle, p. 342). 

61 November 20, 1157. See chap. 22. 


270 JERUSALEM UNDER BALDWIN III 


would hardly have been possible for our army to have acted so freely 
in the districts subject to him. 

The king and those who accompanied him on this expedition turned 
the opportunity to their own advantage. The definite knowledge that 
this great warrior was unable to take any part in his own affairs led 
them to pursue their project with greater fervor and to press forward 
the siege more ardently. Accordingly they encircled the fortress on all 
sides, set up their engines, and prepared all the instruments which are 
customarily used in besieging a citadel. 

The fortress under discussion was situated on a low-lying hill, which 
presented the appearance of a mound artificially built there as a founda- 
tion for the structure. The wisest men in the army devoted themselves 
to constructing covered passages from suitable material, in which the 
soldiers who were to undermine the embankment might lie securely 
hidden. It seemed to them—and they were not far from right—that 
if the hill were mined by concealed passages, some portion of the build- 
ings superimposed upon it must fall. Wickerwork of osiers, ladders of 
moderate height, and all other instruments that might be of service in 
such work were hastily prepared. When everything had been made 
ready with the greatest care, the chiefs of both the infantry battalions 
and the cavalry squadrons were directed by the voice of the herald and 
also by secret instructions to apply themselves promptly and diligently 
to the work of attack. A definite place was assigned to each chief, and 
there he, with his own retainers and friends, pressed on the work with 
fury as if the success of the whole matter rested upon himself alone. 
Each commander was anxious to prove that his own followers were 
the best; consequently by constant attacks and daily skirmishes they 
kept up the work so persistently that an undertaking which would 
ordinarily have occupied many days was by vigilant attention accom- 
plished within two months. 

One day a huge stone cast forth from a hurling machine which was 
battering the citadel night and day chanced to fall upon the chief com- 
mander of the castle upon whom the entire defense rested. He was 
instantly ground to bits. Upon his death the people dispersed like 
sheep when the shepherd is struck down, and, as sand without lime 
cannot hold together, so the obstinate resistance which they had hith- 
erto shown ceased. 

As soon as this was realized, the Christians redoubled their efforts, 


JERUSALEM UNDER BALDWIN III are 


and the resistance of the besieged correspondingly slackened. Very 
soon after—in fact, within a few days—they sent a deputation to the. 
king and offered to resign the place to him, on condition that they be 
permitted to go home freely and peaceably with all their goods. They 
also asked that guides be furnished to protect them from attack and to 
conduct them safely to their desired destination. 

Thus the fortress was taken. It was delivered to the prince of Anti- 
och, under whose jurisdiction it had formerly been, and the leaders 
returned to Antioch after completing a successful campaign. There, 
after words of farewell had been exchanged, the king left them and 
returned to the kingdom, accompanied by the magnificent count of 
Flanders. The count of Tripoli courteously attended them on the way 
as far as Tripoli.®? 


20. Amalrich, quondam prior of the canons of the church of the 
Holy Sepulchre at Jerusalem, is elected patriarch. His elec- 
tion causes strife among the bishops. 


At this time, because of the death of Fulcher of precious memory, 
the church at Jerusalem was without a patriarch. The prelates of the 
church assembled therefore at the Holy City to act on the matter of 
choosing an incumbent for this important see, in accordance with ca- 
nonical rules. It is claimed that, through the intervention of a sister of 
Queen Melisend and Sibylla, countess of Flanders, the king’s sister, 
the choice was irregularly made, and Amalrich, prior of the church of 
the Sepulchre of the Lord, was elected.** 

Amalrich was a Frank by birth, from the town of Nesle, in the 
bishopric of Noyon. He was a man of good education, but very simple 
and of little advantage to the church. He was elected to the position in 
opposition to the wishes of Hernesius, archbishop of Caesarea, and 
Ralph, bishop of Bethlehem, who appealed from the decision. After 
he took possession of the see, Amalrich placed the matter in the hands 

62 This fortress, whose siege and capture are described in such detail, has not been 
definitely identified, unless it be Harim (see W. B. Stevenson, The Crusaders in the 
East, p. 179, note 1). If so, it must have been recently lost, perhaps to Qilij Arslan 
earlier in the year. 

83 Tt is strange that William does not mention which of the queen’s sisters is meant. 
It was probably Iveta, the youngest, who was now abbess of her convent. Sibylla of 
Flanders was especially devoted to this sister of her stepmother, Melisend, and is 


said to have remained with her when her husband returned to Flanders (see L. Delisle, 
ed., Chronique de Robert de Torigni, abbé du Mont-Saint-Michel, 1, 325). 


272 JERUSALEM UNDER BALDWIN III 


of Frederick, bishop of Acre, who went to the Roman church then 
ruled over by Hadrian. By the lavish use of gifts, it is claimed, Fred- 
erick secured for Amalrich, in the absence of his adversaries, the favor 
of the Roman pontiff and brought back with him the pallium in full 
recognition of Amalrich’s claim to the office of patriarch. 


21. Nureddin lays siege to a cave in the region of Suita, belong- 
ing to the Christians. The king marches out against him and 
succeeds in raising the siege. Nureddin fights with the Chris- 
tians and is defeated. . 


In the meanwhile, however, Nureddin had been cured of his malady 
through the careful treatment of his physicians. The king had now re- 
turned to his own realm, and the Turkish prince, in full vigor of health, 
repaired to Damascus. In the course of the following summer, that 
he might not pass the time in idleness there and be accused of relaxing 
his usual vigilance, he summoned his army, mustered a large force of 
reserves, and made a sudden attack upon one of our fortresses. This 
was a cavern in the district called Suita [Sawad], situated on the side 
of a high and very steep hill. There was no access to this place from 
above or below but only from the side, by way of a narrow and danger- 
ous path along a precipice. Within were rooms and sleeping arrange- 
ments which afforded the necessary accommodation for those living 
there. There was also a spring of living water which never failed, so 
that, as far as the narrow limits of the place permitted, it was fairly well 
equipped and was regarded as very useful to the district. 

The news of this siege was brought to the king by a reliable report. 
He at once mustered the forces of the realm and hurried thither, ac- 
companied by the count of Flanders. The people within, unable to 
endure the rigors of a siege, had already made tentative conditions of 
surrender such as necessity usually imposes; namely, that unless help 
arrived within ten days, they would without fail surrender the fort- 
fications at the expiration of that time. This fact also was made known 
to the king. He therefore made all possible haste to their relief and 
with his army encamped near Tiberias, by the bridge where the waves 
of the Jordan separate from those of the lake of Gennesaret. 

But as soon as Nureddin learned that the king was at hand, on the 
advice of Siraconus [Shirkuh], his commander in chief, a man of great 


JERUSALEM UNDER BALDWIN III 273 


valor but of overweening self-confidence, he left the siege and marched 
forth with his army against the Christians. 

The king, learning that Nureddin intended to attack him, sum- 
moned his lords to his quarters at earliest dawn. Humble adoration was 
first rendered to the Life-giving Cross, which Peter, of precious mem- 
ory, our predecessor as archbishop of Tyre, was bearing; then by unan- 
imous consent battle was declared. The ranks were put in motion, and, 
in exultation of spirit as if already assured of victory, they marched 
forth to the place where Nureddin’s hosts were said to be. When close 
upon the foe, according to their wish, the Christian battalions, in battle 
array and armed to the teeth, dashed en masse upon the Turks and 
made furious use of their swords, as if determined to fight to the death. 
But the undaunted Turks sustained the charge without wavering. They 
counterattacked with the sword and with gallant resistance endeavored 
to repel the assault of their adversaries. 

After varying tides of fortune, victory was finally vouchsafed from 
on high to the Christians. The enemy was routed with heavy losses, 
and the king as victor held the field with his army. This battle took 
place at Puthaha on the Ides of July, in the fifteenth year of King 
Baldwin’s reign.°# 

Thence, Baldwin deemed it expedient to march on with his army to 
the fortress which had been under siege. There he repaired the dam- 
age that had been done and carefully supplied the place with arms, 
food, and valiant men. He then disbanded his army, sent them away 
to their homes, and returned to the realm after a successful campaign. 


22. The envoys sent to Constantinople on the matter of the 
king’s marriage return, They bring with them a niece of the 
emperor as a wife for the king. 


As has been mentioned, envoys had gone to Constantinople to ar- 
range a marriage for the king. One of their number, Attard, archbishop 
of Nazareth, died there, and his body was brought back to his own 
church by the zealous care of his faithful companions. He was succeeded 
by Letard, prior of the canons of the same church, a very kindly man, 
gentle and affable, who still remains in the same charge in the twenty- 


84 July 15, 1158. Qalanisi’s account of Nureddin’s defeat is somewhat briefer (Gibb, 
Chronicle, p. 347). 


274 JERUSALEM UNDER BALDWIN III 


third year of his pontificate.** The surviving envoys, namely, Hum- 
phrey the constable, Joscelin Pisellus, and William de Barris, noble 
and illustrious men, well versed in secular affairs, pursued with due 
diligence the task entrusted to them at the court of the emperor. After 
numberless delays and equivocal answers expressed in mystifying cir- 
cumlocutions such as the subtle Greeks delight in and usually employ, 
their request was gratified. Arrangements concerning the dowry and 
the donation for the marriage having been concluded, an illustrious 
maiden, a princess who had been reared in the strictest seclusion of the 
imperial palace, was named as the king’s bride. She was in fact a niece 
of the emperor, the daughter of his elder brother Isaac, and was called 
Theodora. She was in her thirteenth year, a maiden of unusual beauty, 
both of form and feature, whose entire appearance favorably impressed 
all who saw her. Her dowry consisted of a hundred thousand hyper- 
peres, of standard weight, and in addition ten thousand of the same 
coins, which the emperor generously granted for her marriage expenses. 
The bridal outfit of the maiden, in gold and gems, garments and pearls, 
tapestries and silken stuffs, as well as precious vessels, might by a just 
estimate be valued at an additional fourteen thousand hyperperes.* 

The king had sent a guarantee to the emperor in his own handwrit- 
ing that whatever his envoys should agree to on his part he himself 
would ratify. On his behalf, they faithfully promised that, in case of 
the king’s death, the queen should hold as a marriage portion with 
life tenure, in all tranquillity and without contest, the city of Acre 
with all its appurtenances. Thus, with settlements satisfactory to both 
parties the matter was concluded. Bridal attendants selected from the 
highest peers of the empire were assigned to accompany the lady on 
her journey to the king, and she set out for Syria, under the escort of 
the envoys, to go to her husband. 

During the course of the following September she landed safely at 
Tyre with all her retinue. Within a few days thereafter she was conse- 
crated at Jerusalem as the custom of the realm decreed and crowned 


8° This allusion to Letard’s twenty-third year in office dates the time of William’s 
writing of this passage in 1181. 

86 The embassy to Constantinople presumably left late in 1157 and returned with 
the Greek princess as the prospective bride of Baldwin III in September, 1158 (Chalan- 
don, Les Comnéne, II, 439-40). The hyperperus, nomisma, or solidus was at one 
time a gold coin worth about two dollars. It was, however, somewhat debased by the 
Comneni and issued also as a silver coin (A. A. Vasiliev, 4 History of the Byzantine 
Empire, Il, 149). 


JERUSALEM UNDER BALDWIN III 275 


with the royal diadem. Then, after the solemn rites of marriage had 
been accomplished, she was given to her husband. The patriarch-elect 
of Jerusalem had not at that time received the gift of consecration, for 
the envoys sent to the pope on behalf of his cause had not yet returned. 
Aimery, patriarch of Antioch, was therefore summoned by royal man- 
date to confer the grace of royal unction upon the queen and to cele- 
brate the customary rites of marriage.®’ From the time that he took a 
wife, the king laid aside all the levity which, according to rumor, he 
had hitherto unduly displayed. Thenceforward he might say with the 
apostle, “When I was a child I spake as a child, I understood as a child, 
I thought as a child; but when I became a man, I put away childish 
things.” °§ He is said to have cherished his wife ever after with affec- 
tion worthy of praise and is believed to have been faithful to her even 
to the end. Having thus laid aside light conduct, as if changed from 
that former man,°® he began to undertake important works and to 
occupy himself entirely with serious matters. 


23. The emperor of Constantinople comes to Antioch. Prince 
Renaud makes amends for the outrages he committed in 
Cyprus and is restored to favor. 


Durinc the course of that same year, the emperor of Constantinople 
determined to go down into Syria. He mustered troops from all the 
provinces of his realm, in keeping with his imperial magnificence, and 
with this great army gathered from all tribes and peoples, tongues and 
nations, he crossed the Hellespont, passed swiftly through all the in- . 
tervening country and about the beginning of December appeared at 
the head of his armies in Cilicia so suddenly that it seemed almost in- 
credible. The immediate reason for this hurried march was as follows: 
a powerful Armenian prince named Thoros, of whom mention has 
been made, had seized by force the entire land of Cilicia bordering on 
the mountains in which he owned several strongly fortified castles. 
Not a single walled city or the most distant village escaped. Tarsus and 
Anavarza, the capitals of Cilicia Prima and Secunda respectively, had 
fallen under his power; and other cities also, among them Mamistra, 
Adana, and Sisium, where he had driven out the governors placed 


87 Aimery was present in Jerusalem in September of 1158. 
687 Cor. 13:11. 69 Virgil Aen. I. 274. 


276 JERUSALEM UNDER BALDWIN III 


there in charge of imperial affairs. The emperor had, therefore, has- 
tened his march and concealed his purpose in order to take the Arme- 
nian unaware.” 

His journey had another purpose also. His compassion had been 
roused by the pitiful case of the Cyprians, who had well deserved his 
favor and who, as has been related, had been subjected to the mon- 
strous tyranny of the prince of Antioch, who treated them as if they 
had been enemies of the faith and detestable parricides. 

So unexpected was the coming of the imperial armies that Thoros, 
who was then staying at Tarsus, had barely time to flee to the neigh- 
boring mountains before the legions and the chiefs of the army were 
spreading over the open plain. 

When Renaud, prince of Antioch, heard this news, he was assailed 
by the stings of a guilty conscience. Shortly before the coming of the 
emperor, he had wreaked his fury upon the innocent Cyprians and had 
perpetrated upon them and upon their wives and children outrages 
abominable in the sight of both God and men. Consequently, he feared 
the arrival of the emperor, lest, moved by the loud complaints of an 
injured people, he should undertake to avenge their injuries. Straight- 
way, the prince began to ponder, now in his own mind, and again in 
consultation with intimate friends whom he summoned, as to his course 
of action and how he might satisfactorily atone to his imperial magnifi- 
cence for so deep an injury. The arrival of the emperor had terrified 
him so greatly, it is said, that he would not wait for the king [of 
Jerusalem], who was soon to arrive, even though he knew that through 
the latter’s intercession and influenee: increased as it was by the new 
alliance, he might secure far better terms for himself. 

Following the advice of his staff, therefore, he chose certain nobles 
from among their number to accompany him and started for Cilicia 
where the emperor was at the time with his forces. Gerard, the vener- 
able bishop of Laodicea, also attended him on his journey. Having first 
won the favor of some of the members of the emperor’s court to inter- 
cede for his petition, he proceeded to the city of Mamistra, where, after 
making many elaborate explanations fraught with shame and disgrace 
to the Christians, he was restored to the favor of his imperial majesty. 

70 Emperor Manuel reached Cilicia in the fall of 1158 and remained in the neigh- 


borhood for more than half a year (see Chalandon, Les Comnéne, II, 4413 also Gibb, 
Chronicle, p. 349). 


JERUSALEM UNDER BALDWIN III 277 


For in view of the assembled legions, he is said to have appeared be- 
fore the emperor barefooted and clothed in a woolen tunic short to the 
elbows, with a rope around his neck and a naked sword in his hand. 
Holding this by the point, he presented the hilt to the emperor. As soon 
as he had thus surrendered his sword, he threw himself on the ground 
at the emperor’s feet, where he lay prostrate till all were disgusted and 
the glory of the Latins was turned into shame; for he was a man of 
violent impulses, both in sinning and in repenting.”! 


24. The king hastens to the land of Antioch and is graciously 
received by the emperor, who lavishes gifts upon him, 


On learning of the emperor’s arrival, the king, accompanied by his 
brother and attended also by an escort selected from the greatest nobles 
of the realm, repaired to Antioch. The count of Flanders had decided 
to return home by the next crossing and therefore remained behind. 
On his arrival, the king sent an embassy to the emperor, consisting 
of Geoffrey, abbot of the Temple of the Lord, a man well versed in 
the Greek tongue, and the noble Joscelin Pisellus. They were to con- 
vey in a courteous manner the salutations due to his imperial highness 
and. to inquire whether it was his good pleasure that the king should 
appear before his presence. In reply to their message, the envoys were 
instructed to invite the king most urgently to come immediately. In 
addition, the emperor sent his illustrious chancellor as the bearer of a 
letter from himself and charged him to urge the king by word of 
mouth also, as a beloved son of the empire, not to delay to come to him. 
Upon the appointed day, therefore, the king, with a chosen escort 
of very distinguished lords, went thither and was received in most 
honorable fashion. By the emperor’s orders, he was met by two nobles 
of the highest position among the illustrious men of the sacred palace, 
John the protosebastos and Alexius the chamberlain, brothers born of 
the same mother and nephews of the emperor himself. A splendid 


71 According to the Greek historians, Patriarch Aimery had offered to deliver Renaud 
de Chatillon to the emperor, and Baldwin III had been partner to the offer, hoping 
thereby to gain the principality of Antioch. Manuel refused the offer, preferring to 
have Antioch separately ruled, even by Renaud (see Chalandon, Les Commeéne, 11, 
443-48). Greek and Syrian historians insist that Baldwin sought to ameliorate the con- 
ditions imposed on Renaud, which included, among others, the removal of the Latin 
patriarch and the substitution of the Greek patriarch of Antioch. On this point, Baldwin 
could make no gain, though the actual arrival of the Greek patriarch did not occur 
until some years later. 


278 JERUSALEM UNDER BALDWIN III 


retinue of nobles attended them. Under this escort, the king was con- 
ducted to the entrance of the tent where the emperor and his most 
distinguished nobles temporarily resided. 

He was presented with much ceremony. The emperor greeted him 
graciously, gave him the kiss of peace, and placed him by his side in 
a seat of honor although in a somewhat lower position than his own. 
He then honored the king’s companions with fitting salutations and 
gave them, too, the kiss of peace. At the same time he made solicitous 
inquiries about the king’s own health and that of the members of his 
staff. The joyous expression of his countenance, as well as his words 
and general attitude, showed that he was greatly pleased at their com- 
ing and that he rejoiced in the presence of such an illustrious king and 
his retinue. For ten days Baldwin was constantly with the emperor; 
he enjoyed agreeable intercourse with him and they had frequent 
colloquies both in private and in the assembly of the nobles. The king 
was of an affable and friendly disposition, and during his stay he won 
great favor with the emperor and his nobles, whose hearts were drawn 
to him by ties of deep affection; in fact, ever after, as long as he lived, 
he was cherished by them as a son. Even to the present day, though he 
is now dead, they have never ceased to hold him in precious remem- 
brance. 

Baldwin was an energetic man of shrewd insight with respect to 
worldly affairs, and he desired that his sojourn with the emperor might 
be turned to good account. He observed that the emperor had ordered 
forces to be assembled in a camp outside the city for the purpose of 
sending an expedition against Thoros, whom he was pursuing with 
insatiable hatred. After first asking permission, Baldwin undertook to 
bring about a good understanding between the emperor and that 
nobleman. He called Thoros to him and arranged an agreement, by 
which the prince surrendered the fortress which the emperor de- 
manded and thereupon was restored to full favor. Thus, through the 
king’s mediation Thoros, before returning to his own domains, took an 
oath of liege fealty to the emperor.”” 

At length the king and his train returned to Antioch, followed by 
the good will of all. With them they carried rich gifts most liberally 
bestowed by the emperor, as beseemed imperial magnificence. 


7 The negotiations with Thoros were conducted jointly by Baldwin III and thu 
Templars (Chalandon, Les Commnéne, 11, 448-50). 


JERUSALEM UNDER BALDWIN III 279 


We have learned from certain people whose testimony is entirely 
reliable that in addition to the gifts showered with profuse generosity 
upon the king’s followers—and these were said to be countless—the 
treasure bestowed upon the king alone was reputed to amount to 
twenty-two thousand hyperperes and three thousand marks of silver 
of standard weight. Garments, silken stuffs, and precious vases also 
formed a part of the treasure bestowed." 

At Antioch the king found his brother Amaury, count of Jaffa and 
Ascalon. With him was Hugh d’Ibelin, who had lately been released 
from captivity among the enemy and had returned to reéstablish him- 
self in his former position. As they also desired to visit the emperor, 
they soon set out thither and were well received by his imperial maj- 
esty. Great honor was shown them in accordance with imperial custom 
and, at the close of their visit, they were presented with rich gifts and 
sent back to the kingdom rejoicing. 


25. The emperor enters Antioch. He shows great liberality 
toward the citizens. Thence, soon after, he returns to his 
own land. 


THE emperor celebrated the holy season of Easter in Cilicia and 
passed several days in that land. He then led his armies on to Antioch 
and stood before the gates of the city, formidable because of his vast 
array of troops. The patriarch, bearing the books of the Evangels, and 
the clergy surrounded by all the ceremonial splendor of the church, 
went forth to meet him accompanied by the entire people. The king 
also issued forth with great ceremony to welcome him, attended by the 
prince of Antioch and the count of Ascalon and followed by all the 
chief men of the kingdom and the principality of Antioch. To the 
martial sound of trumpets and drums, the emperor in all the splendor 
of the imperial insignia and crowned with the diadem of the empire, 
was led into the city; first to the cathedral, that is, to the church of the 
Chief of the Apostles, and then to the palace, accompanied by the same 
escort of city fathers and people.™ 


73 Tt is not unlikely that William obtained this information from Amaury, the 
brother of Baldwin III. 

74 Manuel’s entry into Antioch and his stay there were somewhat in the spirit of a 
military triumph which Renaud tried in vain to prevent. Manuel took the precaution 
of requiring hostages for his stay there. It was on this occasion that Manuel held a 


280 JERUSALEM UNDER BALDWIN III 


After several days spent in the enjoyment of the baths and other 
pleasures, during which time he showered gifts most liberally upon 
the people of the town, according to his usual custom, the emperor 
determined to make a hunting trip to while away the time. So, accom- 
panied by the king, he visited a place where there was good game. They 
were riding through the forest, as hunters do in pursuance of that sport, 
when, on the solemn day of the Ascension of our Lord, an accident be- 
fell them. The king, borne along on his fleet horse, was riding over 
rough ground covered with low-growing shrubs and brambles, when 
he was flung headlong to the ground from his horse and suffered a 
fractured arm. 

As soon as the emperor learned of the accident, he took upon himself, 
with the most gracious sympathy, the office of surgeon; he knelt down 
by the king and attentively ministered to him, as if he himself were 
merely an ordinary person. Meanwhile, his nobles and kinsmen were 
dumb with wonder and dismay. That the emperor, regardless of his 
imperial majesty, should lay aside his august dignity and show him- 
self so devoted and friendly to the king appeared to all unseemly. 
When, on account of this accident, they returned to Antioch, he visited 
the king daily, himself renewed the poultices and healing ointments, 
and then carefully replaced the bandages. Indeed, he could scarcely 
have shown more solicitude had Baldwin been his own son.*® 

When the king had completely recovered, the emperor proclaimed 
by the voice of the heralds that the commanders of the legions were to 
send ahead the machines and engines of war and on a certain day con- 
duct the army to Aleppo. Soon after, he himself, accompanied by the 
king arid the rulers of the two kingdoms, left Antioch to the sound of 
trumpets and drums, the challengers to battle. At the ford of Balena, 
so called in common parlance, the entire army halted. 

From that place the emperor sent messengers to Nureddin, who 
chanced to be at Aleppo at the time, and through these envoys arranged 
that one Bertram, a natural son of the count of St. Gilles, with certain 
other prisoners should be released.*® Shortly after this, the monarch 


tournament in Western fashion and himself took part in the event (see Chalandon, 
Les Comnéne, II, 450-52). 

"? Manuel seems to have prided himself upon his knowledge of medicine and his 
skill in treating wounds (see also Book XVI, note 45). 

‘© Bertram, the son of Alphonse, had been captured by Nureddin in 1149, a fact 
which William failed to mention at the time (see Book XVII, note 18). Nureddin, 


JERUSALEM UNDER BALDWIN III 281 


returned to his own realm, whither his private affairs called him. After 
his departure, the king also returned to his land, together with those 
who had accompanied him. 


26. On the death of Pope Hadrian, a dangerous schism arises 
in the church of Rome. 


Asout this time Pope Hadrian died of quinsy at Anagni in Cam- 
pania. His body was borne to Rome and there buried with great honor 
in the church of St. Peter, the chief of the apostles. The cardinals there- 
upon assembled to discuss the question of his successor, and it happened, 
as it often does under such circumstances, that their wishes were at 
variance. One faction chose Roland, cardinal-priest of the same church 
of St. Peter, with title St. Mark, who had been chancellor of the holy 
see; and, laying hands upon him, ordained him pope under the name 
Alexander. The other party, however, chose Octavianus, a nobleman 
according to the flesh, cardinal-priest of the same church with title 
St. Cecilia beyond the Tiber; he too was consecrated in the same man- 
ner and constituted pope under the name Victor.’” 

This schism, because of our sins, practically caused a division and 
an irrevocable separation in the entire Latin church; the greatest nobles 
of the land formed into factions and allied themselves to one side or 
the other. 

This condition lasted almost nineteen years. Finally, Frederick, the 
emperor of the Romans, who had been aiding and advising the party 
of Victor, brought about unity in the church by becoming fully recon- 
ciled to Pope Alexander.”* Thus harmony was restored to the church 
of God and, the shades of error having been dispelled, peace shone 
forth, as “the morning star in the midst of the clouds.” 7° 


aa 


who was loath to give up captives, released a number of prisoners at Manuel’s request, 
perhaps a condition of peace between them. 

77 The death of Hadrian IV occurred in 1159 and was followed, as William says, 
by the schism which Frederick Barbarossa for political reasons helped to keep alive 
for many years. 

78 This reconciliation occurred some time after the battle of Legnano, 1176, in 
which Frederick’s troops had suffered a severe defeat from the Lombard cities. The 
Lateran council of 1179, at which William was present, was in a sense a celebration 
of the restored unity of the church. 

79 Ecclus. 50: 6. 


282 JERUSALEM UNDER BALDWIN III 


27. Nureddin invades the country of the sultan of Iconium and 
takes a part of it by force. The king ravages the land of 
Damascus. 


Meanwuite, Nureddin was greatly delighted at the departure of the 
emperor. The arrival of that mighty potentate had caused him great 
fear, and his sojourn in the country had agitated him still more. He 
now felt secure from the dreaded power of the great monarch and, 
perceiving that the king had returned to his own land, thought that 
the opportunity he had so long desired had come. He accordingly 
summoned troops from all over his dominions and directed a campaign 
against the land of the sultan of Iconium, which bordered on his own 
territory. The city of Marash as well as the two strongholds, Cresson 
and Beherselin, fell under his power, for the sultan was far distant from 
these parts and could not easily render them aid. It was with full 
knowledge of this situation, in fact, that Nureddin had ventured to 
attack Iconium against one stronger than himself. 

News of this campaign was brought to the king, who was still de- 
tained with all his forces in those parts. Well knowing that the land of 
Damascus, stripped of its military forces, would lie exposed as an easy 
prey to the wiles of an enemy, the king resolved to turn the fact to his 
own advantage. Gathering an army, he invaded the land of Damascus, 
where without opposition he burned and laid waste everything accord- 
ing to his good pleasure. The entire land from Ostro [Bostra? ], that 
famous city of Arabia, even to Damascus was given over to the soldiers 
to burn and plunder at will. 

There was at Damascus a nobleman named Negem-ed-Din [Najm 
al-Din], to whom, because of his reputation for experience in worldly 
matters, Nureddin had entrusted his personal affairs and the charge 
of the city with its dependencies, to be governed according to his own 
good pleasure. Najm realized that his master was occupied with im- 
portant affairs at a distance while he himself had only a small force 
with which to resist the king. He therefore wisely sought other means 
of avoiding the dangers which beset him. He offered the king four 
thousand pieces of gold and gave up six knights of ordinary rank whom 
he was holding and, in return, demanded a truce of three months. By 
the judicious use of money he had bribed many to intercede for him, 


JERUSALEM UNDER BALDWIN III 283 


and consequently his request was granted. By these prudent measures 
he succeeded in relieving the country of the king’s army.®° 

During this time Queen Melisend, a woman of unusual wisdom 
and discretion, fell ill of an incurable disease for which there was no 
help except death. Her two sisters, the countess of Tripoli and the 
abbess of St. Lazarus of Bethany, watched over her with unremitting 
care; the most skilful physicians to be found were summoned, and 
such remedies as were judged best assiduously applied.*! For thirty 
years and more, during the lifetime of her husband as well as after- 
wards in the reign of her son, Melisend had governed the kingdoms 
with strength surpassing that of most women. Her rule had been wise 
and judicious. Now, wasted in body and somewhat impaired in memory, 
she had lain on her bed for a long time as if dead, and very few were 
allowed to see her. 

Meanwhile, the time of the truce had elapsed which had been agreed 
on with Najm, the governor of Damascus, and Nureddin, not yet 
having completed his undertaking, was still detained in the parts 
mentioned above. The king, therefore, entered the land of the enemy 
by force of arms and devastated the country as he would. He drove 
off cattle and slaves, burned and plundered without hindrance. Then, 
having laid waste the land, destroyed the surrounding fields, and taken 
the inhabitants captive, he again returned in safety to his realm. 


28. Prince Renaud of Antioch is captured by the Turks and 
thrown into prison at Aleppo. 


Nor long after this, Renaud, prince of Antioch, was informed by 
his scouts that in the country which had formerly belonged to the 
count of Edessa, between Marash and Tulupa, there was a land full 
of flocks and herds. Since this locality was without military forces and 
the people were unaccustomed to the use of arms, it lay easily exposed 
to pillage. The credulous Renaud lent a ready ear to this report. He 
at once mustered a large force and under evil auspices set out on the 
march. On reaching the place, he found that the story was correct. 
80 These events at Damascus took place too late to be included in the chronicle of 
Qalanisi, who died March 18, 1160. The lieutenant whom Nureddin had left in charge 
of Damascus was Najm al-Din, according to Gibb (see Gibb, Chronicle, pp. 357-68). 


81 The two sisters were Hodierna and Iveta. William’s statement of the length of 
her rule would imply the year 1161 as the date of her illness. 


284 JERUSALEM UNDER BALDWIN III 


There was indeed an enormous number of flocks and herds, but the 
people to whom they belonged were Christians. For, except in the 
fortresses, there were no Turks in all that region. Even these were 
few in number, since they were merely stationed in those places to 
protect the strongholds, collect tribute from the people, and guard 
it, when paid, for the great lords whose agents they were. The fields 
around were occupied entirely by Syrian and Armenian Christians, 
who tilled the soil and devoted themselves to agriculture. 

Renaud and his forces, without the slightest opposition, seized 
plunder and spoils on all sides. Loaded with booty and enriched 
by all kinds of stolen goods, they were returning home in safety and 
tranquillity when suddenly they were met by Megedin [Majd al- 
Din], the governor of Aleppo, a true friend and loyal ally of Nured- 
din. Having learned that Renaud was returning from his foray, he 
had hastened against him with all the light-armed cavalry of that 
region. His purpose was to surprise the Christians in some narrow 
defiles and rout them while they were encumbered with baggage and 
booty, or at least to compel them by force to relinquish the plunder. 

Following out the shrewd plan of the governor, the Turks had 
marched forth against Renaud under the guidance of the scouts who 
had brought the news and were now at the place named, near which 
the prince with all his plunder was encamped. 

On learning that the enemy was at hand, the prince consulted with 
his people as to what was best to be done under the circumstances. 
The wisest plan was to abandon the booty and hasten home unen- 
cumbered, which could easily have been done; but instead they pre- 
ferred to keep the plunder and, if necessary, put up a vigorous fight. 
The next morning, when the day was somewhat advanced, the hostile 
forces met in battle. The enemy attacked with bows and swords and 
fought most pugnaciously. At first the Christians tried to make a 
stout resistance, but finally they gave way to panic, abandoned the 
spoils, and fled. In punishment for his sins, the prince was forced 
to expiate in his own person all the crimes which he had committed. 
A captive, bound with the chains of the foe, he was led to Aleppo 
in most ignominious fashion, there to become, with his fellow captives, 
the sport of the infidels. 

This disaster occurred on November 23 in the eighteenth year of 


JERUSALEM UNDER BALDWIN III 285 


King Baldwin’s reign, at a place called Commi, between Cresson and 
Marash.®? 


29. One John, cardinal-priest of the church of Rome, comes to 
Syria as legate; an altercation arises among the bishops in 
regard to his being received. A son, Baldwin, is born to the 
king’s brother, Amaury, count of Jaffa. 


Durinc this same period a certain John, a man of much learning, 
cardinal-priest of the church at Rome, of title Saints John and Paul, 
landed with some Genoese at Jubail. He had been sent by Pope Alex- 
ander as legate to the countries of the Orient. Wishing to obtain 
permission to enter the country as legate, he endeavored to ascertain 
the sentiments of the king and the princes of the realm, both ec- 
clesiastical and secular, in regard to his coming to them. For, as has 
been mentioned, a schism had arisen which involved the whole world 
—some favoring Pope Alexander, and others, the opposite party. 
After long consideration had been given to the problem, the legate 
was directed to remain at Jubail for a time; he was not to venture to 
enter the kingdom until the prelates of the church and the princes 
of the realm had considered the matter more fully. He would then 
be instructed what was their pleasure in the matter. 

Accordingly, the patriarch and all the other prelates of the church 
were summoned to Nazareth, where in conference with the king and 
some of the barons also, they began to consider what course to pursue 
in such a difficult situation. For while all the prelates of the East in 
the two patriarchates openly preserved neutrality, as private in- 
dividuals, some secretly favored one side, some the other. 

As is usual under such conditions, they could not agree and were 
swayed by their wishes in many directions. Some declared that Alex- 
ander and his legate should be received, as having the better cause. 
The chief partisan of this view was Peter, of pious memory in the 
Lord, our predecessor as archbishop of Tyre. Others, on the contrary, 
preferred the cause of Victor, on the ground that he had always been 


82 The year is somewhat uncertain, for William’s usual list of the years of Baldwin’s 
reign would make this 1161, which is also given by several Arabic historians. Both 
Chalandon (Les Commnéne, Il, 520) and Stevenson (Crusaders, p. 183, note 2) prefer 
1160 as the year, accepting William’s statement of day and month. 


286 JERUSALEM UNDER BALDWIN III 


a friend and protector of the kingdom; the latter party maintained 
that the legate should, under no circumstances, be received. 

The king, supported by some of the barons and church dignitaries, 
advised that a middle course be adopted and neither party received; 
he feared a division of the bishops which would cause a schism in the 
church. If the legate, laying aside his official rights and dignities, de- 
sired to go as a pilgrim to the holy places for the sake of prayer, per- 
mission should be given and liberty granted him to tarry in the king- 
dom until the first crossing, at which time he must return. The king 
gave the reason for his decision as follows: “The schism is of recent 
date, nor does the world as yet know which faction has the stronger 
cause. In a doubtful matter, it is dangerous to adopt an opinion in- 
dependently, to venture to pronounce in advance a definite decision, 
while the result is still uncertain. Moreover, there is no need of a 
legate in the kingdom to burden the churches and monasteries with 
expenses and weaken them by his extortions.” 

This was the opinion of the king. It seemed most sensible, yet the 
advice of the party which maintained that the legate should be received 
prevailed. He was, therefore, invited to enter the kingdom and later 
proved a heavy burden to many who had approved of his being re- 
ceived,** 

About this time a son was born to Amaury, count of Jaffa, and his 
wife Agnes, the daughter of the count of Edessa. At the father’s re- 
quest, the king received the child at the baptismal font and gave him 
his own name. When he was asked in jest what he would bestow upon 
his nephew, the son whom he had received at the holy font, Baldwin 
answered in his customary merry and affable manner, “The kingdom 
of Jerusalem.” This remark struck deep into the hearts of some of 
the wise men who heard it, for it seemed to them an ominous predic- 
tion that the king, despite his youth and that of his wife, would die 
without children, which proved to be the case.°4 

88 This council was held in 1160, probably late in the year (see R. Rohricht, Regesta 
regnt Hierosolymitant, no. 357, and J. D. Mansi, Sacrorum conciliorum nova et am- 
plissima collectio, XXI, col. 1145-46). 

8 Amaury’s son Baldwin became Baldwin IV, king of Jerusalem 1174-1185. By 


inference from William’s later statements that young Baldwin was nine years old in 
1170 and thirteen at the death of his father, 1174, his birth occurred in 1161. 


JERUSALEM UNDER BALDWIN III 287 


30. The king ts summoned by the people of Antioch and hastens 
thither. Imperial envoys arrive to request a kinswoman of 
the king as a consort for their lord. 


THE imprisonment of the prince deprived the province of Antioch 
of the support of a leader, and fear and anxiety again laid hold on 
the people of that land. From day to day, in painful suspense, they 
awaited the destruction of the land, unless perchance the Lord should 
become their defender. At length they determined to have recourse 
to their usual source of aid and to seek help against the evils which 
threatened them by appealing to him to whom they had so often ap- 
plied and never in vain. A delegation was accordingly sent to implore 
the king of Jerusalem with tears and prayers to come without delay 
to the help of a despairing people, a people about to perish, whereby 
he might win for himself honor and glory in the eyes of men and 
eternal reward from God. 

On learning of the desperate situation at Antioch, the king was 
moved with the deepest compassion for the troubles of that people. 
Following the example of his predecessors, he wholeheartedly as- 
sumed the task and hastened to Antioch, accompanied by a noble escort 
of knights, where he was received with manifestations of extreme joy 
and exultation by the elders and people. At Antioch he remained as 
long as the exigencies of time and place required and displayed the 
utmost care for the affairs of the principality as if they had been his 
own. Then he committed the government of the land temporarily 
to the patriarch, until he himself could return, and after arranging 
for the support of the princess as befitted her position, he returned to 
his kingdom, where his own affairs demanded his presence. 

After his return imperial envoys, nobles of high position and renown 
in the sacred palace, arrived from the emperor of Constantinople. 
They were the bearers of a letter with a golden seal and also of private 
messages for the king. The leader of the embassy was the illustrious 
Gundostephan [Contostephanus], a blood relation of the emperor; 
the other was the supreme interpreter of the palace, Trifulus [Theo- 
phylact] by name,*® a shrewd man and very zealous on behalf of the 


85 These envoys were named John Contostephanus and Theophylact, the latter an 
Italian. William’s spelling of the names suggests that he obtained this information 
orally. Bertha of Sulzbach, or Irene as she was renamed, the first wife of Manuel, 
had died. 


288 JERUSALEM UNDER BALDWIN III 


imperial interests. These envoys, as we have said, bore sacred dis- 
patches, the tenor of which was, in substance, as follows: “Know, O 
dearest friend, most beloved of our empire, that our imperial consort, 
the illustrious Irene, of precious memory in the Lord, has finished 
her allotted days on earth and henceforward dwells with the spirits 
of the elect. She has left us an only daughter as the heir to the empire. 
But as we have no male offspring, we are filled with solicitude about 
the succession and have frequently held earnest conference with the 
most illustrious nobles of the court in regard to a second alliance. With 
the consent and approval of all our princes, it has finally been judged 
desirable that we take as our imperial consort a lady of your lineage, 
since, of all our empire, we hold you in the deepest affection. Whomso- 
ever of your kinswomen you shall choose for us, be she the sister of 
the illustrious count of Tripoli, or the younger sister of the magnificent 
prince of Antioch, her we shall receive, with entire confidence in your 
loyalty and your choice, as, by the will of God, our imperial consort 
and companion in the realm.” 

When the emperor’s intention was made known to the king, both 
by letter and by word of mouth from the envoys, he promised obedience 
and assistance. Most earnestly he thanked his imperial majesty: first 
because he proposed to ally with himself in such an exalted position 
one of the king’s own lineage, and secondly, because, in recognition 
of Baldwin’s loyalty, the choice of the emperor’s future bride and 
imperial consort was left to the king alone. 


31. The king designates as the emperors bride the illustrious 
maiden Melisend, sister of the count of Tripoli; but after a 
year’s delay, the emperor declines the king’s choice and mar- 
ries Maria, daughter of Prince Raymond. 


Arter conferring with his advisers as to the alliance which would 
be most desirable for his own interests and those of his imperial majesty, 
the king called the emperor’s deputies and, with persuasive words, 
directed them to receive as the wife of their lord Melisend, a sister 
of the count of Tripoli, a maiden of fine character and ability. They 
received the communication of the king with due reverence and gave 
assent, but requested that the decision be announced to the emperor 
both by messengers and letters. 

Meanwhile, an enormous array of ornaments, surpassing those of 


JERUSALEM UNDER BALDWIN III 289 


royalty itself, was prepared at infinite expense by the mother and 
aunt of the maiden destined for this exalted position, and by her 
brother and her many friends as well: bracelets, earrings, pins for 
her headdress, anklets, rings, necklaces, and tiaras of purest gold. 
Silver utensils of immense weight and size were prepared for use in 
the kitchen and for the service of the table and the toilet, besides 
bridles and saddles—in short, every kind of furnishing. All these 
things were prepared at vast expense and with great zeal; the work- 
manship alone was evidence of their exceeding great cost and easily 
surpassed the luxury of kings. During this time, the Greeks carefully 
scrutinized each detail and inquired into the life and conduct of the 
damsel even to the most secret physical characteristics. While awaiting 
their return, they were in constant communication with the emperor. 
And thus a year glided by. . 

The king and the court, as well as the other relations and friends 
of the maiden, were very indignant at this delay. They summoned 
the imperial messengers publicly and pronounced an ultimatum: either 
they must reject the marriage long since arranged and refund the 
money spent, or cease to invent inexplicable reasons for delay and end 
the matter by consummating the marriage according to the condi- 
tions originally agreed upon. The count had been put to vast ex- 
pense; he had ordered twelve galleys to be built and completely 
equipped, for he intended to accompany his sister to her husband. In 
addition, all the most important lords, both of the principality and 
of the kingdom had come to Tripoli in anticipation of the lady’s ap- 
proaching departure; and for these guests the count was defraying 
the necessary expenses, either wholly or in part. 

As always, however, the Greeks gave evasive answers and tried to 
drag the matter along still longer. To checkmate their wily designs 
the king dispatched Otto of Risberg as a special envoy to Constanti- 
nople. He was empowered to make an eloquent demand that the 
actual intentions of the emperor be made known to him as deputy and 
that without circumlocutions. Sooner than had been anticipated the 
envoy returned. He brought a letter from the emperor and messages 
also to the effect that all which had been done in regard to this alliance 
was wholly displeasing to his imperial highness. 

When the king received this news, he withdrew from the negotia- 
tions. That an alliance which had been arranged through his own 


290 JERUSALEM UNDER BALDWIN III 


mediation and completed as far as his own part was concerned should 
come to naught seemed most insulting and would unquestionably re- 
flect unfavorably upon himself. 

The imperial envoys, fearing that the indignation of the count of 
Tripoli would be vented upon them, hastily departed for Cyprus in 
a small boat which they had the good luck to find ready. 

As soon as the company of nobles gathered at Tripoli had departed, 
the king repaired to Antioch; for, as was mentioned, at the earnest 
entreaty of that people he had assumed the charge of the principality. 
On his arrival he found there the same envoys of the emperor who 
were supposed to have left Tripoli [for home].8* They were holding 
daily and intimate conferences with the princess in reference to her 
youngest daughter, Maria. Moreover, they had in their possession 
letters sealed with gold in the presence of the emperor in which he 
guaranteed to ratify whatever agreement should be made by them 
with the princess and her friends on the subject of this marriage. These 
negotiations were made known to the king immediately on his arrival. 
He had been so deeply offended in regard to the former affair that 
he would have been justified in refusing to interest himself for the 
emperor in the present matter. Yet, out of consideration for his orphaned 
kinswoman, who was without a father to protect her, he undertook 
that role and, after many delays, succeeded in arranging the marriage.8” 

As soon as the matter was concluded, the galleys were made ready 
at a place called the Port of St. Simeon at the mouth of the Orontes 
river. The maiden was delivered over to the envoys, and, attended 
by an honorable retinue of the greatest nobles of the land, who were 
to escort her to her husband, she set forth on her journey. 


86 The chronological interrelationship of these events is of great importance, but 
William does not furnish the precise information needed to establish it. He himself was 
probably studying in the schools of the West during 1161-1163 and was therefore 
out of touch with local gossip in Palestine. Apparently Manuel had sent an embassy 
to Baldwin some time before he knew of the capture of Renaud de Chatillon. The 
negotiations for the marriage of Melisend of Tripoli were in progress when Constance 
sent an appeal for aid to Manuel. She may have offered her daughter, Maria, in mar- 
riage at the same time. At any rate, the two negotiations crossed each other, and the 
alliance with Antioch offered greater attractions to Manuel. William must be in 
error in his implication that Manuel did not begin negotiations with Baldwin until 
after the capture of Renaud (see Chalandon, Les Comnéne, Il, 517-25). 

87 The marriage of Manuel and Maria took place at Constantinople on December 
25, 1161 (Chalandon, Les Comnéne, II, 523). William is here glossing over some 
embarrassing details. It is doubttul whether Manuel sought or used Baldwin’s help 
in these negotiations. 


JERUSALEM UNDER BALDWIN III 291 


32. The king rebuilds a stronghold near Antioch called the 
bridge of Iron. His mother, Queen Melisend, dies. 


In order to make his presence at Antioch of service to the land, the 
king, while sojourning there, rebuilt a fortress which had formerly 
stood at a bridge over the Orontes river, commonly called the Iron 
bridge. This place, about six or seven miles from the city of Antioch, 
was of great use in preventing hostile raids and also served as an 
obstacle against the surreptitious entrance of bandits. 

While the king was occupied thus with the affairs of the principality, 
his pious mother, wasted by the constant suffering attendant on a 
lingering illness, went the way of all flesh. Her death occurred on 
the eleventh day of September. When the king received the news, 
he gave himself up to grief and by the depth of his emotion clearly 
showed how sincerely he had loved her; in fact, for many days there- 
after he was inconsolable. 

Queen Melisend of illustrious memory, thenceforward to dwell 
with the angelic host, was buried in the valley of Jehoshaphat on the 
right as one descends to the sepulchre of the Blessed and Immaculate 
Virgin Mary, the mother of our Lord. Her body rests in a stone 
crypt with iron gates. Near by is an altar where mass is celebrated 
daily for the healing of her soul and for the souls of all Christians 
who had died in the Lord.*® 


33. The count of Tripoli, enraged at the rejection of his sister, 
endeavors to harm the emperor in every possible way. 


MEANWHILE, the heart of the count of Tripoli was rent with grief 
and anger because he had been mocked by the emperor, who, after 
putting him to such enormous expense, had finally rejected his sister 
without cause, like the daughter of a common person. He gave utter- 
ance to deep groans and sighs as he anxiously pondered over means 
of requiting the emperor in like fashion and returning measure for 
measure. Although in the midst of his reflections he realized that 
the emperor was the most powerful monarch on earth and that his 
own strength was entirely inadequate to do him any injury, yet re- 

88 Her death is dated September 11, 1161, by Rohricht (see R. Rohricht, Geschichte 


des Kénigreichs Jerusalem, 1100-1291, p. 307). Baldwin must have spent the winter 
at Antioch. 


292 JERUSALEM UNDER BALDWIN III 


sentment drove him to action. Lest he seem indifferent or oblivious 
to the insult which had been offered him, he ordered the galleys which 
he had prepared for another purpose to be armed. Then he summoned 
pirates and desperados, men who had committed the most shocking 
crimes, and delivered the ships into their charge with orders to devastate 
the lands of the emperor without mercy. Neither age, sex, nor condi- 
tion was to be spared; everything was to be given to the flames without 
distinction, including churches and monasteries, and the work of pil- 
lage and rapine carried on far and wide. Let them ever keep in mind 
that they were employing arms and force in a just cause. 

Obedient to his command, they set sail upon the sea and roved over 
the domains of the emperor. Both in the islands and on the lands 
bordering on the sea, they interpreted the count’s orders in the widest 
sense. On all sides they plundered, burned, and massacred. They vio- 
lated churches and broke into monasteries without respect for the vener- 
able places. They laid hands on the travelling money of pilgrims as 
they journeyed to and from the holy places and thus forced them to 
die, or, needy and naked, to prolong their lives by begging. They 
seized the goods of travelling merchants who earned a livelihood 
for their wives and children in that way and forced them to return 
home empty handed with the loss of both principal and gain.®® 


34. Dhe king is poisoned at Antioch. Falling thereby into his last 
illness, he begs to be carried home. His illness becomes worse 
on the journey, and he dies at Beirut. 


Wuite the count of Tripoli, in his desire for revenge, was thus en- 
gaged, the king was at Antioch. Desiring to take a physic before the 
approach of winter, as was his custom, he obtained certain pills from 
Barac, the physician of the count, a part of which were to be taken 
at once and the rest after a short interval. For our Eastern princes, 
through the influence of their women, scorn the medicines and practice 
of our Latin physicians and believe only in the Jews, Samaritans, 
Syrians, and Saracens.®° Most recklessly they put themselves under 

*° William’s vivid and sympathetic account of the sufferings of the house of Tripoli 
would indicate that he condoned, to some degree, the terrible vengeance which Ray- 


mond III exacted. Melisend is said to have entered a convent after this unfortunate 
affair. 

°° Whether this preference was due to the fact that so many of the women were 
themselves Eastern or because they recognized a definite superiority in Eastern medical 
knowledge is not clear, but the preference is clear enough. 


JERUSALEM UNDER BALDWIN III 293 


the care of such practitioners and trust their lives to people who are 
ignorant of the science of medicine. It was rumored that these pills 
were poisoned, and this was probably the fact. At any rate, when 
later at Tripoli the rest of the medicine was put into bread and ad- 
ministered as an experiment to a dog, the animal died within a few 
days. As soon as the king had taken the pills, he was seized with a 
fever and dysentery which developed into consumption from which 
he was never able to obtain relief or help. Perceiving from the intensity 
of his suffering that the disease was, increasing, he left Antioch and 
went to Tripoli. There he lay for several months hoping from day 
to day to improve. Finally, realizing that his malady was becoming 
worse and that recovery was improbable, he caused himself to be 
carried to Beirut and directed that the prelates of the church and the 
nobles of the realm be summoned in haste. Before them all, he acknow]- 
edged his faith with piety and devotion and, in humble and contrite 
spirit, confessed all his sins to the priests. Then his spirit, released from 
the prison of the flesh, departed to heaven, there to receive, God 
willing, in the company of the elect the crown that never fades. 

King Baldwin died on February 10 in the year 1162 of the Incarna- 
tion of our Lord, in the twentieth year of his reign and the thirty- 
third year of his life.9* As he left no children, his brother was the 
heir to the throne. Amid universal mourning his body was borne to 
Jerusalem with reverence and royal ceremony. The funeral proces- 
sion was met by the clergy and all the people and conducted to the 
church of the Sepulchre of the Lord. There he was honorably entombed 
among his predecessors before the place Calvary, where the Lord 
was crucified for our salvation. 


®1 The date here is definite, yet is contradicted in the opening paragraph of the next 
book. The events after 1160 are somewhat confused. William fails to mention an ex- 
pedition which Baldwin III made into Egypt during this time. He conveys the im- 
pression of two expeditions to Antioch in successive years. William’s absence from 
Palestine during these years doubtless accounts for some of this confusion. The date 
of Baldwin’s death, as William here states it, has been accepted by so many historians, 
including both Rohricht and La Monte, that it seems necessary to enumerate a number 
of inconsistencies. If Baldwin was born no earlier than February, 1130 (see Book 
XIV, note 10; Book XVI, note 3), he would be barely thirty-two years old February 
10, 1162. If his reign began when his father died on November 10, 1143, he had ruled 
but eighteen years and three months. Furthermore, if his brother was seven years old 
when Baldwin began to rule in 1143, he could only be twenty-six years old at most 
by February, 1162, instead of the twenty-seven which William assigns to him (Book 
XIX, chap. 1) at this time. The only way in which all of these stubborn inconsistencies 
can be removed is by accepting 1163 instead of 1162 as the year of Baldwin’s death. 


294 JERUSALEM UNDER BALDWIN III 


There is no record in any history, nor does any man now living 
recall, that such deep and poignant sorrow was ever felt over the 
death of any other prince of our own or other nations. For, in addition 
to the manifestations of grief and mourning displayed by the people 
of the cities through which the royal funeral train passed, there came 
down from the mountains a multitude of infidels who followed the 
cortége with wailing. 

For eight successive days, while the funeral procession moved from 
Beirut to Jerusalem, lamentation was unrestrained and grief was re- 
newed almost hourly. Even his enemies are said to have grieved over 
his death. When it was suggested to Nureddin that while we were 
occupied with the funeral ceremonies he might invade and lay waste 
the land of his enemies, he is said to have responded, “We should 
sympathize with their grief and in pity spare them, because they have 
lost a prince such as the rest of the world does not possess today.” 

As we come to the end of this book recording the works of this 
king, we too pray that with the spirits of the elect saints his soul may 
enjoy holy repose. § Amen. 


HERE ENDS THE EIGHTEENTH BOOK 


THE NINETEENTH BOOK BEGINS 


AMAURY I: THE STRUGGLE FOR EGYPT, 
FIRST STAGE 


1. Amaury succeeds his brother Baldwin on the throne. 


Batpwin III, the fourth Latin king of Jerusalem, died without chil- 
dren, as has been mentioned. He was succeeded in the Holy City by 
Amaury, his only brother, count of Jaffa and Ascalon. The latter be- 
came the fifth Latin king in the year 1163 of the Incarnation of our 
Lord and the sixty-second of the liberation of that same city, beloved 
of God. At this time, Alexander was head of the holy Roman church, 
in the third year of his pontificate; the holy church of the Resurrection 
was ruled by Amalrich, the ninth patriarch of the Latins, in the fourth 
year of his patriarchate; over the holy church at Antioch presided 
Aimery, the third patriarch of the Latins in that same city, in the 
twentieth year of his office; and the church at Tyre was subject to 
Peter, the third archbishop of the Latins after the taking of the city, 
who was in the thirteenth year of his office. 

The succession to the throne after the death of Baldwin was the 
occasion of much discord among the barons of the realm, who were 
variously affected by the change of monarchs. In fact, it came near 
causing a serious quarrel involving the danger of schism. But happily 
divine providence, which knows how to apply proper remedies in the 
gravest crises, was with us. The clergy and the people, as well as a 
few of the great men of the kingdom, were strongly in favor of 
Amaury, and the efforts of the disaffected nobles were quickly brought 
to naught. On the twelfth day before the Kalends of March, which 
was the eighth day after the death of the king, his brother Amaury 
was raised to the throne of the realm, which belonged to him by 

1 This paragraph is probably a part of William’s framework made hastily in 1182. 
His resolve to include Godfrey in the list of the kings was probably made later, but 
he may have had it partly in mind, since he here dates from the liberation of Jerusalem, 
1099, instead of the beginning of the Kingdom, 1100. This necessitated the difference 
of a year from the last two digits of the Christian era, but William has reversed the 
figures. It should read either 1163 and sixty-fourth year or 1162 and sixty-third year. 


It is difficult to check the year by reference to the other chronological items because 
the adjectival expression allows a margin of nearly a year in each case. 


296 KING AMAURY I 


hereditary right. In the church of the Sepulchre of the Lord he re- 
ceived the grace of royal unction at the hand of the patriarch, assisted 
by the assembled archbishops, bishops, and all the prelates of the 
church, and was given the insignia of the crown. At the time when 
he became a knight and assumed arms, he had been created count of 
Jaffa. Later, his brother Baldwin, of illustrious memory, with royal 
liberality granted him the city of Ascalon. This metropolis of the 
Philistines was captured in Baldwin’s own time and thus restored after 
a long interval to the Christian profession, as was described in more 
detail when the events of the reign of Baldwin were related. Amaury 
was twenty-seven years old when he came to the throne, and he 
reigned eleven years and five months.” 


2. The characteristics of King Amaury with some remarks on 
his life and manners. 


Amaury was a man of prudence and discretion, well versed in secular 
affairs. He had a slight impediment in his speech, not serious enough 
to be considered as a defect but sufficient to render him incapable of 
ready eloquence. He was far better in counsel than in fluent or ornate 
speech. He was well skilled in the customary law by which the kingdom 
was governed—in fact, he was second to no one in this respect. In 
keenness of intellect and true discernment he surpassed all the nobles 
of the realm. He handled with strength and wisdom the frequent 
crises which arose during his vigorous and unceasing efforts to extend 
the limits of the kingdom and always maintained a fearless attitude 
combined with regal firmness. He was fairly well educated, although 
much less so than his brother. Thanks to his keen intellect and reten- 
tive memory, however, he was sufficiently well informed on the ques- 
tions which are usually important to kings. In this he was assisted by 
his habit of constantly asking questions and of reading whenever the 
affairs of the kingdom allowed him leisure. He displayed much subtlety 
in putting his questions and took pleasure in seeking solutions for 
them. He listened eagerly to history and preferred it to all other kinds 
of reading.* He never forgot what he heard and recited it afterwards 


2 These two statements of date are definite and consistent, and both indicate that 
Amaury became king in 1163. 

3 The implications of this statement are too often overlooked. It is the clearest evi- 
dence that William himself read history to Amaury and that William wrote originally 
to read his history to him. 


KING AMAURY I 297 


with ease and accuracy. Serious matters absorbed his attention entirely, 
and he had no interest in theatricals or games of chancé. He took 
great delight in watching the flight of falcons and herons in pursuit 
of prey. He endured hardships with patience; but as he was inclined 
to corpulency and was altogether too fat, he suffered little inconveni- 
ence from heat and cold. 

He was pious in that he commanded tithes to be given to the. 
church in their entirety and without dispute. He religiously heard 
mass every day unless prevented by sickness or some other emergency. 
He bore with equanimity the curses and reproaches which were often 
hurled against him both in public and private, even by low and con- 
temptible persons, and concealed his feelings so well that it appeared 
as if he had not heard the things said.* In both eating and drinking, 
he practiced moderation, for he despised excess in both. He is said to 
have placed so much confidence in his agents that he required no ac- 
counting from them after they had been put in charge of his affairs 
and refused to listen to insinuations against their good faith. By some 
people this was regarded as a fault, while others considered it a 
virtue and said that it was a proof of genuine trust. 

From these excellent gifts of mind and character certain conspicuous 
faults detracted and in some measure dimmed the good traits just 
described. He lacked a genial temperament and was far too taciturn. 
He was entirely without that gracious affability which princes need 
more than other people in order to win the hearts of their subjects. 
Rarely did he speak to anyone unless compelled by necessity or unless, 
perchance, annoyed by being addressed first. This defect was the more 
noticeable because his brother Baldwin had always been ready with 
pleasant words and was most affable to all.® 

Amaury is said to have abandoned himself without restraint to the 
sins of the flesh and to have seduced married women; for which may 
the Lord in His mercy forgive him! He was, moreover, a violent op- 
ponent of the liberty of the churches. During his reign he reduced 
them to the point of exhaustion by frequent demands on their patri- 


* This affords excellent evidence of the spirit of freedom which prevailed in the 
feudal kingdom of Jerusalem. Though some of the refinements of life in the East 
had been introduced, the ceremonial suppression of free speech which prevailed in 
Eastern courts had evidently not yet been adopted. 

5 This frequent comparison of the two brothers suggests that William must have 
known Baldwin also and therefore have been at court even before the days of Amaury, 
with whom, of course, he was very intimately acquainted. 


298 KING AMAURY I 


mony, so that the holy places were burdened with debt far beyond 
the extent of their revenues.® 

His greed for money was greater than was seemly or honorable in 
a king. By the free use of gifts, he often acquired it and still more 
often retained it quite contrary to the demands of strict justice and. 
right. In talking familiarly with me, he tried to excuse this avaricious 
conduct by giving the following reasons: “Every prince, and above 
all a king, should ever see to it that he is never in straitened circum- 
stances, and that for two reasons: first, because the wealth of the 
subject is always safe when the ruler is not in need; secondly, that 
he may have resources at his disposal from which to provide for the 
necessities of his realm whenever an unexpected emergency arises. In 
such a case, the provident king should be most munificent and should 
spare no expense. Thus it will be plain that whatever he has he pos- 
sesses not for his own benefit but for the good of the realm.” 

Even those who disliked the king could not deny that these reasons 
were applicable in his case. For when the kingdom was in critical straits 
he spared no expense, nor was he restrained by mere physical fatigue. 
But the wealth of his subjects was far from safe, for again and again 
he took advantage of the most trivial pretexts to make serious inroads 
upon their patrimony. | 


3. Of his physical traits and of a certain question which he pro- 
pounded to one of his friends for solution. 


He was of goodly height, taller than many although shorter than 
those of maximum stature. His features were comely, and his bear- 
ing plainly proclaimed even to strangers the dignity of a prince to 
whom reverence was due. He had sparkling eyes of medium size; his 
nose, like that of his brother, was becomingly aquiline; his hair was 
blond and grew back somewhat from his forehead. A comely and very 
full beard covered his cheeks and chin. He had a way of laughing 
immoderately so that his entire body shook. He loved to talk with 
wise and discreet men as well as with those who were familiar with 
far countries and foreign customs.? 


® This has reference, doubtless, to special levies for campaigns, though William evi- 
dently disapproved of such practice except for emergency when the kingdom was actu- 
ally endangered. 

* This suggests a definite intellectual interest at the court of Jerusalem. 


KING AMAURY I 299 


I recall that he once summoned me in a friendly way to the citadel 
of Tyre, while he was suffering from a low fever there, which was, 
however, unattended by danger. During the hours of rest and in the 
intervals which occur in intermittent fevers, I talked with him inti- 
mately on many subjects and answered some of his questions as well 
as the time permitted. In fact he was much edified by our conversation. 

Among other questions which he put to me at that time, there was 
one which moved me greatly; first, because the query was unusual 
and the subject one that hardly admitted of discussion, for our uni- 
versal faith taught it and had handed it down as entitled to sincere 
belief, and secondly, because my heart was deeply wounded that an 
orthodox prince, the scion of orthodox ancestors, should entertain a 
doubt in regard to a fixed doctrine and should question it in the depths 
of his heart. 

He asked me, in short, whether outside of the teaching of the Saviour 
and the holy men who followed Christ, doctrines which he did not 
doubt, there was any way of proving by reliable and authoritative 
evidence that there was a future resurrection? Much agitated by the 
novelty of his query I answered, “The teaching of our Lord and 
Redeemer is sufficient, for, in many passages of the Gospel He plainly 
teaches the future resurrection of the body. He promises that He 
will come as judge to judge the quick and the dead and the world 
with fire. To the elect He says that He will give a kingdom prepared 
from the foundation of the world; but the wicked shall be consigned 
to the eternal fire which is prepared for the devil and his angels. The 
pious declaration of the holy apostles and the patriarchs of the Old 
Testament suffices.” 

To this he responded, “I firmly believe all this; but I seek a reason 
whereby this can be proved to one who doubts these things and does 
not accept the doctrine of Christ and believe in a future resurrec- 
tion and that there is another life after this death.” I answered, “Put 
yourself then in the place of a man so afflicted and let us try to ascertain 
something about this matter.” “It is well,” he said. 1 then asked, 
“You acknowledge that God is just?” He answered, “I acknowledge 
that nothing is more true.” Then I continued, “It is also just that good 
be repaid for good and evil for evil?” He replied, “That 1s true.” “In 
this life,’ I went on, “that does not often happen. For some good 
people suffer nothing but troubles and adversity in this world, while 


300 KING AMAURY I 


many evil persons rejoice in continual happiness, as the evidence of 
daily life teaches us.” Again he answered, “It is so.” “Then,” I re- 
sumed, “that will take place in another life, for it is impossible that 
God should not act justly. Therefore there will be another life and 
a resurrection of this flesh, when all who have merited either good or 
evil in this life must receive their reward.” To this he said, “This seems 
to me good beyond measure; you have wrested all doubt from my 
heart.” 8 By these and similar conversations his spirit was greatly re- 
freshed. But let us return to our subject. 

Amaury was excessively fat, with breasts like those of a woman 
hanging down to his waist. Nature had framed his other members 
with a kinder hand, however, for these displayed not merely ordinary 
comeliness, but, in fact, a rather unusual beauty. Not even his enemies 
could deny that in the use of bodily nourishment he was moderate 
and in regard to wine most abstemious. 


4. Relates how, before his coronation, he was forced to put 
away the wife whom he had married contrary to the sacred 
canons. 


Wuite his brother Baldwin was still actively concerned in human affairs 
and was ruling the kingdom with success, Amaury had married Agnes, 
daughter of the younger Joscelin, count of Edessa.® During the life- 
time of his brother, he had by her two children: a son, Baldwin, whom 
his uncle received at the sacred font, and an older daughter, Sibylla, 
a namesake of the countess of Flanders, the sister of Baldwin and 
Amaury. 

After the death of his brother, however, when Amaury claimed 
the kingdom devolving upon him by hereditary right, he was forced 
to put away his wife. It was in opposition to the expressed will of the 
Patriarch Fulcher, of revered memory, that he had espoused her in 
the beginning, for it was claimed that they were within the fourth 
degree of blood relationship, a fact which was later solemnly attested 
in the face of the church by relatives common to both.?° An annulment 


8 The dialogue between the king and his chronicler recalls the conversations between 
Charlemagne and Alcuin, though the subject of the dialogue reveals the existence of 
some scepticism in secular circles of the twelfth century. 

® Robert of Torigni mentions this marriage as occurring in 1157. 

10 Agnes must have been a woman of unusual attractiveness. She was already be- 
trothed to one of the nobles of the kingdom, Hugh d’Ibelin, when Amaury became 
infatuated with her. 


KING AMAURY I 301 


according to the forms of ecclesiastical law was pronounced, therefore, 
and the marriage dissolved in the presence of the Patriarch Amalrich, 
of good memory, and John, cardinal-priest of Saints John and Paul, 
the papal legate. The kinsmen of both parties attested the relation- 
ship by solemn oaths and swore that the facts were as had been stated. 
Provision was made, however, that the offspring of the two should 
be considered legitimate and should have full right of succession to 
the inheritance of their father. 

Being curious about such matters, I later made a careful investiga- 
tion as to the degree of relationship between the two. For at the time 
that this event took place at Jerusalem, I had not returned from the 
schools but was still sojourning beyond the sea, engaged in the study 
of the liberal arts. I finally learned the facts through the Lady Stepha- 
nia, abbess of the convent of the Holy Mary the Elder (which was 
situated opposite the Sepulchre of the Lord at Jerusalem). This pious 
woman, noble both according to the flesh and by reason of her holy 
life, was the daughter of the elder Joscelin, count of Edessa, and the 
sister of Roger, prince of Antioch and son of Richard.1! Although she 
was now far advanced in years she remembered the details of the matter 
well and gave the genealogy of the two as follows. 

Baldwin du Bourg, the second king of Jerusalem, a splendid man 
in every respect (of whose life and manners, as well as of his deeds 
both good and evil, we wrote at length when we were treating of his 
reign), and the elder Joscelin were sons of two sisters. Of Baldwin 
was born Queen Melisend; of Melisend were born the two kings 
Baldwin III and Amaury. Likewise of the elder Joscelin were born 
Joscelin the Younger, father of the Countess Agnes, wife in fact, 
though not in law, of Amaury, and her brother Joscelin III, now 
seneschal of the king and uncle of King Baldwin IV who is now reign- 
ing.12 Amaury remained unmarried for a time, but Agnes at once 
united herself in the bonds of matrimony with the noble and illustrious 
man, Hugh d’Ibelin, son of the older Balian. Hugh was the brother 
of Baldwin of Ramlah, who now rules that city, his brother having 


11 Joscelin I had married the sister of Roger, after whose death he married the 
Armenian princess. 

12 Joscelin III was made seneschal of the kingdom shortly after his release from 
captivity in 1176, a position which he held until 1190. His sister Agnes was doubtless 
responsible for his new start in life (see J. L. La Monte, “The Rise and Decline of a 
Frankish Seigneury in Syria in the Time of the Crusades,” Revue historique du Sud-Est 
européen, XV [1938], 301-20). 


302 KING AMAURY I 


died without children, and of Balian the Younger, who married the 
widow of King Amaury. After Hugh’s death and while Amaury was 
still living, Agnes entered into the same bonds of affection with Renaud 
of Sidon, son of Gerard. This alliance is said to have been not less illegal 
than her former relation to King Amaury. For Gerard, the father of 
Renaud, a blood relation of both as he certainly was, established by 
his sworn statement the consanguinity of these two, as he had heard 
it from his ancestors. A second annulment consequently followed in 
the manner already described. 


5. The king goes down into Egypt. A battle is fought with 
Dirgham the sultan. Shawar introduces Shirkuh into E gyft. 
Dirgham sends envoys to the king to sue for peace. 


Arter Amaury had been established on the throne and during the 
first year of his reign, the Egyptians refused to pay the annual tribute 
according to the agreement which they had made with his brother.'* 
The king thereupon assembled a strong force of knights and a large 
army and, about the first of September, descended upon Egypt with 
a great host. Dargan [Dirgham], the governor of that kingdom, who 
in that tongue is called the sultan, marched out against him at the 
head of a countless multitude and did not hesitate to risk an encounter 
in the desert on this side of Egypt. He was unable to sustain the at- 
tack of the Christians, however, and, after losing the greater part of 
his men either by capture or death, he was forced to retreat with the 
remnant of his army to the nearest city, which in the Egyptian tongue 
is called Belbeis [Balbis]. The Egyptians now feared that the king, 
after accomplishing this feat, might decide to lead his armies against 
the more remote parts of the realm. In despair, therefore, of finding 
any other remedy against our inroads, they broke down the retaining 
dykes which held back the overflow of the Nile until the proper sea- 
son, and let in the waters of the river now swollen by its usual increase. 
By these barriers, at least, they might hope to prevent the further 
advance of their foes and, by the help of the all-pervading waters, 
secure their safety. 


13 According to Wiet, this promise to pay tribute was a result of Baldwin’s cam- 
paign to al-Arish in the early part of 1161. William failed to mention the expedition 
(see G. Wiet, L’Egypte arabe de la conquéte Arabe a la conquéte ottomane, 642~1517 
de Pere chrétienne, p. 291). 


KING AMAURY I 303 


Thereupon the king returned victorious and covered with glory 
to his realm. He had triumphed over his enemies and had completed 
a successful campaign.14 

Shortly before this, Dirgham, now governor and sultan of all Egypt, 
as has been said, had driven out from that same office another powerful 
lord called Shawar.1® This change was effected partly by force and 
partly by strategy. Shawar succeeded in making good his escape, and 
with his friends and retainers and all the treasures which he could 
carry away, he betook himself to his fellow tribesmen, the Arabs, to 
seek their. aid. There he lay in hiding among his own people, as has 
been said, to await the outcome of the matter and the result of the 
war. He hoped that a favorable opportunity would soon present itself 
when he might turn the tables against his rival. Information of the 
king’s return to his own land reached him, together with the news 
that his adversary continued to be strong and powerful as ruler. Dirg- 
ham had indeed become more arrogant than ever. He boasted vain- 
gloriously of the fact that he had conquered in battle a mighty chief 
and had forced him to retreat without causing great injury to the 
land. Thereupon Shawar hastened to the powerful prince Nureddin, 
the king of Damascus, and begged his aid. He desired to return to 
Egypt, drive out his rival Dirgham, and again obtain control of the 
kingdom. Induced by gifts and promises, Nureddin readily agreed 
to this proposition, for he hoped that if once his army were introduced 
into Egypt, he might seize the kingdom himself. He assigned to 
Shawar the chief of his knights, Shirkuh, an able and energetic warrior, 
eager for glory and of wide experience in military affairs. Generous 
far beyond the resources of his patrimony, Shirkuh was beloved by 
his followers because of this munificence. He was small of stature, 
very stout and fat and already advanced in years. Though of lowly 
origin, he had become rich and had risen by merit from his humble 
estate to the rank of a prince. He was afflicted with cataract in one 
eye. He was a man of great endurance under hardships, one who bore 
hunger and thirst with an equanimity quite unusual for that time of 


14 There is some controversy about the date of this expedition. Rohricht and Schlum- 
berger place it in the fall of 1163. Derenbourg and Wiet insist upon 1162 as the date. 
Wiet regards the matter as settled by a poem of congratulation addressed to Ruzzik, 
who ceased to be vizier December 28, 1162 (see Wiet, L’Egypte arabe, p. 291). 

15 Shawar succeeded Ruzzik as vizier, obtaining the office by force early in 1163. 
He himself was driven out by Dirgham in August, 1163 (see Wiet, L’Egypte arabe, 


p. 292). 


304 KING AMAURY I 


life. Such was the man whom Nureddin sent to Egypt with a great 
army.?® 

Messengers were constantly going to and fro. From them and from 
common report as well, Sultan Dirgham learned that the enemy whom 
he had once driven out was returning with a Turkish army of many 
thousands. As he had little confidence in his own strength, the sultan 
was forced to beg for assistance. He dispatched envoys to the king with 
messages of peace, wherein he earnestly pleaded for aid against the 
enemy who was now threatening to attack him. He promised to pay 
not only the tribute originally agreed upon with King Baldwin, but 
a larger amount to be fixed as the king determined. He also declared 
that he was prepared to give hostages in token of perpetual subjection 
and an alliance for all time. 


6. Peter, archbishop of Tyre, dies. He is succeeded by Fred- 
erick, bishop of Acre. 


Axsout the same time, on March 1 in the second year of King Amaury’s 
reign, Peter, the venerable archbishop of Tyre of pious memory in 
the Lord, went the way of all flesh.17 Within a few days—in fact, 
before the month passed—Frederick, bishop of Acre and suffragan 
of the same church, was appointed in his stead at the express desire 
of the king. 

Frederick, a Lotharingian by birth, was noble according to the flesh. 
He was an extremely tall man. He possessed little education but was 
inordinately devoted to the art of war. 


7. Dirgham, the sultan of Egypt, 1s slain by the machinations 
of his own people. Shawar becomes sultan. He invites the 
king to come to his aid. The king goes down into Egypt. 
Shirkuh 1s driven out by force. 


Meanwulite the Egyptian envoys were negotiating with the king and, 
in fact, had practically arrived at a satisfactory agreement. Before they 
could return to their own country, however, the aforesaid Shawar and 


16 Shirkuh had figured prominently in the capture of Damascus. Despite his own 
great achievements as a warrior, he is remembered chiefly as the uncle of Saladin, 
under whom the latter received his training in military affairs. 

17 There is some uncertainty about this year. The evidence of the charters would 
indicate March, 1164, as the probable date (see R. Rohricht, Regesta regni Hiero- 
solymitani, nos. 385 and 397). 


KING AMAURY I 305 


Shirkuh had entered Egypt with all their forces and had met the 
sultan Dirgham in battle. In the first engagement they were vanquished 
and suffered a severe defeat. However, before they could try their 
fortune in a second battle under the same conditions, Dirgham was 
struck by an arrow sent by the hand of one of his own men and perished, 
greatly lamented by his followers.1® Upon his death, Shawar entered 
Cairo as victor, just as he had desired. He put to the sword all the 
friends, relations, and retainers of Dirgham who could be found and 
again assumed his former official position. For it is a matter of indif- 
ference to a supreme ruler whether one rival claimant or the other 
wins, as long as there is someone who will devote himself slavishly 
to the care of his lord’s personal affairs and to those of the realm. 

Shirkuh at once attacked the neighboring city of Balbis and began 
to claim that city as his own. By his deeds and possibly by his words, 
he showed that he intended, if fortune favored him, to bring the other 
parts of that kingdom under his own power, in spite of the sultan and 
the caliph. Before long, Shawar began to fear that by introducing such 
a guest he had injured his own cause as well as that of his master and 
had received one who, “like a mouse in the wardrobe and a serpent 
in the bosom,” would poorly requite his hosts. As speedily as possible, 
therefore, he dispatched envoys to the king in Syria, charged with 
messages of peace. They were empowered to carry out at once, not 
merely by word but by action, the terms of the agreement formerly 
concluded between the lord king and the Sultan Dirgham and, if 
necessary, to offer even greater inducements. 

As soon as the pact had been confirmed by both parties, the king, in 
the second year of his reign, marched forth at the head of his entire 
army and went down to Egypt a second time.!® There he was joined 
by Shawar with the Egyptian forces, and together they besieged Shirkuh 
in the city of Balbis, whither he had retired as into his own citadel. 
After a long siege, Shirkuh was finally forced through exhaustion and 
lack of provisions to surrender the place. The terms demanded were 
that he be permitted to depart to his own land with all his forces freely 
and without hindrance. This was granted; thereupon he abandoned 
the city and returned by way of the desert to Damascus. 

18 The death of Dirgham occurred in a battle under the walls of Cairo, August, 


1164 (Wiet, DEgypte arabe, p. 294). 
19 This campaign of Amaury’s was carried on during the fall of 1164 (Wiet, L’Egypte 


arabe, pp. 294-95). 


306 KING AMAURY I 


8. Nureddin is defeated in the country around Tripolt and 
barely escapes from the hands of the Christians by flight. 


NurebpIn was at this time sojourning in the environs of Tripoli, at 
a place commonly known as La Boquea. The great elation which he 
felt over his victories had had the effect of rendering him somewhat 
careless, and as a result he suffered a disaster which was almost ir- 
reparable. Just at this time, certain nobles had come from the land 
of Aquitaine on a pilgrimage for the sake of prayer. Among them 
were Godfrey, surnamed Martel, a brother of the count of Angouléme, 
and Hugh de Lusignan the Elder, who was surnamed the Brown. 
After their devotions were accomplished according to custom, they 
proceeded to the land of Antioch. Here they learned that Nureddin 
was still with his army in the vicinity of Tripoli at the, place named 
above. In too great fancied security, he was enjoying at his leisure a 
period of rest and relaxation. The Christians accordingly gathered 
their forces and made a sudden attack upon his army. Nureddin was 
taken by surprise; many of his men were made prisoners, and still 
more perished by the sword; in fact, his army was almost annihilated. 
The prince himself, in despair of his very life, fled in utter confusion. 
All the baggage and even his sword were abandoned. Barefooted and 
mounted on a beast of burden, he barely escaped capture at the hands 
of our forces. But the Christians, laden with spoils and manifold riches, 
returned victorious to their own land. 

Gilbert de Lacy, a nobleman of high rank, an experienced warrior 
and commander of the Knights Templars in those parts, led this ex- 
pedition. He was assisted by the two great men named above, by 
Robert Mansel who commanded the Galensians on that expedition, 
and by some other knights.”° 


9. Nureddin lays siege to the fortress of Harim in the land of 
Antioch, The prince of Antioch, the count of Tripoli, and 
Colman, the governor of Cilicia, are taken prisoners. 


NvurepDIN, extremely angry and filled with confusion and fear, was 
overwhelmed with dismay at this unlucky disaster. Anxious to wipe 
out the disgrace and to avenge his own injuries as well as those of 


°0 This defeat of Nureddin must have taken place late in 1163 at the very latest 
(see F, Lundgreen, Wilhelm von Tyrus und der Templerorden, pp. 99-100). 


KING AMAURY I 307 


his people, he besought aid from relatives and friends. There was 
scarcely a prince in the East on whom he did not call as a suppliant, 
now entreating assistance by prayers and again by promise of reward. 
Meanwhile, he recruited his own strength and collected military re- 
inforcements from all sides. With a great host and thousands of knights 
assembled in this way, he laid siege to Harim, one of the Christian 
strongholds in the land of Antioch. He stationed his engines around 
it in the customary manner and began to assault the place with a fury © 
which permitted the inhabitants no rest. 

The leaders of the Christians were soon informed of his activities. 
At once all the forces, both infantry and cavalry, that could be gathered 
anywhere, hastened to Harim. These included Bohemond III, prince 
of Antioch, the son of Raymond; the younger Raymond, count of 
Tripoli, son of Count Raymond; Calamanus [Colman], the governor 
of Cilicia, a kinsman of the emperor, in charge of the imperial affairs 
in that province; and Thoros, a very powerful Armenian prince. They 
marched with forces drawn up in battle formation, determined to 
relieve the siege in spite of Nureddin’s efforts. 

But that prince and the Parthian leaders associated with him, after 
consultation, decided that it would be safer to raise the siege and de- 
part of their own accord, rather than to risk encountering the enemy 
who were now almost upon them. They therefore arranged the bag- 
gage and endeavored to make good their retreat. But the Christians, 
emboldened by the success that had attended their efforts, started in 
pursuit. They could not rest content with having relieved the citizens 
from the siege at the hand of these great princes. So, regardless of the 
rules of military discipline, they recklessly dispersed and roved hither 
and yon in pursuit of the foe. Suddenly the Turks rallied, regained 
their courage and strength, and turned upon them. Trapped in a con- 
fined and swampy place, the Christians broke ranks at the first charge, 
and those who shortly before had caused the utmost terror in the ranks 
of the Turks became the pitiful sport of that same enemy. Over- 
whelmed and shattered by the swords of the enemy, they were 
shamefully slain like victims before the altar. No one called to mind 
his former valor; no one, remembering his own prestige and that 
of his fathers, strove to avert disaster or to fight for the defense of 
liberty and the glory of his ancestors. Regardless of honor all threw 
down their arms precipitately and ignominiously begged for life, which 


308 KING AMAURY I 


would have been better expended in fighting manfully for the father- 
land as an example for posterity. 

At this crisis, Thoros the Armenian, perceiving that the Turks were 
gaining the upper hand and that the Christians, on the contrary, had 
succumbed, decided to save himself by flight and withdrew from the 
tumult of battle. From the first he had opposed the pursuit of the 
Turks and had endeavored to dissuade the Christians from attempting 
it, but the foolish advice of others prevailed. 

To save their lives even at the cost of shame and reproach, Bohe- 
mond, prince of Antioch, and Raymond, count of Tripoli, surrendered 
to the enemy. Colman, the governor of Cilicia, Hugh de Lusignan, 
who was mentioned above, Joscelin III, son of Joscelin II, count of 
Edessa, and many other nobles followed the same course. Chained 
liked the lowest slaves, they were led ignominiously to Aleppo, where 
they were cast into prison and became the sport of the infidels. 

Encouraged by this success and great good fortune, Nureddin and 
his allies again attacked the stronghold which they had been besieging 
before and this time with more confidence. Siege operations were once 
more resumed, and within a few days the place was captured by force. 

This event happened on the fourth day before the Ides of August, 
in the year 1165 of the Incarnation of our Lord and the second year 
of King Amaury’s reign. The king himself was still in Egypt at this 
time, detained there by his own affairs.?1 


10. Count Thierry of Flanders arrives in Syria. Nureddin be- 
sieges Banyas and takes the city. 


THESE great changes and dire disasters so seriously affected the condi- 
tion of the Christians that they were reduced almost to the last ex- 
tremity. No ray of hope now remained. All with despairing hearts 
were daily dreading worse misfortunes, when Thierry, count of Flan- 
ders, arrived. He was accompanied by his wife, the king’s sister, a 
religious and God-fearing woman, and followed by a goodly company 
of knights.?? The people universally welcomed him with rejoicing, 

71 The year 1165 is obviously wrong, perhaps a copyist’s error. William clearly 
intends to correlate these events with Amaury’s expedition into Egypt in 1164. 

*2 This was the fourth journey of Thierry of Flanders to the Holy Land. He had 
entrusted the county of Flanders to his son, Philip. According to Robert of Torigni, 


who notes Thierry’s departure under the year 1164, Sibylla had remained in Jerusalem 
with Iveta, abbess of St. Lazarus in Bethany, when Thierry went home in 1158 (see 


KING AMAURY I 309 


for he seemed a very present help, like unto a pleasant breeze after 
the intense heat of the sun, and by his support they hoped that they 
might be able to hold out until the king and the Christian army should 
return. But, alas, this state of serenity, bright as it was, was soon dis- 
pelled by a dense cloud which suddenly arose and turned all into 
darkness.?? For Nureddin had become so arrogant through his success 
that he determined to seize the opportunity to besiege the city of 
Banyas. Well he knew that the kingdom was stripped of its customary 
defenders, for the king was absent with the entire military strength 
of the realm and the principal leaders were his own prisoners. 

Banyas is a very ancient city situated at the base of the famous Mt. 
Lebanon. During very early times, in the days of the people of Israel, 
it was called Dan. It was the northern boundary of the Israelitish 
possessions, just as Beersheba was the southern, and, accordingly, when 
the length of the Land of Promise is described it is spoken of as “from 
Dan to Beersheba.” Philip, son of the elder Herod, tetrarch of Iturea 
and the region of the Traconites, as one reads in Luke, enlarged 
it during his time in honor of Tiberius Caesar and in order to preserve 
his own name forever called it Caesarea Philippi. It is also known 
as Paneas, but our Latins corrupted the name, as is generally their 
custom with names of cities, and called it Belinas. On the east it borders 
upon the land of Damascus, near the place where the two streams of 
the Jordan have their origin. This is the city which is spoken of in 
the Gospel where it is written that “When Jesus came into the coasts 
of Caesarea Philippi, he asked his disciples,” 2° and so on. Here also 
it was that Peter, the prince of the disciples, received the keys of 
the kingdom of Heaven from the Lord as the reward of his excellent 
confession. 

To this place Nureddin laid siege. He found it undefended, for 
Humphrey, the royal constable to whom it belonged by hereditary 
right, was absent with the king in Egypt. The bishop of the place was 
also away and the population had been greatly diminished by slaughter. 
Machines and engines of war were at once set up in position round 
about, the wall was undermined and the towers weakened for the 
most part by constant volleys of stones. Within a few days, therefore, 





L. Delisle, ed., Chronique de Robert de Torigni, abbé du Mont-Saint-Michel, I, 325, 


348). 
23 Joel 2:31; Ac. 2:20. 24Lu. 3:1. 25 Mat. 16: 13-19. 


310 KING AMAURY I 


it was taken. The people within were forced to surrender, on condi- 
tion, however, that they should be permitted to leave the city un- 
molested with all their goods. Thus, in the year 1167 of the Incarna- 
tion of our Lord, Nureddin took over the city. This event occurred 
in the second year of King Amaury’s reign, on the fifteenth day before 
the Kalends of November.?¢ 

On departing for Egypt, the lord constable had put Banyas in charge 
of one of his own loyal knights, Walter de Quesnoy. It is affirmed by 
some that this man was negligent in defending the place. It is rumored 
further that in collusion with a priest named Roger, a canon of that 
church, he treacherously accepted a bribe in return for effecting the 
surrender. Consequently, the two traitors were greatly terrified when 
the king returned from Egypt, lest they be put to death. We have 
no trustworthy information on these points, however, except that the | 
city was surrendered to the enemy. 


11. On his return from Egypt, the king repars to Antioch. The 
prince is restored to liberty on payment of a ransom. The 
cavern at Sidon is surrendered to the Turks. They also gain 
possession of another cave beyond Jordan. 


Tuis, then, was the situation in Syria. Meanwhile, the king had driven 
Shirkuh from the land of Egypt and established Shawar in the govern- 
ment as sultan. He now returned, a glorious conqueror, to his own 
land. There he learned of the sad events which had taken place in 
the kingdom. Although some information of all this had reached him 
before, he now listened to a detailed account of the disasters and heard 
that the people of Antioch, in an almost desperate situation, had ap- 
pealed to him for aid.?? Accordingly, in brotherly pity and compas- 
sion, he took with him the count of Flanders and hurried by forced 
marches to Antioch to render the assistance so greatly needed by that 
afflicted land. On his arrival he at once assumed charge of the prince’s 
affairs. These he managed faithfully and well with even more care 


°° Elsewhere William has indicated 1164 as the second year of Amaury’s reign. 
The use of 1167 must therefore be regarded either as a copyist’s error or a slip of 
William’s pen due to haste, for he obviously relates this to Amaury’s absence in Egypt 
in 1164. W. B. Stevenson (The Crusaders in the East, p. 189) dates the capture of 
Banyas October 18, 1164. 

“7 The news of Nureddin’s activities behind him may have prevented Amaury from 
following up his success by further penetration of Egypt. 


KING AMAURY I 311 


than he ordinarily gave to his own concerns. He governed both nobles 
and people with great kindness and wise foresight. In each city he 
placed a capable man to take faithful and sensible charge of all matters 
pertaining to the prince’s domain, after which he returned to his own 
kingdom. With the assistance of loyal followers and friends of the 
prince, however, he continued to interest himself in the matter of 
that lord’s ransom. As the result of his active efforts, the prince, on 
payment of a large sum of money, was restored that same summer to 
his former state of honor and liberty. His captivity among the enemy 
had lasted for nearly a year.?® Bohemond did not rest in idleness after 
his return to Antioch but displayed great energy in raising the ransom 
for the hostages he had given so that their return also might not be 
delayed. A short time before this the emperor of Constantinople had 
married the prince’s youngest sister, Maria. Thither [Bohemond] 
hastened. He was received by the emperor with honorable and kindly 
treatment and, after a short visit, returned to Antioch, laden with 
munificent gifts from his imperial majesty. 

It seems strange that Nureddin, wise and far-seeing prince that he 
was, should have consented to release the prince of Antioch so soon. 
He was always loath to free Christian captives and gloried above all in 
the fact that he held many of our people, especially those of high 
rank, as his prisoners. Two possible solutions of this problem occur to 
me. He may have feared that the emperor would intervene; that the 
mighty potentate, whose request he would not dare refuse, might 
demand that he restore the prince without ransom. He may also have 
considered the possibility that the people of Antioch, if their prince 
were detained too long, might provide for their interests by choosing 
a stronger ruler in the place of Bohemond, for the prince was a youth 
who gave little promise of future good. Thus a more formidable 
adversary might be raised up against himself. Hence, Nureddin, shrewd 
and provident, deemed it better for his own interests that Bohemond 
should continue to rule at Antioch, for he too looked for little good 
from him. A wiser and more powerful prince placed in that position 
might be more difficult to deal with. This latter theory, in my opinion, 
explains the real motives which governed this most sagacious prince.?® 

28 Bohemond III was released in the summer of 1165, as much the result of the 
military success of Thoros of Armenia as of Amaury’s powers of persuasion. 


29 Nureddin still held a number of important Latin princes, including Renaud de 
Chatillon and Raymond III of Tripoli. He had held Joscelin II captive for nine years. 


312 KING AMAURY I 


About the same time Shirkuh, so often mentioned, a man bent on 
destroying the Christians, seized a fortress belonging to the Christians 
near Sidon suddenly and without warning. The place was known as 
the cave of Tyre and was considered impregnable. It is said that the 
capture was accomplished by bribing the custodians. That the fortress 
had fallen into the enemy’s hands through collusion with its guardians 
was quite apparent, for as soon as it was surrendered all those within 
escaped to the enemy’s country, with the exception of their chief. By 
a lucky chance he was caught and came to a miserable end at Sidon, 
where he was hanged. 

During this same year, William, king of Sicily, of illustrious re- 
nown, the son of King Roger, was overtaken by death.*° About this 
same time, also, a fortress of similar nature, that is, an impregnable 
cave, lying beyond Jordan on the borders of Arabia, was likewise sur- 
rendered to Shirkuh by the brothers of the Knights Templars, to whose 
care it had been confided. The king hurried to its rescue with a goodly 
company of knights, but while he was encamped on the banks of the 
Jordan, news came that the stronghold had already fallen into the 
hands of the enemy. Disconcerted and infuriated at this news, the 
king caused about twelve of the Templars responsible for the surrender 
to be hanged from a gallows.*! 

Thus, during that year which was the third of King Amaury’s reign, 
the Christians suffered many reverses, and, because of our sins, the 
entire kingdom was in a very parlous state. 


It was only under pressure that he released such prisoners, the threat of Manuel’s 
invasion being the most striking instance. This was another. Ordinary offers of ransom 
did not tempt him. Perhaps William is justified in his speculation as to Nureddin’s 
reason for releasing Bohemond. Réhricht suggests a more probable reason in the 
threat of another attack by Manuel (R. Réhricht, Geschichte des Kénigreichs Jerusalem, 
1100-1291, Pp. 319 

30 William I of Sicily died May 7, 1166, and was succeeded by his son William II, 
who was only thirteen years old (see F. Chalandon, Histoire de la domination nor- 
mande en Italie et en Sicile, Il, 303-305). 

81 William’s date for this tragedy is in Amaury’s third year, or 1165. Lundgreen, 
who places it in 1166, is unable to find any other authority for the hanging of the 
Templars and questions William’s statement without being able to refute it (Wilhelm 
von Tyrus und der Templerorden, p. 101). 


KING AMAURY I 313 


12. The return of the writer of this history to his own land is 
described and something of his progress is related. 


[The text of this chapter does not appear in any of the extant manu- 
scripts. ] 3? 


13. Shirkuh goes down into Egypt at the head of a large body 
of soldiery. 


Tus, then, was the situation among our people at that time. Mean- 
while a persistent story emanating from various sources was widely 
circulated. It was said that Shirkuh at the head of a mighty force of 
knights gathered from the lands of the East and the North was pre- 
paring to descend again in martial splendor upon the land of Egypt. 
Nor was this report without foundation. For Shirkuh had visited the 
caliph of Bagdad, that greatest of all Saracen rulers, he who far excels 
all others and is recognized as the supreme monarch over all. On his 
arrival there, Shirkuh offered the customary salutation and then began 
to describe in great detail the immense wealth of Egypt. He told of 
the marvellous abundance of all good things there and of each in- 
dividual commodity; the inestimable treasures belonging to the prince 
himself; the imposts and taxes from the cities both on the coast and 
farther inland; and the vast amount of annual revenue. He added 
that the people, devoted to luxurious living and ignorant of the science 
of war, had become enervated through a period of long-continued 
peace. Again and again he endeavored to impress upon the caliph’s 
mind the fact that the prince now ruling Egypt, and his ancestors as 
well, had raised up a rival caliph in opposition to himself [the caliph 
of Bagdad] and his predecessors. This caliph, they had insolently 

32 Prutz has various conjectures regarding this missing material (H. Prutz, “Studien 
tber Wilhelm von Tyrus” Neues Archiv, VIII, 98-99). If the assumption that William 
had not been able to finish this work is correct and that the unfinished portion was 
that of the years 1160-1166 inclusive, the most reasonable explanation is that William 
did not write it. He had planned the chapters for the whole work, which accounts for 
the captions, but in his haste had been unable to fill it out. The very sketchy nature 
of the chapters preceding this lends further support to the explanation. His absence 
from Palestine during a part of this period may, as noted above, account for the 
vagueness of the material for the years from 1160 to 1163 inclusive, while the relative 
fullness and accuracy of related events in 1164 would indicate that he was then back 
in the Holy Land. If so, only the haste of closing his work would explain the few 


entries for 1165 and almost none for 1166. The contrasting fullness of the next year, 
with which he probably began his work as historian, emphasizes this possibility. 


314 KING AMAURY I 


dared to claim, was on an equality with his own unparalleled excellency. 
Moreover, they had assumed to teach another law and traditions 
directly opposed to those of the caliph. By reiterating such suggestions 
Shirkuh so wrought upon the caliph’s: mind that he was induced to 
carry out the sultan’s will. He wrote to all the princes who accepted 
his false doctrines and commanded them strictly to muster their forces 
and follow Shirkuh to lend him aid.?? 

When Amaury heard this news, he called a general assembly at 
Nablus to devise means of anticipating and forestalling the caliph’s 
designs. There, in the presence of the patriarch, the archbishops, bish- 
ops, and other dignitaries of the church as well as the barons and all 
the people, he explained with great care the danger which threatened 
the kingdom and earnestly besought their aid. In view of the circum- 
stances, it was thereupon unanimously decided that everyone without 
exception should give one-tenth of all movable property toward the 
relief of the kingdom. This decree was put into effect. 

The report continued to circulate that Shirkuh, well supplied with 
the requisite food for many days and an abundant provision of water 
carried in skins, had already started on his march through the desert, 
over the route by which the children of Israel had entered the Land 
of Promise. The king thereupon mustered all his available cavalry 
and set out in haste to meet him and oppose his progress. He advanced 
as far as Kades-Barnea in the desert, but not finding Shirkuh there, 
he at once retraced his course. 


14. The king, following Shirkuh, likewise goes down to Egypt 
to assist the Egyptians. 


Tue heralds were now ordered to summon from every city the entire 
military strength of the kingdom, both infantry and cavalry. The 
forces were directed to concentrate at Ascalon.*4 On January 30, the 
army set forth, carrying with them the necessary supply of food for 
the journey, and by forced marches crossed the vast wilderness with 
lies between Gaza, the last city of our kingdom, and the land of Egypt. 

83 This account of the situation in Egypt is quite evidently made without regard 


to the previous chapters, another reason for concluding that William began his history 
at this point. 

34 The preliminaries of this campaign, including the council of Nablus, must have 
reached back into the fall of 1166. The march began from Ascalon on January 30, 
1167. 


KING AMAURY I 315 


At al-Arish, an ancient fortress in the desert, they held a census of 
their forces and awaited the rest of the army. The army as a whole 
finally reached the city now known as Balbis, although in ancient times 
it was called Pelusium and as such is often mentioned in the Prophets. 
When the Sultan Shawar learned that the king had come, he was 
seized with terror. Dismayed at the sudden appearance of the Chris- 
tians, he doubted the good faith of the oncoming host and feared that 
the martial array might be directed against himself. He was, in gen- 
eral, a wise and able ruler and was considered particularly farsighted, 
but on this occasion he displayed cowardice and gross ignorance. Al- 
though informed of the reason for our coming, he could scarcely be- 
lieve it true. Finally, almost too late and reluctantly, he dispatched 
scouts to the desert to obtain definite information about the enemy’s 
movements. On their return, the messengers reported that the Turkish 
army had reached Attasi. Then, indeed, the sultan marvelled at the 
sincere loyalty of the Christians and praised them highly. In recogni- 
tion of the solicitude which the Christian army had shown for their 
Egyptian allies, he placed at the disposal of the king all the riches, 
both of the kingdom and of the caliph. Moreover, from that day forth, 
he showed great zeal in carrying out all the king’s wishes. Accordingly, 
Amaury freely availed himself of this help whenever he had need. 


15. A description of Cairo and some remarks on the founder 
of the city. 


THE Christians proceeded on their way past the cities of Balbis *° 
and Cairo, of which the latter, with its magnificent buildings, was dis- 
played as the seat of royal power and the supreme glory of Egypt. 
With the noble and famous city commonly called Babylon [Babi- 
lyun],°® but known in the Arabic tongue as Macer,°" on the left, they 
established the camp on the bank of the Nile. We have been unable 
to discover what name this city bore in ancient times. Babylon or 


35 This place was later called Farama, or al-Farama. 

36 Babilyun was a strong fortress at the time of the Arab conquest. It was the scene 
of a pitched battle and a long siege. The fortress was captured April 6, 641. The city 
of Cairo was built later just north of Babilyun. It was probably from Babilyun that 
the Westerners derived their name for Egypt, which they commonly called “Babylon.” 
William is right in refusing to identify it with ancient Memphis, which he correctly 
located some ten miles farther up the Nile. 

87 “Macer” is of Egyptian origin and is more correctly spelled Misr, which is today 
the official name for Egypt. 


316 KING AMAURY I 


Babylonia was a very ancient city in the Orient, but histories relating 
to very early times do not refer to any city of this name as ever exist- 
ing in Egypt. It is probable, therefore, that this place was founded 
not only after the time of the Pharaohs, who were the first to reign 
in Egypt, and after that of the Ptolemies, who ruled later, but even 
subsequent to the period of the Romans, who reduced Egypt to a 
province. As to Cairo, this city is known to have been founded by 
Johar [Jawhar], commander in chief of the forces of Mehezedin- 
alla [Muizz]. This ruler was at that time reigning in Africa after 
Jawhar had won for him all the land of Egypt. How this happened 
will be related farther on. 

Yet some writers confidently assert that this Babilyun is the ancient 
Memphis, that noble and far-famed city, so often mentioned in ancient 
histories and in the Prophets, and which is said to have been the 
capital and queen of that whole kingdom and of many neighboring 
provinces. But ten miles beyond the Nile which flows by this Babilyun 
of which we are speaking there still exists a venerable city of vast 
extent where there are still evidences of bygone grandeur, and this 
the dwellers in those parts positively assert is the Memphis of antiquity. 

It is quite probable, therefore, that the people of Memphis, either 
through necessity or because this site offered greater advantages, 
transferred their homes to the other side of the river and at that time, 
or possibly later, changed the original name. 

We consider it definitely established also that it was Jawhar who 
built Cairo. As has been said above, he had been sent from Africa with 
the armies of the great prince Muizz to conquer Egypt. In the year 
358 of the Muslim era, after he had won the entire land and made the 
people tributary, Jawhar established this city near Babilyun, and it 
became the principal and favorite residence of his master.?® Three 
years later, Muizz left Kairawan, which had been the seat of his king- 
dom for some years, and, according to the intentions of the prince, 
made this place glorious as the capital of his kingdom and his own 

38 This is a clear indication that William used more than one Arabic source for his 
history of Egypt. His conclusion regarding the Fatimid conquest of Egypt and the 
founding of Cairo is in accord with the best modern research. The year 358 A.H. 
extended from November 24, 968, to November 13, 969 A.D. The construction of 
Cairo was completed June 22, 972, and the caliph established himself there June 11, 


973 (see Wiet, L’Egypte arabe, pp. 179-88). This passage is almost the only one in 
which William specifically cites the Muslim era, though he frequently uses the reckon- 


ing. 


KING AMAURY I 317 


residence.°® This occurred in the year 361 of the Muslim calendar 
and the twentieth of Muizz’s own rule, as has been thoroughly nar- 
rated elsewhere in our history of the princes of the Orient. 


16. The king marches forth to meet Shirkuh, but the latter, 
anticipating such action, crosses the river. 


WHEN the Christians had established their camp on the banks of the 
river less than two stadia from the city just mentioned, they held a 
council. After long deliberation and the careful consideration of diverse 
opinions, they judged it best to march out to encounter Shirkuh and 
his forces before they should cross the river. To prevent him from 
entering the kingdom would be far wiser than to join battle after his 
hosts had made the passage, when the difficulty of recrossing would 
cause them to fight more desperately. 

They broke camp, therefore, and marched rapidly toward the spot 
where the enemy was supposed to be. This was reported as about ten 
miles from the place where our forces had earlier encamped. On 
reaching the spot, however, they found that Shirkuh, a very sagacious 
leader, had already made the crossing with nearly all his troops. Only 
a few remained, and these our men at once seized and bound. When 
questioned, they gave the Christians a great deal of useful informa- 
tion, especially in relation to Shirkuh’s passage of the river and the 
number of his troops. 

A fact that was unknown to our people was disclosed by their story, 
namely, that after their forces had passed Syria Sobal in the desert 
a terrible whirlwind suddenly sprang up. Particles of sand raised 
aloft swirled through the air like clouds or dense fog. The men dared 
not open their mouths to speak to one another, nor could they keep 
their eyes open. Dismounting from their horses, they lay prostrate 
clinging to the ground, their hands pressed into the sand as far as 
possible, lest they be swept aloft by the violence of the whirlwind 
and again dashed to the ground. For in that desert waves of sand 
like those of the sea are wont to rise and fall as in a tempest, a fact 
that renders the crossing of these perilous reaches not less dangerous 
than sailing over the sea. At last, pleasant weather returned, and 
after several days spent in wandering aimlessly here and there, un- 


39 Kairawan, which is so easily confused with Cairo, is located a short distance south- 
east of Tunis. It had been the earlier Fatimid capital. 


318 KING AMAURY I 


certain of the route and hoping only for life, they reached Egypt, as 
has been related. Their camels and the greater part of their supplies 
were lost; many of their people were dead, and still more were scattered 
over the vast wastes of the far-reaching sands. 

When it became evident that Shirkuh and his host had already 
crossed the river, out army retraced their steps along the route by 
which they had come and again encamped on the riverbank near the 
city which they had left earlier. 


17. Shawar, the sultan, renews the treaty in order to keep the 
king with him. 


SHawar now realized that it was impossible for him to resist the foes 
who had penetrated to the very heart of his kingdom, or to drive 
them from the land except by the assistance of the king. He anxiously 
sought the most effective means, therefore, by which he might keep 
the king in Egypt, for he feared that Amaury, weary of the great 
hardships, might resolve to return to his own land. In fact, the only 
means of keeping the king in the land seemed to be by offering him a 
larger amount of tribute and promising an adequate sum for the ex- 
penses of himself and his barons. 

He resolved therefore—and the proposition seemed good to the 
Christians also—to renew the old agreements and to establish a treaty 
of perpetual peace between the king and the caliph on an inviolable 
and stable basis. The annual tribute was to be increased and a fixed 
payment guaranteed to the king from the treasury of the caliph, for 
the matter was apparently one that could not easily be accomplished 
without the expenditure of much labor and time. After examining 
the demands and wishes of both parties, those in charge of arranging 
the treaty and the stipulations thereof decided that four hundred 
thousand pieces of gold should be allowed the king. Of this amount 
two hundred thousand was to be paid at once and the remaining two 
hundred thousand was to be sent without any trouble at certain specified 
times. The terms were as follows: “that the king should guarantee 
with his own hand, in good faith, without fraud or evil intent, that he 
would not depart from the land of Egypt until Shirkuh and his entire 
army should be utterly destroyed or entirely driven from the terri- 
tories thereof.” These terms met with the approval of both parties, 
and in token of his agreement to the treaty the king extended his 


KING AMAURY I 319 


right hand to the caliph’s representatives. At the same time, however, 
he sent Hugh of Caesarea, a young man of admirable wisdom and 
discretion far beyond his years, with several others to obtain the caliph’s 
ratification of the covenant by the hand of Hugh, according to the 
stipulations agreed upon; for the sultan’s guarantee alone in this 
matter seemed insufficient. 


18. Envoys are sent to obtain the renewal of the treaty from the 
caliph, The magnificence of the royal palace is described. 


SincE the palace of that monarch is unique and after a fashion quite 
unfamiliar to our world, I have deemed it well to set down in detail 
what I have learned from the trustworthy accounts of those who visited 
that great prince, to describe his state and grandeur, his vast riches, 
and exceeding magnificence. To have an accurate understanding of all 
this will surely be of no slight advantage to my readers. 

Hugh of Caesarea, accompanied by Geoffrey Fulcher, a knight of 
the Temple, entered Cairo under the escort of the sultan, as chief of 
the embassy which was sent thither. On arriving at the palace, which 
in the Egyptian language is called Cascare,‘® they were led through 
narrow passages entirely without light, preceded by a numerous and 
noisy throng of attendants armed with swords. At each entrance they 
found bands of armed Ethiopians who zealously showed their reverence 
for the sultan by repeated salutations. 

After passing the first and second guards, they were conducted into 
a large and spacious court open to the sky which freely admitted the 
sun’s rays. There, supported by columns of marble covered with de- 
signs in relief were promenades with fretted and gilded ceilings and 
pavements of various colored stones. Throughout the entire circuit 
royal magnificence prevailed. So elegant was both material and work- 
manship that involuntarily the eyes of all who saw it were ravished by 
the rare beauty and never wearied of the sight. There were marble 
fishpools filled with limpid waters; there were birds of many kinds, 
unknown to our part of the world. These were larger than those fa- 
miliar to us, their forms were unusual, their colors strange, and their 
songs different. The food of each varied according to its species and was 
suited to its own kind. 


40 This term is an Arabic loan-word from the Latin name for fortress, castrian, It 
acquired 3g - dignity i ing identi vith 3 : 
acquired a new dignity in becoming identified with a “palace.” 


320 KING AMAURY I 


From this court the chief eunuch led them still further on, where 
they saw buildings which surpassed in elegance those recently seen, just 
as the latter had seemed more splendid than common and ordinary 
structures. Here was an amazing variety of animals such as the playful 
hand of the painter or the imagination of the poet loves to picture, or 
such as the mind sees in the visions of the night—creatures such as are 
often found in the countries of the East and the South but which are 
never seen and rarely heard of in the West. Undoubtedly it was from 
these places that our Solinus derived the account contained in his Poly- 
histor.*+ 


19. The treaty is concluded, and in confirmation thereof, the 
caliph gives his right hand to Hugh of Caesarea. 


AFTER passing through many winding passages and devious ways, 
whose wonders might well detain even the busiest of men in contem- 
plation, they reached the palace itself. Here still larger groups of armed 
men and throngs of attending satellites testified by their appearance 
and numbers to the incomparable glory of their lord. The very aspect 
of the place gave indisputable proof of the opulence and extraordinary 
riches of the monarch. 

They approached and were admitted to the inner part of the palace. 
Here the sultan showed the usual reverence to his lord, according to 
custom; twice he prostrated himself on the ground and humbly of- 
fered as to a divinity due worship and a kind of abject adoration. Then 
for a third time bowing to the ground, he laid down the sword which 
he wore suspended from his neck. Thereupon the curtains embroidered 
with pearls and gold, which hung down and hid the throne, were 
drawn aside with marvellous rapidity, and the caliph was revealed 
with face unveiled. Seated on a throne of gold, surrounded by some 
of his privy counsellors and eunuchs, he presented an appearance 
more than regal.#? 

With all reverence, the sultan approached him and, humbly imprint- 


*1 Solinus does not make special mention of many birds in his discussion of Egypt, 
though he does mention animals. William’s statement indicates a general familiarity 
with the whole work. 

#2 This was Caliph Adid, who reigned 1160-1171. He was a cousin, not a son, of 
the previous caliph, Faiz, and was about sixteen or seventeen years old at this time. 
William derived this account of the palace and its ceremonial directly from Hugh of 
Caesarea. The contrast in manners described in this chapter suggests that the Latins in 
the East had not yet lost all their Western ways. 


KING AMAURY I 321 


ing a kiss upon the foot of the seated monarch, stated the reason for 
the envoys’ visit, the provisions of the treaty, and the urgent needs of 
the kingdom. He explained that an enormous hostile force was stand- 
ing in the very heart of the empire and in a few words stated what was 
asked of the caliph and what would be rendered by the king in return. 
To this the caliph, with cheerful and undisturbed countenance, very af- 
fably responded that he was ready to fulfil all the stipulations of the 
treaty that had been arranged and accepted by both parties, and that 
with a most liberal interpretation, because of his own regard for the 
king. 

The Christians then requested that he confirm this statement with 
his own hand as the king had done. At first, the courtiers who sur- 
rounded him, as well as his counsellors and gentlemen of the chamber, 
on whom rested the responsibility of the royal plans, were shocked at 
the suggestion, as a thing utterly beyond comprehension. Finally, how- 
ever, after long deliberation, at the persistent urging of the sultan, he 
very reluctantly extended his hand covered. Then, to the consternation 
of the Egyptians, who were amazed that anyone should talk so freely 
to their supreme lord, Hugh of Caesarea said to him: “Sire, good faith 
has nothing to conceal, but when princes bind themselves together in 
true loyalty everything ought to be open; and everything which is in- 
serted in good faith in any pact should be confirmed or refused with 
frank sincerity. Therefore, unless you offer your hand bared we shall 
be obliged to think that, on your part, there is some reservation or 
some lack of sincerity.” 

Finally, with extreme unwillingness, as if it detracted from his 
majesty, yet with a slight smile which greatly aggrieved the Egyptians, 
he put his uncovered hand into that of Hugh. He repeated, almost 
syllable by syllable, the words of Hugh as he dictated the formula of 
the treaty and swore that he would keep the stipulations thereof, “in 
good faith, without fraud or evil intent.” The caliph was, as Hugh 
reported to us, a young man of an extremely generous disposition 
whose first beard was just appearing; he was tall, of swarthy com- 
plexion and good frame. He had a large number of wives. 

After dismissing the envoys, he sent them gifts in token of his royal 
liberality. These both in quantity and kind recommended the royal 
donor greatly to the ambassadors, who left the princely presence in 
high delight and returned with joy to their own land. 


322 KING AMAURY I 


20. Explains why the prince of Egypt is called mulene. 


Havine described the magnificence of the caliph, according to the re- 
ports of those who witnessed it with their own eyes, we shall now 
proceed to tell about the title of his high estate, his origin, and his 
progress, as far as is known to us. This information is derived from 
studying histories of olden times and also from the trustworthy ac- 
counts of many ‘persons. For without the aid of history it would be 
impossible to inform the reader in regard to these details. 

The prince of Egypt is known by his people under two names. He 1s 
called the caliph, which, being interpreted, is the successor or heir, be- 
cause he occupies the place of their supreme prophet and holds the 
succession by hereditary right. He is also called mulene [mawlana] 
which means, our lord.** The origin of this second name seems to date 
from the days of the pharaoh, when the famous Joseph bought the 
entire country of Egypt and that people were forced by dire famine 
to sell their possessions. Joseph made these lands and all the inhabi- 
tants thereof subject to the pharaoh, from the uttermost boundaries of 
Egypt even to its remotest frontiers. He said to those who tilled the 
fields, “You shall give a fifth part to the king, but the remaining four 
parts I permit you to keep for planting, that you may provide for 
your households, your homes, and your children.” First, he bought 
their possessions and then their persons. Hence it is that the Egyptians 
are held to their lord by a stricter bond than is the case with inhabitants 
of other lands, since he bought them and their possessions with a price. 
This also explains why they are bound to him in a servile capacity of 
the humblest order. ; 

Thus through the extreme solicitude of this best of governors the 
Egyptians became serfs and ever after called their prince by that re- 
vered name mawlana. This condition originated in the days of the 
pharaohs. It prevailed through the epoch of the Ptolemies and con- 
tinued through the rule of the Romans, who reduced the land, as was 
their custom with other conquests, to the status of a province. A trace 

4° This title occurs in an inscription recently discovered under a coat of plaster in 
the Aqsa mosque in Jerusalem. It is there applied to Mustansir, caliph 1035-1094. 
William may well have read that inscription (see S. A. S. Husseini, “Inscription of the 


Khalif El-Mustansir Billah 458 a.u. [=a.D. 1065],” Palestine, Department of Antiq- 
uities, Quarterly, IX [1942], 77-80). 


KING AMAURY I 929 


of that old status still lingers in the fact that the prince of Egypt is 
absolutely free from responsibility and knows nothing of tumults and 
seditions. He devotes himself entirely to the enjoyment of leisure and 
luxury, while a governor, like Joseph of old, administers all the affairs 
of the realm, wielding the power of the sword and executing justice in 
the place of his lord. This governor is called the sultan, and this was 
the office held by that Shawar of whom we have so often spoken. 


21. Relates why he 1s called caliph and why he is the adversary 
of the caliph of Bagdad. 


Tue reason for the title caliph is as follows: Muhammad, their 
prophet, or rather their destroyer, who was the first to draw the peoples 
of the East to this kind of superstition, had as his immediate successor 
one of his disciples named Abu-Bakr. The latter was succeeded in the 
kingdom by Omar, son of Khattab, who was likewise followed by 
Uthman, and he by Ali, son of Abu-Talib. All these prophets were 
called caliphs, as were also all who followed them later, because they 
succeeded their famous master and were his heirs. But the fifth in the 
succession from Muhammad, namely Ali, was more warlike than his 
predecessors and had far greater experience in military matters than 
his contemporaries. He was, moreover, a cousin of Muhammad him- 
self.4* He considered it unfitting that he should be called the successor 
of his cousin and not rather a great prophet himself, much greater, in 
fact, than Muhammad. The fact that in his own estimation and that 
of many others he was greater did not satisfy him; he desired that this 
be generally acknowledged. Accordingly, he reviled Muhammad and 
spread among the people a story to the effect that the Angel Gabriel, 
the propounder of the law, had actually been sent to him from on high 
but by mistake had conferred the supreme honor on Muhammad. For 
this fault, he said, the angel had been severely blamed by the Lord. 
Although these claims seemed false to many from whose traditions 
they differed greatly, yet others believed them, and so a schism devel- 
oped among that people which has lasted even to the present. Some 
maintain that Muhammad is the greater and, in fact, the greatest of all 
prophets, and these are called in their own tongue, Sunnites; others 
declare that Ali alone is the prophet of God, and they are called Shiites. 


44 Ali was cousin and son-in-law of Muhammad. 


324 KING AMAURY I 


The above-named Ali was slain, however, and the rival faction 
gained the supremacy. The kingdom of the Orient, therefore, was 
under the sway of the successors of Muhammad, and they, holding the 
power, oppressed all who held the opposite opinion. In the two hun- 
dred and eighty-sixth year after the rule of the aforesaid seducer,*® 
there arose a certain nobleman, by name Abdallah [Ubaydullah] son 
of Muhammad, son of Japhar [Jafar], son of Muhammad, son of Ali, 
son of Hussen [Husayn], son of the greater Ali, of whom we have 
been speaking. He went out from the city of Salamia in the Orient and 
crossed over to Africa. After conquering all the lands of that region, 
he called himself Almahadi [al-Mahdi], which means the Leveller,**® 
that is, one who has reduced all things to peace and made the ways 
smooth and without obstacle for the people. He built the great city 
Mahadia [Mahadiyah], so called from his own name; this he in- 
tended should become the capital of his dominions, a metropolis sur- 
passing all others. He built a fleet, seized Sicily, and laid waste certain 
parts of Italy. He was the first of all his line after Ali, his ancestor, 
who ventured to call himself caliph; not that he considered himself the 
successor of Muhammad, whom he execrated, but rather of Ali, that 
greatest and most famous prophet from whose stock he was descended, 
as has been said. Indeed, he even dared to hurl curses openly against 
Muhammad and his successors and to establish another ritual and 
another form of prayer. 

One of his descendants, Abu-Tamin, surnamed Muizz, subjugated 
Egypt through Jawhar, the commander in chief of his army. The latter 
also built Cairo which, being interpreted, is the Conqueror,*? because 
it was destined to be the residence of his great and supreme master, the 
conqueror of all things. 

This caliph left Caroca [Kairawan] in the province of Africa, where 
four of his predecessors had lived, went to Egypt, and made the city 
just mentioned the seat of his kingdom. From that time until now 


45 The year 286 A.H. extended from January 16, 899, to January 6, 900 A.D. There 
is considerable variation among Arabic scholars as to the correct genealogy of Ali’s 
descendants, there being at least eight different lists (see P. K. Hitti, History of the 
Arabs, p. 618). 

*6 The translation should be “the Guided One.” Professor Hitti believes that Wil- 
liam here mistook the Arabic word for another which is almost identical and has the 
meaning assigned by him. Evidently William knew his Arabic almost too well. 

af Hitti prefers “Triumphant” as the translation of the word (see Hitti, Arabs, 
p. 619, note 2). 


KING AMAURY I 325 


there has never ceased to be, ruling in Egypt, a rival to the caliph of 
the East, who had been supreme for so many years, a rival ever striving 
to be on a par with him—nay, even claiming to be his superior.*® 

If anyone wishes to know more of these matters, he may read the 
history which we have written with great care from the Arabic sources 
at the instance and command of King Amaury. It deals with the princes 
of the East and their acts from the time of the seducer Muhammad; 
that is, it covers a period of five hundred and seventy-seven years to the 
present, which is the year 1182 of the Incarnation of our Lord.*® 


22. The king builds a bridge over the Nile. Shirkuh descends 
upon the island; the king attacks him. 


WHEN the treaty had been renewed and reduced to terms satisfac- 
tory to both parties, as has been related, all girded themselves as with 
one accord for the work planned, prepared to attack the enemy and 
drive him out of the entire realm. Meanwhile, the approach of night 
afforded an excuse for resting. In the morning they found the situation 
somewhat changed. During the night Shirkuh had arrived and en- 
camped on the other bank of the same river opposite our army. The 
king, thereupon, caused boats to be brought and trunks of the palm 
tree, which is native there, and had a bridge constructed. The vessels 
were joined together two by two and made stable by anchors; then 
the beams were laid upon them and covered with earth. Finally the 
bridge was fortified with wooden towers, equipped with engines. The 
work was continued for several days until the middle of the river was 
reached, when fear of the enemy prevented the extension of the work 
to the opposite bank. Here, then, for a month or longer, all actual en- 
counter was suspended, since the Christians were unable to cross the 

#8 The Fatimid caliphate was brought to an end by Saladin in 1171, as William 
himself relates later. William’s definite statement that there was still a caliph at Cairo 
when he was writing would indicate that this passage was written before William had 
learned of the change, perhaps before 1175, and is here incorporated from the Gesta 
orientalium principum. 

#9 This statement of time is of exceptional interest. The material of the two pre- 
ceding chapters was obviously drawn from his History of the Princes of the Orient. 
Whether he took it as he had originally written it or summarized a portion of it is not 
clear. The statement referring the reader to that other work is an indication that he 
had excerpted the material immediately preceding. The year 577 a.H. extended from 
May 16, 1181, to May 6, 1182, and its identification with the Christian year 1182 is 


therefore limited to the first four months of that year. He was thus engaged in the 
revision of this book during those months. 


326 KING AMAURY I 


river and the enemy, on their part, did not dare to venture far, lest we 
fall on their rear. This was the situation in the vicinity of Cairo. In 
the interim, Shirkuh had sent a party of men to seize, if possible, a 
neighboring island which abounded in all kinds of supplies, for he 
wished to prevent the Christians from raiding it at some future time. 
This undertaking was successfully accomplished. 

As soon as the king learned that the enemy had seized the island, 
he sent thither Milon de Plancy and Chemel [Kamil], a son of the 
sultan, with a force of knights. They found that the Turks were already 
in possession and were treating the inhabitants most shamefully. An at- 
tack was immediately made, and a battle ensued which was waged 
very fiercely on both sides. Finally, by the help of God, the Christians 
prevailed; they forced the enemy headlong into the river near by, 
where those who escaped the sword were drowned in the raging waters. 
Five hundred of the enemy perished that day from various mishaps. 
When the report of this battle reached Shirkuh, he was overwhelmed 
with dismay and began to entertain grave doubts about the ultimate 
success of his undertaking. 

This was the state of affairs when certain leading men of the king- 
dom arrived at the camp, namely Humphrey of Toron, the royal con- 
stable, and Philip of Nablus. They had not marched out with the king 
but had remained behind for private reasons. As swiftly as possible, 
however, they followed the army and joined our camp. The cohorts 
greeted them with demonstrations of great joy, for they were brave 
men, valiant in arms and trained from their earliest years in the art of 
war. 

A council was at once held to determine what plan of procedure 
should be adopted. It was finally decided by unanimous consent that, 
in the silence of night, without the knowledge of the enemy, the entire 
fleet should be conducted to an island about eight miles below the camp. 
About the first watch, the whole army was to be ferried across the 
river; then, during the night, they were to fall stealthily upon the foe 
while off guard and do all the damage possible. It was ordered that 
this plan be carried into execution. The fleet immediately descended to 
the place decided upon, without discovery by the enemy. The army in — 
utter silence followed. They were quickly ferried across and seized 
the island. 


KING AMAURY I 327 


While they were trying to cross the farther channel of the river, 
however, in the same way, according to their orders, a whirlwind sud- 
denly arose which prevented them from carrying out their purpose. 
They were obliged to make camp, therefore, on that part of the island 
which faced the farther shore. A part of the force was left behind, how- 
ever, to finish the bridge and guard it after its completion. In command 
of this detachment was Hugh d’Ibelin, a valiant and powerful knight, 
who, as has been said, had married the divorced wife of King Amaury. 


23. The island is described ; the names and number of the mouths 
by which the Nile enters the sea are given. The Christians 
drive out the foe and take possession of the island. Shirkuh 
flees into the desert. 


Tue island now under discussion is called by the natives Mahalla. It 
has a very productive soil and abounds in all good things. The waters 
of the Nile separate at this point and form this island, and the branches 
which part here do not again join the main stream until they reach the 
sea. Even then the waters do not unite but mingle with the sea through 
four separate mouths. The first branch, which faces our Syria, flows 
into the sea between two ancient maritime cities, Tanis and Farama. It. 
flows very close to one of these cities in its passage, even laving its 
buildings, but is about three or four miles distant from the other. The 
second arm joins the sea at Damietta, an old and noble city; the third, 
at Sturio. The fourth flows into the sea at Rosetta, which is about four 
or five miles from Alexandria. We have discovered no other mouths of 
this river, although careful search and inquiry have been made. This 
we regard as singular, for the ancients call the Nile the sevenfold 
flowing,°° because it entered the sea by seven mouths. The only expla- 
nation which occurs to us is that, through successive ages, the face of the 
country has altered and the river has changed its channel, as has hap- 
pened in the case of so many other rivers. Possibly, however, the peo- 
ple of that earlier epoch did not understand the truth of the matter; 
or perchance the river, swollen by more than its usual complement, 
overflowed and, at the time of its annual increase, formed other chan- 
nels besides these four, which the sea abandoned when the water again 
subsided within its bed. If any still exist, we have not counted them 


50 Ovid Meta. 1. 422. 


328 KING AMAURY I 


as branches because they are not always filled but, like torrents, are 
full only at certain seasons.*? 

Although the island had been taken, the lesser channel still re- 
mained. As the day grew bright, the enemy, roused from sleep, dis- 
covered that the foe had departed and the fleet had sailed away. They 
flew to arms, fearing a sudden attack by the Christians. As they hur- 
riedly advanced, extending their lines along the river, they saw that 
our forces had seized the island and, by introducing the fleet, were 
asserting their right to the channel yet to be crossed. Accordingly they 
placed their camp opposite, somewhat back from the shore, although 
in this position they had no free access to the river but were obliged to 
go farther downstream even to water their horses. 

The Christians had determined to try their fortune to the utmost 
on the following day and to open a path by the sword, if necessary. 
But during the night, unknown to them, the infidels departed. When 
morning came and our army saw that the enemy had left, they quickly 
crossed the river and hastened in pursuit. That the cavalry might ad- 
vance more rapidly, the foot soldiers were left behind, and the king 
set out accompanied only by a few knights. He dispatched Hugh 
d’Ibelin, however, and Kamil, the sultan’s son, with a large force of 
cavalry, both Christian and Egyptian, to protect Cairo and the bridge 
which the soldiers had built from sudden hostile attack. The towers 
and all the fortifications of that noble city were put in charge of our 
people, and the palace of the caliph, heretofore unknown to the Chris- 
tians, became very familiar to them, for the lord himself and his 
entire household relied for safety entirely on the king’s forces. Then 
there was revealed to the Christians that holy of holies which had been 
hidden from the world, and the inmost precincts whose wonders were 
once familiar to only the few were disclosed. 

The king also sent Gerard de Pougy and another son of the sultan, 
called Mahadan, to the farther bank of the river, again with a force 
made up of both nationalities. They were ordered to check the foe, if 
perchance he should attempt to cross the river. The king himself, leav- 
ing behind most of the impedimenta, as we have said, then set out in 
pursuit of the foe, against the current of the stream; for the formation 


51 William here, as in a number of other places, refuses to accept the testimony of 
books, however ancient, if they are at variance with observed fact. 


KING AMAURY I 329 


of the country was such that the enemy’s route could be traced without 


difficulty. 


24. The land of Egypt and its characteristic features. 


THE entire land of Egypt from the most remote frontiers, where 
it 1s said to border on the country of the Ethiopians, lies between two 
sandy deserts, doomed to be infertile forever. The land itself neither 
knows nor produces fruitful crops of any kind except as it is rendered 
fertile at fixed seasons by the inundation of the Nile when in flood. 
It is only where the nature of the adjacent land permits that the river 
makes the soil fit to bring forth crops. For wherever it finds a level 
surface in the vicinity, the river spreads freely over a wide area and 
renders it productive. The wider the distribution of the waters, the 
more extensive is the country which thus becomes arable. 

Beyond Cairo toward the sea, where the country is very flat, the 
waters have a wider range. Hence this district is extremely productive 
throughout the wide extent irrigated by the Nile. The river thus in- 
sures very abundant crops and also extends the limits of the kingdom. 
From the fortress called Phacusa, which faces Syria, even to Alexan- 
dria, which borders on the Libyan desert and is the last city of Egypt, 
the Nile carries the blessings of fertility and cultivation for a hundred 
miles and more. Above Cairo, however, until Chus, the southernmost 
city of Egypt, is reached—a place which is said to abut on the kingdom 
of the Ethiopians—the country is shut in by the encroaching sand hills. 
Consequently, only here and there does the river stretch out to the 
width of seven or eight miles and generally only to four or five, some- 
times on both sides and again only on one, according to the extent of 
the flood. In this way it contracts or expands the lateral extent of the 
kingdom, for the places not irrigated by the river are doomed, as has 
been said, to perpetual sterility, because of the intense heat of the sun’s 
rays. This upper region is called in the Egyptian tongue Seith. As yet 
we have been unable to find the origin of this name. Legend says, 
however, that in very early times there was an ancient city in this 
upper part of Egypt called Sais. Our Plato, in the Timaeus, mentions 
the city through his disciple, Critias, who introduces Solon, a man of 
great authority. As better evidence of this, it seems well to give his 
very words that nothing authoritative may be lacking. “There 1s,” he 


330 KING AMAURY I 


says, “a part of Egypt called the Delta, at the extremity of which the 
waters of the Nile divide. Near this place, there was once a great city, 
Sais by name, which was governed according to an ancient custom, 
called the Satyran law.®? The Emperor Amasis was originally from 
this city,” etc. 

Still another part of this country belongs to Egypt; it lies a day’s 
journey from Cairo, across uninhabitable land. This region, thanks to 
the benefits received from the river through some of its branches, has 
excellent, fertile soil and rejoices in luxuriant fields and vineyards. 
The Egyptians call this part of the country Phium [Philae]. 

Traditions of olden times say that this was formerly barren land 
which had never experienced the plough, but had been left without 
cultivation and care from the beginning of the world, just like the 
other portions of this same desert. But Joseph, that wise governor of 
Egypt, ever alert to discern anything that might be turned to advan- 
tage, investigated the location of the place and perceived that this 
region was lower than the surrounding land. He saw that if certain 
low mounds which lay between the habitable land and this part of the 
desert were removed this locality also might readily receive the benefit 
of the waters. He built dykes, levelled off the ground between, and 
let in the overflow of the Nile. The water was conducted through 
ditches already prepared for it and produced a fecundity hitherto un- 
known there. 

Although we do not know its ancient name, we believe that in early 
times this region was called the Thebaiad. From here is said to have 
come the legend of the holy Thebans who were crowned with martyr- 
dom at Agaunum under Diocletian and Maximianus Augustus, and 
whose first martyr, we read, was Mauritius. There is another proof, 
also; the best opium found anywhere grows there and is called by 
physicians Theban.** 

Now the land of Goshen which Joseph is said to have given to his 
brethren is in that part of Egypt which faces Syria, according to the 
description given in the book of Genesis, as the diligent reader may 
easily discover for himself. This region, on the contrary, which faces 
nearer Libya is situated at the other extremity of Egypt and is on the 


°? This quotation is from the Latin translation of the Timaeus by Chalcidius and 
includes a mistranslation of the name of the law. 

°8 The use of opium by physicians of the twelfth century is an interesting item in 
medical history. 


KING AMAURY I 331 


farther bank of the river. It is far from being of small extent; indeed, 
it is said to include within its boundaries three hundred and sixty-six 
cities and villages. 

By reason of the nature of the country, therefore, the kingdom was 
so narrow, as we have said, that it was impossible to turn either to the 
right or left. Constant information of the enemy’s progress was brought 
to the king and the sultan by scouts. The pursuit was continued for 
three days, and on the fourth, which was the Sabbath before the Lord’s 
day when “Rejoice, Jerusalem,” is sung in the church, the foe was 
reported to be in the vicinity.°* 


25. A battle involving great peril to both sides is fought in the 
desert between the king and Shirkuh. 


A counciL, necessarily short, was immediately held, for it was evi- 
dent that there was need of wise advice and a bold spirit and the press- 
ing emergency did not admit of long delay. Battle was decided upon 
by unanimous consent, and the decision that the matter must be settled 
by the sword was greeted with applause. The number of mailed war- 
riors in the two hosts, however, was very unequal. Shirkuh had twelve 
thousand Turks, of whom nine thousand wore the breastplate and 
helmet and the other three thousand used only bows and arrows. He 
had in addition ten or eleven thousand Arabs who, according to their 
custom, fought with lances only. The Christians, on the other hand, 
had barely three hundred and seventy-four knights besides the worth- 
less and effeminate Egyptians, who were a hindrance and a burden 
rather than a help. They had also some light-armed cavalry called 
Turcopoles, but I do not know in what number. Many have told me, 
however, that in the great conflict of that day these forces were, for the 
most part, useless. 

As soon as the two hostile armies became aware of each other’s 
proximity, both drew up their forces in battle array, as the occasion 
seemed to demand, arranged their battalions, and displayed their 
weapons. Veterans, with the wisdom obtained from experience in 
former conflicts, exhorted the rest; they instructed the recruits and 
roused their courage by promising victory and immortal glory, the 
fruit of success. 


54 I getare Hierusalem” was sung on the fourth Sunday of Lent, hence on March 
18, 1167. 


332 KING AMAURY I 


The field where the engagement was to take place was on the bor- 
derland between the fertile country and the desert. The ground here 
was uneven, broken by hills of sand and depressions, so that those 
coming or going could not be seen from a distance. The place was called 
Beben, which means the Gates, because the passage between the hills 
on either side is very narrow at this point. It is ten miles from Lamonia, 
hence this engagement is sometimes known as the battle of Lamonia. 

With energetic foresight, the enemy had already seized the hills 
on both right and left and had drawn up their forces in battle array. 
The rising ground and the yielding nature of the sand made it difh- 
cult for our men to approach with a rush against this position. The 
cohort commanded by Shirkuh occupied the center, and the others 
were drawn up on either side. The conflict soon reached the point 
where fighting at close quarters became necessary. The king’s division 
advanced valiantly as with one thought; they overwhelmed Shirkuh’s 
cohorts and put them to the sword. Shirkuh himself fled, with the foe 
in close pursuit. 

Hugh of Caesarea attacked the division commanded by Saladin, 
Shirkuh’s nephew; he was, however, deserted by his men and, conse- 
quently, was defeated and taken prisoner. A large number of his troops 
were taken, and many more were slain. Eustace Cholet, a noble and 
valiant lord from the land of Ponthieu, also fell in this combat. 

Elated by this success, the other Turkish divisions united. They 
completely surrounded the Christian forces which had been detailed 
to guard the baggage and equipment, and in a furious attack promptly 
dispersed and routed them. Hugh of Creona is said to have fallen in 
this battle. He was a nobleman of Sicilian birth, a young man of up- 
right and honorable life. 

The Christian lines were now broken, ; many of our people were dead, 
and those who had escaped the sword rool refuge in flight. The enemy 
seized the baggage and equipment without a struggle and carried it off. 

The scattered forces, dispersed here and there among the little 
valleys, fought with varying fortune. The only witnesses were the 
fighters themselves, for no one else could see it. The battle was inde- 
cisive; sometimes the Turks and again the Christians had the upper 
hand, all alike ignorant of what was transpiring elsewhere. Each side 
considered itself at one place victorious, at another defeated. In the 


KING AMAURY I 333 


confusion, our venerable brother, Ralph, bishop of Bethlehem, the 
royal chancellor, whom we later followed in that office, was seriously 
wounded and lost all his baggage.®* For a long time the result of the 
battle was uncertain. The actual decision of victory was deferred until 
the close of day warned the scattered troops to return to their standards. 
Then, at length, through fear of the oncoming night, those who were 
still at large began to hurry back to their own ranks, eagerly seeking 
the king. From all directions they rallied and again joined the lines. 

The king had come off conqueror at the point where he had fought. 
Others, in one place or another, had tried the fortune of war with vary- 
ing results, here enjoying success, there adverse fate, so that neither 
side could claim a decisive victory. Finally, the king withdrew with a 
few of his retainers to a certain hill, somewhat elevated above the 
plain, and there took his stand. Raising his standard to recall his scat- 
tered forces, he awaited his comrades. When these had rallied in part, 
the Christians saw that the Turkish division which had destroyed their 
baggage train, after killing some and capturing others, was in disarray 
upon the two hills opposite them. No other way of retreat was possible 
for our army except that which passed between the two hills occupied 
by the enemy. Determined to retreat, however, the Christians formed 
in order of battle and began to advance slowly between the enemy 
whom they saw both on the right and on the left. With such steadiness 
did they proceed that the infidels dared not attempt any hostility 
against them. Placing the strongest and best-armed men around the 
column, our people in close array made their way to a certain part of 
the river where they crossed in safety by a ford. In this same formation 
they continued to retreat throughout the entire night along the same 
route by which they had previously advanced. 

At Lamonia they were met by Gerard de Pougy. With fifty knights 
and a hundred Turcopoles, assisted by Mahadan, a son of the sultan, he 
had been holding the other bank of the river to check the enemy if 
they should try to cross. The arrival of Gerard was most opportune, for 
the king had been much concerned lest the enemy might attack him 
alone on one side of the river or the other. He was still anxious about 
the infantry detachments, however, which were to follow under com- 


55 This passage must have been written after the death of Amaury and the time of 
William’s appointment as chancellor, late in 1174. 


334 KING AMAURY I 


mand of a wise and valiant knight, Joscelin of Samosata. There was 
indeed great danger that they might suddenly encounter the foe while 
off their guard. 

For three days he awaited their arrival at Lamonia. By the fourth 
day the infantry had gradually assembled and were again united with 
his forces. They thereupon proceeded to Cairo by continuous marches 
and encamped by the bridge before Babilyun. There the king took a 
census of his knights and found that a hundred were missing. The 
enemy is said to have lost fifteen hundred in that encounter. 


26. Shirkuh withdraws to Alexandria. The king goes thither 
in haste and lays siege to the city. 


SHIRKUH now rallied all his remaining troops and formed them into 
one body. Then secretly, unknown to the Christians, he marched 
through the desert to Alexandria, where the people at once surrendered 
the city to him. 

Information of this fact was soon brought to the king. He at once 
summoned his chief counsellors, together with the sultan and his sons 
and the Egyptian nobles, and counselled with them as to what meas- 
ures should be taken. After long discussion, as is usually the case in 
doubtful matters, it was decided to station the fleet in the river as an 
obstacle, for Alexandria has within its own borders no resources of 
grain or other food supplies and is entirely dependent upon what is 
brought by ships from upper Egypt. In this position the fleet could 
completely shut off all commerce with people outside. 

When this had been done, the king led his entire army to the vi- 
cinity and established his camp between Toroge and Demenhut, at a 
place about eight miles from Alexandria. From here he sent out scouts 
to visit and break up all settlements in the vicinity and even those far 
remote in the desert. He wished to prevent any assistance being sent 
to the besieged and also to intercept all messengers leaving the city 
to solicit aid from outside. As a further check, the fleet prevented all 
passage of the river and permitted no one, however well known, to 
descend without undergoing a thorough questioning. 

A period of one month rolled away under these conditions. During 
that time the city had received no provisions from outside, and the 
people were already beginning to murmur. For bread was failing in 
their chests, and they had no food. When this came to the knowledge of 


KING AMAURY I 335 


Shirkuh, he began to fear lest he and his army might also be forced to 
suffer famine with the rest. Accordingly, he left his nephew Saladin 
with about a thousand knights in charge of the city, and he himself 
withdrew by night through the desert. Although he passed very near 
our forces, he managed to escape to the upper part of Egypt, whence 
he had come only a short time before. 

As soon as Shirkuh’s departure became known, the king at once 
started in pursuit and had proceeded as far as Babilyun. His whole 
army was ready to advance, and he had already ordered the baggage 
arranged with a view to further pursuit when Ben Ercarselle, a power- 
ful Egyptian nobleman, suddenly approached and informed him that 
Alexandria was struggling with desperate famine. He said, further- 
more, that he had relatives of great influence in the city itself, the 
governors, in fact, of the place. They could easily sway the people, 
now under the stress of hunger, in whatever direction they wished, 
even to the extent of surrendering the city into the hands of the king 
with all the Turks who had been left there. 

Influenced by this news, the king thereupon inquired of his counsel- 
lors what policy seemed best in their eyes; and finally, since the wishes 
of all were in accord, and even the sultan approved, they returned to 
Alexandria and placed the two armies as a blockading force around it. 


27. The situation of Alexandria is described. 


Avexanpria is the last of all the cities of Egypt in that part of the 
country which extends westward toward Libya. It lies on the border 
between the cultivated land and the arid desert. Beyond the walls of 
the city and closely adjoining it on the west lies a vast waste which has 
never felt the blessings of cultivation and care. According to ancient 
histories, this city was founded by Alexander of Macedon, the son of 
Philip, from whom it takes its name. Julius Solinus states that it was 
built in the hundred and twelfth Olympiad, in the consulship of Lu- 
cius Papirius, son of Furius, and of Gaius Petilius, son of Gaius. It was 
laid out by the architect Dinocrates, who occupies the second place after 
its founder in the grateful remembrance of the people.*® 

Alexandria is situated not far from that mouth of the Nile which 
some call the Heracleoticon and others the Canopic mouth. Now, how- 


56 Solinus Polyhistor XXXII, 41. 


336 KING AMAURY I 


ever, the place from which the arm nearest that city takes its name has 
lost its ancient appellation and is called Ressith [Rosetta]. The city 1s 
five or six miles distant from the bed of the river, but, during the season 
of its annual increase, part of the water is carried to the city by several 
canals. This influx of water is saved with great care in vast cisterns 
specially designed for the purpose, for the use of the people during the 
entire year. As much as is necessary, however, is diverted through un- 
derground conduits, for the purpose of irrigating the orchards which 
lie outside the city. 

Alexandria is most conveniently situated for carrying on extensive 
commerce. It has two ports which are separated from one another by 
a very narrow stretch of land. At the end of that tongue rises a tower 
of marvellous height called the Pharos. Julius Caesar is said to have 
built this for utilitarian purposes and to have led a colony hither.*” 

By the Nile, Alexandria receives from upper Egypt an abundance 
of food supplies of every kind and, indeed, a wealth of almost every 
commodity. If there is anything which the country itself lacks, it is 
brought by ships from the lands across the sea in profuse abundance. 
As a result Alexandria has the reputation of receiving a larger supply 
of wares of every description than any other maritime city. Whatever 
our part of the world lacks in the matter of spices, pearls, Oriental 
treasures, and foreign wares is brought hither from the two Indies, 
Saba, Arabia, and both the Ethiopias, as well as from Persia and other 
lands near by. All this merchandise is conveyed to upper Egypt by 
way of the Red sea, which forms the route from those races to us. It is 
unloaded at the city of Aidab °8 on the shore of that same sea, and 
thence descends the Nile to Alexandria. Consequently, people from 
the East and the West flock thither in great numbers, and Alexandria 
is a public mart for both worlds. It is famous under both its ancient 
and modern titles, but it derives especial honor because of the preach- 
ing and conversation of the blessed Mark, the spiritual son of the 
prince of the apostles who was sent by divine will to that church. It is 
furthermore made illustrious by the fact that the holy fathers Athana- 
sius and Cyril chose it as the place of their abode and are there buried. 


57 Solinus XXXII, 43. 

°8 Near the site of modern Suez. The old trade route ran almost directly west to 
strike the Nile near Cairo. This route was so important that both in ancient times and 
again under the early Muslims a canal was built from the Nile toward the Red sea. 
Such a fresh water canal from Cairo to Suez was finally built in 1869. 


KING AMAURY I 337 


Alexandria ranks second among the four patriarchates, and to it as 
their metropolis look Egypt, Libya, Pentapolis, and many other prov- 
inces. 

Thither the entire fleet was dispatched. Every gate and all means of 
approach were blockaded and no one allowed to enter. 


28. The king continues to carry on the siege and oppresses the 
citizens most grievously, 


MEanwulte, the Christians who had remained in Syria learned that 
the king had laid siege to Alexandria. They knew that by sailing with- 
out making any stops they could reach that city within a few days. 
Accordingly they seized arms and eagerly undertook the journey. 
Loading the ships with all necessary provisions, they joyously set sail 
on their own initiative. With them went Frederick, archbishop of Tyre, 
our predecessor. Moved by the enthusiasm of others and also by an 
ardent affection for the king, he went down to Egypt by ship, accom- 
panied by a rather distinguished retinue. But soon he began to suffer 
from a dangerous attack of dysentery caused by drinking the water of 
the Nile, and, his illness increasing, he was forced to return home 
before Alexandria was surrendered to the king. 

The besieging host assembled before the city now collected an im- 
mense number of masts, summoned craftsmen and carpenters, and 
caused them to erect a tower of great height from whose top the entire 
city could be surveyed. Machines called petraries which hurl forth 
enormous stones of great weight were also placed in strategic positions 
around the walls. From these, almost incessantly, were hurled im- 
mense stones of great weight which shattered the walls and terrified 
the people almost beyond endurance. 

Surrounding the city like a leafy forest were fertile gardens of most 
delightful aspect, full of fruit trees and medicinal plants. The very sight 
of this charming retreat invited the passer-by to enter and, having 
entered, to rest there. Our soldiers invaded these orchards in large 
numbers, primarily with the object of finding material for building 
the engines. Soon, however, they were seized with the sole desire of 
causing injury and loss, and, with far more zealous effort than had 
been expended upon the original planting, they cut down aromatic 
trees, useful for many purposes. Before long, the orchards were 
levelled to the ground, and no trace of their former condition re- 


338 KING AMAURY I 


mained. It was of this outrage that the people complained most bitterly 
after the treaty of peace had been adopted and in respect to which they 
felt that they had received the greatest injury. 

Our army continued to press on the siege; every method of causing 
injury was employed and new ways of annoying the besieged con- 
stantly invented. Incessant assaults permitted the weary defenders no 
rest. The citizens, accustomed only to trading, untrained in the art of 
fighting and without experience in warfare, found this unusual kind 
of labor extremely hard to bear. The Turks who had remained in the 
city were few in number and hesitated to trust themselves to the waver- 
ing and unreliable prowess of the citizens. Hence they seldom came 
forth to the conflict and then reluctantly—an attitude which did not 
greatly encourage the rest to fight. Why should more be said? Daily 
fighting, the constant slaughter of friends, continual vigils, fear by 
night, and above all the lack of food, wore upon the people and caused 
them to despair. So disheartened had they become that now they cast 
aside all desire for liberty and preferred to give up the city and be en- 
slaved by anyone rather than to die of cruel hunger on their own hearth- 
stones, together with their wives and little ones. Murmurs began to 
creep about among the people; and presently it was openly said that 
the pestilential strangers who had brought such affliction upon them 
must be driven from the city. An agreement of some kind should be 
sought by which these unseemly woes might be dispelled, the siege 
raised, and the city restored to its former state of dignity and freedom. 

This general state of feeling among the people was not lost upon 
Saladin. He dispatched swift messengers in all secrecy to his uncle with 
a statement of the situation: the wretched plight of the city, the entire 
Jack of food supplies, the inclination of the people to desert him. Most 
earnestly he besought him by every possible argument to find some 
immediate relief to succor the despairing people from most imminent 
danger. 

In the interim he appealed both to the city fathers and the people 
themselves; he warned them that they must fight to the death for their 
wives and children and urged them to emulate the customs and tradi- 
tions of their ancestors. Help was before the gates; even now Shirkuh, 
his uncle, was traversing Egypt to drive away the enemy and to relieve 
Alexandria. Very soon he would arrive with a vast number of troops. 

The king, well aware of the dissension among the citizens, urged 


KING AMAURY I 339 


that the siege be pressed on without pause. The more he learned of 
their desperate situation, the fiercer became his assaults. The sultan, 
too, was constantly on the alert; active, diligent, and full of solicitude, 
he went about among all the commanders. With a liberal hand he dis- 
pensed money for building engines as well as generous sums for every 
necessity of warfare. He paid adequate wages to the workmen; he 
gave gifts to the poor and needy, and, above all, to the wounded, that 
they might have proper care. He was liberal also to the fighters, es- 
pecially to those whom he knew were valiant in battle. 


29. On hearing this report, Shirkuh confers with Hugh of 


Caesarea about peace. 


WHILE these events were happening before Alexandria, Shirkuh was 
marching through upper Egypt. On arriving at Chus, he made an at- 
tempt to take the place by storm. He soon found, however, that his 
efforts were in vain; a longer time was needed for such an undertaking, 
and the precarious situation of his nephew demanded that he proceed 
to other work. Accordingly, he accepted a money payment from these 
cities and hurried on to lower Egypt with his forces. 

On arriving at Babilyun, he found that the king had sent Hugh 
d’Ibelin to guard Cairo and the bridge there, that, in short, existing 
conditions were far otherwise than he had supposed. He therefore 
summoned Hugh of Caesarea, whom he was holding prisoner, to a 
friendly conference and, being ready of speech, courteous, and genial, 
he began to address him in well-chosen words: “You are a great prince 
of high rank and much influence among your own people, nor is there 
any one of your barons to whom, if free choice were offered me, I would 
prefer to communicate this secret of mine and make my confidant. Of 
her own accord Fortune has granted and the chance of war has 
afforded an advantage which otherwise must have been sought with 
much effort, namely that I may have the benefit of your experience 
for this present need. I frankly acknowledge that I, eager for glory 
like all mortals, was attracted by the wealth of this kingdom, and rely- 
ing upon the helpless character of the native population, I at one time 
conceived the hope that this realm might sometime fall into my hands. 

“Therefore, at the cost of great expense and infinite hardships, fu- 
tile as I now see, I have come down into Egypt through many dangers. 
With me is a large company of knights all of whom have been drawn 


340 KING AMAURY I 


hither by the same desire. My expectations have not been realized, 
however, for, as I now see, fortune was against my entering the coun- 
try. Would that I may be permitted to return at least under favorable 
auspices! You are a man of high rank, as I have said, dear to the king, 
and influential both in word and deed; be the mediator of peace be- 
tween us. May the matter prosper in your hands. Say to the king, ‘We 
are wasting our time here, and the days are passing without result. 
Many duties await us at home.’ Moreover the presence of the king 
himself is most necessary to his realm. He is expending his efforts now 
for others; for, when he has repulsed us, he will resign the riches of 
this province to the miserable inhabitants, who are hardly worthy to 
live. Let him take his people who are now my prisoners; let him raise 
the siege and restore the captives whom he holds as well as those whom 
he is keeping shut up in the city of Alexandria. For my part, as soon 
as I have received a guarantee from him that we are to meet with no 
trouble on the way from his soldiers, I am ready to leave.” 


30. Hugh arranges the terms of the treaty with the king and 
the barons. 


AFTER listening to this speech, Hugh, as he was a man of good sense 
and discretion, for a long time carefully considered in his own mind 
this proposal. He did not doubt that the terms of peace under the con- 
ditions of the treaty would be advantageous to the Christians; yet he 
hesitated to undertake this mission himself, lest it might seem that he 
was more interested in obtaining his own liberty than concerned for 
the public welfare. He felt, therefore, that the first steps might be 
more honorably taken by someone else. His feeling on the matter he 
later explained to us confidentially. 

Accordingly, another captive, Arnulf of Turbessel, an intimate as- 
sociate of the king who had been taken prisoner in the same battle as 
the Hugh of whom we are speaking, was sent as the bearer of the 
message. Charged with this mission, he hastened to the king and ex- 
plained to him in detail the object of his coming. The king at once 
called a council, and in that assembly of the barons, the sultan and his 
sons also being present, Arnulf submitted the proposal and explained 
the nature of the treaty. The overture of peace met with the approval 
of all, and the terms proposed seemed to suffice both for glory and for 
the fulfillment in good faith of the treaty concluded between the king 


KING AMAURY I 341 


and the caliph. The city was to pass by surrender into the power of the 
king. An exchange of all prisoners on both sides was to be made, and 
all the Turks who had been shut in by the siege as well as the troops of 
Shirkuh, now dispersed over the land of Egypt, were to leave its 
boundaries utterly. 

Shawar, the sultan, as well as all the satraps of Egypt, approved the 
pact and willingly accepted the provisions of the treaty. He declared 
himself fully satisfied, since it excluded his most dreaded enemy, his 
rival for the supremacy in the kingdom. 

Then Hugh presented himself and, after the treaty in all its aspects 
had been fully discussed by both sides, put the final touches to it and 
brought the matter to a satisfactory conclusion. 


31. The city is surrendered to the king, and peace 1s proclaimed 
to the people of Alexandria. 


THEN the herald proclaimed to each cohort and to the public in general 
that the fighting was at an end; a legal edict was also issued forbidding 
further molestation of the Alexandrians. As soon as peace was con- 
cluded, the people, worn down by the hardships of the long-continued 
siege, issued forth rejoicing. They made light of the straits which they 
had endured and took pleasure in walking about unhindered, to relieve 
their weariness. There was now abundant food, and the resumption of 
commerce was granted. Accordingly, the people, relieved from the 
long-continued famine, devoted themselves to the restoration of their 
health and spirits. They delighted to watch the now friendly troops 
whom but a short time before they had regarded with loathing and 
hatred, to talk with the very men whom recently they had feared as the 
ministers of danger and death. 

The Christians, for their part, were no less eager to enter the city 
so long the object of their desires. Wandering freely about the streets, 
they gazed at the ports and the ramparts; and by diligent observation 
they collected material from which, on their return home, they might 
ofttimes weave stories for their friends and refresh the minds of their 
listeners with agreeable converse. 

Above this splendid city rises a tower of remarkable height called 
the Pharos.®® Toward this, as toward a star, guided by the brilliant light 


59 The repetition of this statement about Pharos (see chap. 27) so soon suggests that 
these two chapters were written at different times. This mention was probably the 


342 KING AMAURY I 


of its many flashing torches, ships unfamiliar with the locality direct 
their course at night. For the approach to Alexandria is very dangerous, 
and the gloomy sea is full of treacherous shoals. But sailors, warned in 
advance by the lights which are kept burning always at public expense 
upon the tower, escape the threatened danger of shipwreck and proceed 
in safety on their way. 

Above this tower, in token of victory, the standard of the king was 
unfurled, and at the sight of the flag, the fact of the surrender, which 
until now had been known to a few only, became manifest to all. 
Thereupon, many who at the first talk of the treaty had cautiously held 
back and feared to trust themselves to the Christians, now that peace 
was assured, did not hesitate to join us and to rely on the sincerity of 
our good faith. One thing appeared marvellous beyond all others: 
namely, that so small an army had been able to shut up within Alex- 
andria such a host of citizens, besides numerous foreigners who all 
faithfully codperated for the defense of the place, and had forced them 
to an ignominious surrender. For the Christians had barely five hun- 
dred knights and only four or five thousand foot soldiers, while the 
besieged had more than fifty thousand men who were able to bear arms. 


32. The king returns to his own land, victorious, with all his 
forces restored. 


SALADIN now issued forth from the city and repaired to the king. There 
he remained in the Christian camp until ready to set forth on his re- 
turn. He was treated with all respect and furnished with a guard to 
protect him from insults that might be offered him by audacious spirits. 
But the sultan at the head of his troops marshalled in serried ranks 
entered the gates of Alexandria in triumph as a victor. Heralded by the 
blare of trumpets, the sound of drums, and of every other kind of 
musical instrument, he advanced attended by bands of singing men 
and preceded by numerous servitors and crowds of shouting men at 
arms. The citizens trembled with terror; some he condemned, others 
he released; for, although he punished the guilty with a strong hand, 
he distributed rewards to all who deserved them. 


earlier and written on the basis of his first investigation of the Egyptian campaign of 
1167. The previous mention is part of the antiquarian information which William was 
adding for the benefit of the more remote reading audience which he was addressing 
after 1180. 


KING AMAURY I 343 


The citizens of Alexandria were finally sentenced to pay a great 
sum of money, not definitely fixed; administrators of the tribute and 
officers to have charge of the taxes and revenues of the city were ap- 
pointed. After thus exacting a vast sum of money, the sultan entrusted 
the care of the city to loyal servants of his own and retired full of 
glory to his camp. 

The Christian army now yearned to return home. Accordingly, 
those who had come by sea made the necessary provision for the trip 
and embarked on board ship. Committing themselves to the breezes, 
they returned with joy to their own land. The king ordered the ma- 
chines to be burned and the baggage made ready. He then took the 
route to Babilyun, where those whom he had sent on before were again 
united with his forces. Thus having confirmed the sultan in the govern- 
ment of the kingdom, expelled the enemy, and recovered his men who 
had been taken prisoners, he entered Ascalon on the twelfth day be- 
fore the Kalends of September [August 21] in the fourth year of his 
reign and the year 1167 of the Incarnation of our Lord.*° 


60 Amaury’s fifth regnal year had begun in February, 1167. 


HERE ENDS THE NINETEENTH BOOK 


THE TWENTIETH BOOK BEGINS 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EGYPT: ALLIANCE 
WITH EMPEROR MANUEL 


1. Hernesius, archbishop of Caesarea, and Eudes de Saint- 
Amand, the royal butler, return from Constantinople, bring- 
ing with them the future wife of the king. Amaury 1s 
crowned in the church at Tyre and marries a wife. 


Durinc this time, Hernesius, archbishop of Caesarea, of precious 
memory, and Eudes de Saint-Amand, at that time the royal butler, 
returned by sea from Constantinople and landed at Tyre. They had 
pursued the task on which they had been sent to Emperor Manuel 
with wisdom and loyalty, and at the end of two years their mission 
had been successful, for they brought with them the daughter of John 
the protosebastos as the future wife of the king." 

As soon as the king learned of their arrival, he hastened to Tyre. 
There, after summoning the prelates of the church and the nobles 
of the realm, he espoused the Princess Maria, who had previously re- 
ceived the gift of royal unction and consecration. The marriage was 
solemnized with due pomp and ceremony on August 29 in the church 
at Tyre by the Patriarch Amalrich of good memory. The king was 
magnificently attired in the royal robes and wore the crown of his 
ancestors. 

This John the protosebastos, whose daughter, as I have said, the 
king took as his consort, was the emperor’s nephew, the son of his 
elder brother. As escort for his niece, Manuel sent a number of il- 
lustrious and magnificent nobles closely attached to himself, among 
whom were the Lord Palaeologus and Manuel Sebastos, a kinsman 
of his own, and numerous others.” On them devolved the duty of 


1 This embassy must have been sent to Constantinople in 1165, one of the events 
of that year which William failed to mention at the time. Presumably it left in the 
fall of 1165, for Hernesius is recorded as still present in Palestine in a document of 
the late summer or early fall of that year. 

Protosebastos (like sebastos and sebastocrator) was one of the honorific titles de- 
vised by the Comneni, usually applied to relatives of the emperor. There is no exact 
Western equivalent. 

® Maria was the daughter of John Comnenus, and her escort was headed by George 
Palaeologus and Manuel Comnenus, all members of the imperial family (see F. 
Chalandon, Les Comméne, Il, 536). 


STRUGGLE FOR EGYPT 345 


conducting the future queen with much pomp to the lord king and 
of seeing to it that none of the prescribed solemnities was omitted. 
The head of the church at Tyre, where these ceremonies were held, 
was at that time Lord Frederick, who had been transferred from the 
church at Acre. Three days after the coronation and the nuptials of 
the king had been celebrated in that city, Frederick generously be- 
stowed upon me the office of archdeacon of the church at Tyre, which 
William had resigned when he was called to the church at Acre. This 


he did at the request and in the presence of the king and many other 
honorable men.® 


2. Andronicus, a relative of the emperor, carries away Theo- 
dora, the widow of King Baldwin, into the land of the 
enemy. 


Ar this time, while the king was still in Egypt, one Andronicus, a 
Greek nobleman of great influence and a relative of the emperor of 
Constantinople, arrived from Cilicia, attended by a large retinue 
of knights.* He remained with us until the king returned and was 
a source of much comfort to us. But like a snake in the bosom or a 
mouse in the wardrobe, he made a poor return to his hosts and proved 
the truth of that saying of Maro, “I fear the Greeks even when bear- 
ing gifts.” 5 

Immediately after his return the king bestowed upon him the city 
of Beirut. The Greek then invited Theodora, the widow of King 
Baldwin, who was also the daughter of his own nephew, to go with 
him to visit Beirut. Theodora possessed the city of Acre, which had 
been given to her as dowry at the time of her marriage, and had en- 
tertained Andronicus a long time in her own house. While on this 
journey Andronicus, acting in collusion with Nureddin, treacherously 


8 It is of interest to note William’s mention of the king’s influence in his promotion 
to the office of archdeacon, September 1, 1167. It probably marked the agreement of 
William to write a history of the deeds of Amaury. 

* He had been dismissed as governor of Cilicia by the emperor, both because he was 
inefficient and because he had conducted a violent flirtation with Philippa, the sister 
of Manuel’s wife, at Antioch. It practically reached the stage of marriage but was 
broken up by the emperor. He was therefore free to indulge in further adventures in 
Jerusalem. His wildly adventurous career awaits a biographer. Even the summary 
sketches of it read stranger than fiction (see C. Diehl, Figures byzantines, 2d Series, 
pp. 86-134). 

5 Virgil Aen. 11. 49. 


346 STRUGGLE FOR EGYPT 


abducted the queen and carried her off into the enemy country, first 
to Damascus and later to Persia.® 


3. Churches are established at Petra and Hebron and bishops 
appointed over them. Stephen, chancellor of the king of 
Sicily and bishop-elect of the church at Palermo, goes down 
into Syria. Count William of Nevers dies while with us. 


ScaRcELyY anything worthy of note occurred in the kingdom during 
this year, except the establishment of two churches about Easter time 
and the appointment of bishops over them. Petra, one of these two, 
lies beyond the Jordan in the land of Moab and is the capital of 
Arabia Secunda. This church had had no Latin bishop since the Chris- 
tians came into the Land of Promise. The other, namely Hebron, 
never had received that honor, it is said. In the time of the Greeks it 
had been only a parish, which was the status of the church at Bethle- 
hem also, as is well known. But Bethlehem, because of the reverence 
with which it was held as the birthplace of our Lord, deservedly was 
raised to that honor first, and in the time of King Baldwin I, im- 
mediately after the liberation of the Holy City beloved of God, it 
was given the rights and privileges of a cathedral.” 

In this same year of which we are speaking, Hebron also was for 
the first time distinguished by that honor, as was fitting in view of her 
connection with those servants of God, whose memory is ever blessed, 
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. As bishop over the church at Petra was 
chosen Guerricus, a regular canon of the Temple of the Lord, who 
was also made the metropolitan of Arabia; while Hebron received as 
head Raynald, the nephew of the Patriarch Fulcher of revered mem- 
ory. 

In the following summer, Stephen, a nobleman of high rank, chan- 
cellor of the king of Sicily and bishop-elect of the church at Palermo, 
arrived in the kingdom attended by a small retinue. Stephen was a 
brother of Count Rotrou du Perche and a young man of fine appear- 
ance and excellent natural ability. He had been made the victim of a 
conspiracy on the part of the combined nobles of Sicily, who by their 
intrigues had succeeded in driving him from that land. This was done 

® His affection for Theodora seems to have been genuine. When she and the two 
sons she bore him were captured by Emperor Manuel, Andronicus surrendered him- 


self. 
7 See Book XI, chap. 12. 


STRUGGLE FOR EGYPT 347 


contrary to the wishes of the young king, a minor, and his mother, 
but they were powerless to prevent it. With the utmost difficulty, 
Stephen managed to evade the plots of the nobles and came to us by 
sea. Not very long after his arrival, however, he was overtaken by a 
serious illness from which he died. He was buried at Jerusalem with 
fitting honor, in a chapel of the Temple of the Lord.® 

About the same time, also, William, count of Nevers, a powerful 
Jord of noble family and great influence, came to Jerusalem from the 
kingdom of France, attended by a noble band of knights. He had 
come with the intention of fighting in the service of Christianity at 
his own expense against the enemies of our faith. But premature 
death, envious of his successful prowess, most unfortunately pre- 
vented this pious and noble purpose. For William was stricken with 
a lingering malady and, after long suffering, died at the very begin- 
ning of a most promising life. His death was mourned and regretted 


by all.® 


4. Envoys from the emperor arrive and demand certain agree- 
ments from the king. The archdeacon of Tyre ts sent as 
envoy to Constantinople. He concludes the proposed treaty 
with the emperor. 


In the course of that same summer, Count Alexander of Gravina 
and a certain Michael Hydruntinus [of Otranto], both members of 
the court of the emperor of Constantinople, arrived at Tyre on an 
imperial mission.1° They were granted a private audience, to which 


8 Stephen du Perche had been chancellor of Sicily and archbishop-elect of Palermo. 
The pathetic career of this noble and high-minded young Norman amidst the com- 
plicated political tangles of Sicilian affairs is described by J. C. Hildt (“The Ministry 
of Stephen of Perche during the Minority of William II of Sicily” Sith College 
Studies, III [1918], 139-86). The palace revolution to which William refers occurred 
in 1168. Stephen’s arrival in the Holy Land must therefore be dated toward the latter 
part of the summer (see F. Chalandon, Histoire de la domination normande en Italie 
et en Sicile, Il, 345). 

® William IV, count of Nevers, died at Acre in 1168. Robert of Torigni erro- 
neously enters the event under the year 1170 (see L. Delisle, ed., Chronique de 
Robert de Torigni, abbé du Mont-Saint-Michel, Il, 20). 

10Jt is interesting to note that the emissaries of Manuel were both of southern 
Italian origin. There were many Westerners at the court of Constantinople at this 
time, and Manuel seems to have relied upon them in matters of great importance. 
Chalandon is wrong in assuming that they demanded a part of the kingdom of 
Jerusalem. William is using the term regnum for Egypt (see F. Chalandon, Les Commnéne, 
Il, § 36). 


348 STRUGGLE FOR EGYPT 


the king had summoned those whom he wished to have present at the 
conference. The envoys explained the reasons for their coming and 
presented to the king a letter from his imperial majesty dealing with 
the same subject. 

The substance of the message was as follows: “The emperor has 
perceived that the kingdom of Egypt, which up to the present time 
has been powerful and exceedingly rich, has fallen into the hands of 
a weak and effeminate race. The neighboring peoples also have be- 
come aware of the impotency and inefficiency of both ruler and 
princes. Since it seems impossible that the kingdom can continue long 
in its present state and the government and dominion over it must of 
necessity pass to other nations, the emperor believes that with the aid 
of the king he can easily bring it under his own power.” It was upon 
this matter that he had dispatched the envoys to the king. 

Some say—and with much plausibility—that it was the king who 
first suggested this matter to the emperor through messengers and 
frequent letters, that he had urged the latter to aid him with troops, 
with a fleet, and with the necessary money. In return, the emperor 
was to receive a certain share of that kingdom and of any spoils that 
might be taken. 

This, then, was the nature of the business on which the envoys had 
come to the king. When the stipulations of the treaty had finally been 
agreed upon by both parties, I was added to the legation as one of 
their number by command of the king. As the bearer of letters, I was 
to visit the emperor and convey to him the decision of the king and 
the entire realm. Furthermore, I was empowered to ratify the agree- 
ment between them as might be required of me, but under the form 
already decided upon. 

Accordingly, I joined the imperial envoys, who were awaiting my 
coming at Tripoli, as directed by dispatches from the king, and we 
set out together for Constantinople. The emperor himself was de- 
tained for the moment in Serbia, where the people had rebelled 
against his authority. 

Serbia is a mountainous country lying between Dalmatia, Hungary, 
and Illyria. It is thickly wooded and very difficult of access. Relying 
upon this general inaccessibility of their country and the narrow passes 
leading into it, the Serbians had revolted. 

Old traditions say that this entire people derive their origin from 
exiles who were banished to this land and condemned to work in the 


STRUGGLE FOR EGYPT 349 


marble quarries and mines. From this condition of servitude they are 
said to take their name. They are a rude and undisciplined people, 
dwelling in the forests and mountains. They have no knowledge of 
agriculture but possess large flocks and herds which supply them 
abundantly with milk and cheese, butter and meat. In addition they 
have plenty of honey and wax. They have magistrates who are called 
suppani. 

At times they obey the emperor. At other times, since they are a 
bold and warlike race, they sally forth from their mountain fastnesses 
and lay waste all the surrounding country. Because of the intolerable 
outrages committed against their neighbors, the emperor had valiantly 
marched against them with a large army. He was finally successful 
in subduing them and captured their principal chief. It was: on his 
return from this campaign that we, after overcoming the many dif- 
ficulties of the road, met him at the city called Butella, in the province 
of Pelagonia. This place is near the ancient city, formerly known as 
Justiniana Prima, which was the native place of the most wise, most 
fortunate, and invincible Emperor Justinian. It is now commonly 
called Acreda [Ochrida]. 

Here we were accorded an honorable reception by the emperor, 
who treated us with imperial kindness. To him we announced the mo- 
tive for our journey and mission and explained with great care the 
tenor of the treaty. He listened to the entire report with much pleas- 
ure, graciously accepted it, and gave his approval to all that had been 
agreed upon. After both parties had taken a solemn oath, the em- 
peror by his authority ratified the details as already arranged by the 
envoys and confirmed the treaty. 

Imperial letters containing the text of the treaty in its entirety 
were given us, and we were then dismissed with munificent gifts, ac- 
cording to the usual custom. Our mission was now successfully ac- 
complished, and accordingly, on the first day of October, we started 
on the return journey. 


5. The king leads an army down into Egypt and, contrary to 
the terms of the treaty which he had concluded with the 
Egyptians, makes war against them. 


Mranwui_e, immediately after our departure and before our em- 
bassy could return to inform the king of the promised assistance of 


350 STRUGGLE FOR EGYPT 


the emperor, it began to be rumored quite generally throughout the 
land that Shawar, the sultan of Egypt, was constantly sending messen- 
gers to Nureddin and secretly imploring his aid. He claimed that it 
was entirely against his own wishes that he had joined in any treaty of 
peace with an enemy, and he desired to withdraw from the agreement 
which he had made with the king. If he could be assured of Nured- 
din’s assistance, he would break the treaty and desert the king com- 
pletely. 

Moved with righteous indignation at this news, it is said, the king 
mustered infantry and cavalry forces from all over the realm and 
hastily departed for Egypt. There are those who claim that all these 
charges were false, that the Sultan Shawar was quite innocent and, 
far from deserving such treatment, had in good faith kept the treaty 
and all its stipulations. They assert that the war made against him 
was unjust and contrary to divine law; that it was merely a pretext 
invented to defend an outrageous enterprise. Hence it was, they main- 
tain, that the Lord, who strictly judges the secrets of the heart and 
conscience, wholly withdrew His favor from us and refused to grant 
success to our iniquitous undertaking. 

It is said that Gerbert, surnamed Assallit [Gilbert d’Assaily], the 
master of the house of the Hospital at Jerusalem, was the prime 
mover, if not the originator, of this ill-fated campaign. He was a 
man of high spirit, extremely generous, but unstable and vacillating 
in character. After exhausting all the treasures of the Hospital, he 
borrowed a large sum of money in addition and expended it all on 
knights whom he drew to him from every source. In this way he 
brought such a weight of debt upon his establishment that there was 
no possibility of its being lifted. He finally resigned his office in 
despair, gave up the administration of the Hospital, and left the 
house burdened with obligations amounting to a hundred thousand 
pieces of gold. He is said to have spent these immense sums on the 
basis of an understanding made with the king that if Egypt should be 
taken and subjugated, Balbis, formerly called Pelusium, with all its 
territory, was to become the possession of this house in perpetuity. 

The brethren of the Temple, on the contrary, declined to take part 
in this campaign. Either because it seemed to them contrary to the 
dictates of conscience or because the master of a rival house was 
apparently the originator and leader of the enterprise, they refused 


STRUGGLE FOR EGYPT 351 


to follow the king or furnish troops. To declare war against a friendly 
power which was relying on our good faith seemed to them wrong, 
contrary to the tenor of the treaty and in defiance of right and justice, 
for Egypt had kept good faith and did not deserve such treatment."! 


6. The city of Balbis is besieged and taken. The sultan beguiles 
the king by promising a large sum of money. 


AccorpINGLy the king made all his preparations and assembled all 
the paraphernalia of war. Then, in the month of October, in the fifth 
year of his reign, he mustered the forces of the realm and went down 
into Egypt.1? After a march of about ten days across the intervening 
desert, he arrived at Balbis, where he at once began siege operations. 
Within three days he had opened a way with the sword and taken the 
place by force. Without delay, on November 3 he placed his forces 
in full possession of the city. 

As soon as the place was taken, most of the citizens were put to the 
sword without regard to age or sex. If by any chance some escaped 
death, they suffered loss of liberty and fell under the miserable yoke 
of bondage, a fate which to men of honor is far worse than any form 
of death. Among the prisoners of high rank taken at Balbis was 
Mahaza, a son of the sultan, and also one of the latter’s nephews. The 
two had been in charge of the city, in command of the troops assem- 
bled there. 

As soon as an entrance was opened, the troops rushed in pell-mell 
and, without regard for distinctions of any kind, penetrated to the 
most secluded retreats. They unbarred private apartments and 
dragged in chains to ignominious death those who had vainly thought 
to escape by hiding. All men in the prime of life capable of bearing 
arms were immediately put to the sword. Scarcely were old men and 
children spared, while to the common people slight consideration was 
shown. Whatever seemed at all desirable became the booty of the 
enemy, and the most valuable articles were divided by lot as spoils. 

11 ZLundgreen, following Abu-Sama, believes that the Templars did finally take 
part after voicing their objections to the venture. The Templars were especially 
concerned because their grand master, Geoffrey Fulcher, had made the treaty with 
the caliph at Cairo in 1167. William had given chief credit to Hugh of Caesarea 
(see F. Lundgreen, Wilhelm von Tyrus und der Templerorden, pp. 101-6). 

12 Amaury and his army left Ascalon October 20, 1168 (R. Rohricht, Regesta 


regni Hierosolymitant, no. 453). William, who left Ochrida on October 1, did not 
have time to reach home before Amaury’s departure. 


352 STRUGGLE FOR EGYPT 


Shawar, completely overwhelmed by the news of these outrages, 
was at a loss what course to adopt. He began to consider, as far as the 
time and circumstances permitted, whether to endeavor to appease 
the king’s wrath by an offer of money or to beg the neighboring chiefs 
of his own faith to assist him, either freely or for pay. Finally, as a 
matter of immediate precaution, he resolved to use both methods. 
Accordingly, he sent a deputation to Nureddin to ask for help. This 
was readily granted. Nureddin called Shirkuh, who was mentioned 
above, put him in command of a part of the army, and gave him a 
large number of his own nobles to share the responsibility. He 
ordered the necessary provisions for the march to be supplied, ar- 
ranged for a goodly number of camels to carry the baggage, and sent 
the expedition into Egypt. 


7. The king encamps before Cairo while waiting for the money 
promised by the sultan. 


AFTER the destruction of Balbis, the king marched on with all his 
forces toward Cairo. He made very slow progress, scarcely advancing 
a distance of one day’s march in ten days. He finally arrived at his 
destination, however, established camp before the city, and had the 
machines made ready for action. Wickerwork screens were set up and 
whatever else might be useful in siege operations arranged. These 
preparations outside the walls seemed to forecast an attack very 
shortly. The hearts of the besieged shook with fear, and they felt 
themselves already menaced by the apparition of death. 

Those who know the secret reasons underlying the king’s actions 
declare that he purposely delayed making the attack in order that the 
terror-stricken sultan might have more time for reflection and so be 
led to offer money for the withdrawal of the troops. The king’s entire 
aim was to extort ‘* money from the sultan; he preferred to take a 
goodly bribe and withdraw rather than to give those cities over to 
rapine at the hands of his people, as had been done at Balbis. This 
statement will be explained more fully later. 

During this interval, the sultan tried every means of approach to 
the king, through the members of his own house and those of the 


13 Virgil Aen. 1. 95. 


14 William’s choice of words here is reminiscent of Terence Phormio 1v and 
Plautus Bacch. v. i. 16. 


STRUGGLE FOR EGYPT 353 


king, and employed every subtle device. His offers finally worked on 
the mind of the avaricious king; for the sum promised was so vast 
that the entire resources of the kingdom would scarcely have sufficed 
to pay it even though scraped together from every corner. He 
promised, it is said, two million pieces of gold for the release of his 
son and nephew and the withdrawal of the troops to their own 
country. He made this offer, as was later disclosed, not with any 
expectation of ever being able to redeem his promises, but to prevent 
the king from advancing suddenly on Cairo. The city was wholly un- 
prepared and, in its defenceless state, might easily be taken by a 
surprise attack. Those who were present at the time believe that this 
would undoubtedly have happened, had our army advanced on Cairo 
by forced marches immediately after the capture of Balbis. For at 
that time the Egyptians were greatly disheartened—in fact, almost 
stupefied—by the recent massacre and the unexpected catastrophe to 
that great city. This does, indeed, seem most probable, for the citizens 
of Cairo were weak and effeminate and entirely without military train- 
ing. For a long time they had devoted themselves entirely to pleasure. 
The neighboring city was still smoking, and they themselves were 
utterly prostrated over the loss of countless friends. At such a time, 
while fearing for themselves the fate that had overtaken others, they 
would have had neither courage nor strength to resist. 


8. Our fleet sails up the Nile and joins the land forces. The 
sultan withdraws from his agreement. He attempts resistance 
and begs aid from the Turks. 


Tus, then, was the situation in the vicinity of Cairo. Meanwhile, 
the fleet, which the king upon his departure from the realm had or- 
dered to set sail with all speed, arrived. Borne by favoring winds, it is 
said to have entered the Nile through that branch commonly known as 
Carabes. Tanis, a very ancient city on that bank of the river, was at 
once captured by the naval forces and handed over to the troops for 
plunder and pillage. The fleet then attempted to sail on to join the 
king, but the Egyptians blocked the Nile with their vessels and pre- 
vented its passage. Thereupon the king sent Humphrey of Toron, 
his constable, with a picked body of cavalry to seize the opposite 
shore if possible, that a passage on that side at least might be kept 
unobstructed. ‘This might have been done without difficulty, had not a 


354 STRUGGLE FOR EGYPT 


rumor arisen in the meantime that Shirkuh was approaching. This 
compelled a change of plans. The fleet was ordered to sail out to sea 
immediately and return home, which was done. Through lack of 
proper precaution, however, one of the galleys was lost. 

In the meantime, the sultan and his people did not cease their 
efforts to drive the king from their land. What they lacked in strength 
they accomplished by strategy and atoned for the weakness of their 
forces by using subtle devices. As soon as the money had been 
promised, they demanded an increased length of time in which to pay 
it. The excuse given was that such an immense sum could not be 
secured from one source, therefore more time must be granted before 
the agreement could be carried out. A payment of a hundred thou- 
sand gold pieces was made at once, however, and in return the sultan’s 
son and his nephew were released. As hostages for the remainder he 
offered his two little nephews, lads of tender years. 

The king then raised the siege, withdrew with his forces to a place 
about a mile away, and established his camp near the garden of 
Balsam. Here the forces remained for eight days. During this time, 
the king received frequent but unsatisfactory messages from the sultan 
and finally again removed the camp to a place called Syriacus. 

Meanwhile the sultan was sending his messengers throughout the 
entire realm to beg for aid. He collected all the available arms and 
summoned assistance from the surrounding country. He ordered food 
supplies to be brought into Cairo, made the rounds of the city, saw 
that all weak places in the fortifications were strengthened, and con- 
sidered every method of resistance. With persuasive words he called 
upon his people to fight for their lives, for liberty, for their wives 
and children. He drew before their eyes a vivid picture of the dread- 
ful disaster that had befallen a neighboring city, described the bitter- 
ness of captivity, the unbearable yoke of a master, and the desperate 
lot of those under slavery. 


9. Milon de Plancy corrupts the king’s mind by evil counsel. 
Shirkuh arrives in response to the call of the Egyptians. The 
king advances into the desert against him but does not find 
him. He therefore returns to his own land without having 
obtained results. 


THERE was a certain man in the king’s army, of noble family but of 
degenerate morals, one who neither feared God nor reverenced man. 


STRUGGLE FOR EGYPT 355 


Mailon de Plancy was a man without shame, a brawler and a slanderer, 
ever active in stirring up trouble. Well aware of the king’s insatiable 
desire for wealth, he chose to-foster those avaricious tendencies rather 
than to offer wholesome admonitions. From the first he had con- 
sistently advised the king to devote all his efforts toward a certain 
end, namely, to cheat the Egyptian kingdom of the sum mentioned 
above and then to effect an arrangement with the sultan and the 
caliph, instead of attempting to take Cairo and Babilyun by force. He 
did this, it is said, not because he believed it impossible to take the 
city, but that he might outwit the knights and others who were 
eagerly looking forward to the spoils and thus turn the entire rewards 
of this great campaign into the royal treasury. For when a city is 
taken by storm, the army usually reaps a far richer harvest of spoils 
than is the case when the surrender is made to a king or prince 
directly, under the definite terms of a treaty which benefits the lord 
only. 

In the former case, amid the din and confusion of looting, the 
right of war permits each man to seize whatever chance throws in his 
way, and thus the private means of the victors are increased. In the 
latter contingency, however, the advantage is wholly to the king, and 
all that is gained by this means accrues to his coffers. Moreover, 
although it may appear that all which increases the fortune of the 
king and those in high places benefits their subjects indirectly and 
increases the wealth of all, yet the individual ever seeks more eagerly 
those gains which tend to swell his private property and to enrich his 
own lares and penates. 

And so this diversity of feeling led to serious altercations. The 
majority demanded that the decision be left to the sword and that all 
be given over to pillage, while the king and his party held otherwise. 
The wishes of the latter finally prevailed, and the will of the king was 
accomplished. 

While the army was encamped in the village just named, five or six 
miles from Cairo, a steady stream of messengers kept passing to and 
fro between the two sides. The sultan was continually sending word 
that he was using every effort to collect the promised sum; mean- 
while he begged the king not to consider the delay but to wait 
patiently. He also advised him not to approach nearer to the city, 
lest the caliph and the people, who were relying in full security on 
the treaty of peace already arranged, should become alarmed. The 


356 STRUGGLE FOR EGYPT 


money would soon be paid, and the king would be able to return 
home under favorable circumstances. With false promises of this kind, 
Shawar successfully played on the credulity of the Christians and 
thereby counteracted the good advice and sound warnings of others 
who suggested wiser plans. Then, suddenly, a rumor arose that 
Shirkuh was at hand with a countless host of Turks. As soon as the 
king heard this news, he broke camp, ordered the baggage arranged, 
and returned to Balbis. There he supplied himself with the necessary 
provisions for the march, left a force of infantry and cavalry to guard 
the city, and on December 25 marched out into the desert against 
Shirkuh. When he had advanced for some distance into the wilder- 
ness, however, trustworthy scouts who knew the locality well reported 
that Shirkuh had already crossed the Nile with his forces. This news 
necessitated a change of plans. As the enemy’s strength would be 
doubled by these reinforcements, it would not be safe to tarry longer, 
for delay was fraught with extreme danger. On the other hand, to 
risk an engagement with Shirkuh seemed equally hazardous. The 
sultan no longer showed any intention of standing by the treaty, and 
we were helpless to force him to do so. By a shrewd and carefully 
considered policy of delay, he had prolonged the affair until the 
Turks were at hand and we must depart. Accordingly, the forces 
returned to Balbis, where they were joined by the detachment which 
had been left there to guard the city. On January 2, the Christian 
army in marching array took the road back to Syria.?° 


10. Shirkuh seizes Egypt. He kills the sultan and, a little later, 
is himself slain. 


SHIRKUH now felt the time opportune to accomplish his purpose, for, 
since the king had departed, there was nothing to hinder his wishes. 
He therefore ordered the plan which he had already formed to be 
carried out. He placed his camp before Cairo as if his coming were 
with no hostile intent, and there, like a sensible man, he waited 
patiently for several days. He showed no sign of unfriendly feeling 

15 The detailed account of this campaign, with the emphasis placed upon the 
atrocities committed by the Christians, the sordid motives in their negotiations with 
Shawar, and the sympathetic appreciation of Shawar’s tactics, reflects not only 
William’s typical regard for the sanctity of treaties, even when made with infidels, 


but also his concern about the real, though not formal, breach of the treaty which 
he himself had signed with the Greeks. 


STRUGGLE FOR EGYPT 357 


or sinister design, but with the shrewdness of which he was a master 
he concealed his actual intention. Each day Shawar the sultan, ac- 
companied by a large retinue, went out to visit him at his camp and, 
after offering the customary devoted salutation and presenting gifts, 
returned to the city. 

The security attending these successive visits seemed to promise 
well for the future; and the honorable reception accorded him for 
several days increased the sultan’s confidence. But, alas, in this fancied 
security he placed too much reliance on the Raed faith of the Turk, 
and therefore Shirkuh, as the minister of murder, took him unawares. 
He gave secret orders to his minions that at dawn the following day, 
when he himself went out as if to walk down to the shore, at the time 
when the sultan made his daily visit, they should fall upon the 
Egyptian and slay him. Accordingly when Shawar went to the camp 
at the usual hour to pay his accustomed visit and render the salutation 
due, the agents of death rushed upon him and carried out their 
orders.1® They threw him to the ground, stabbed him through and 
through, and cut off his head. 

His sons had witnessed the murder. They mounted their horses at 
once and galloped swiftly back to Cairo, where they prostrated them- 
selves before the caliph and on their knees begged for life. He is said 
to have answered that they might hope for life on condition that they 
would have no secret dealing with the Turks. These terms they 
immediately violated, however, by secretly sending messengers to 
treat with Shirkuh about peace. When the caliph was informed of this, 
he ordered them to be put to death by the sword. 

The king had now departed, and Shawar had been removed from 
this world. Well satisfied with the accomplishment of his desires, 
Shirkuh thereupon seized the kingdom and visited the caliph to pay 
him the reverence due. He was received with great honor and granted 
the high dignity of sultan. Thus, strong through the power of the 
sword, Shirkuh became master of all Egypt. 

O blind cupidity of men, worse than all other crimes! O wicked 
madness of an insatiable and greedy heart! From a quiet state of 

16 According to Beha ed-Din, it was Saladin who carried out these orders for the 
assassination of Shawar. The caliph is said to have requested the head of Shawar 
and, upon receiving it, sent the robes of the vizirate to Shirkuh, who made his formal 


elk on the caliph the next day, January 19, 1169 (see Beha ed-Din, The Life of 
Saladin, p. 55). 


358 STRUGGLE FOR EGYPT 


peace into what a turbulent and anxious condition has an immoderate 
desire for possessions plunged us! All the resources of Egypt and its 
immense wealth served our needs; the frontiers of our realm were 
safe on that side; there was no enemy to be feared on the south. The 
sea afforded a safe and peaceful passage to those wishing to come to 
us. Our people could enter the territories of Egypt without fear and 
carry on commerce and trade under advantageous conditions. On their 
part, the Egyptians brought to the realm foreign riches and strange 
commodities hitherto unknown to us and, as long as they visited us, 
were at once an advantage and an honor to us. Moreover, the large 
sums spent by them every year among us enriched the fiscal treasury 
and increased the private wealth of individuals. But now, on the 
contrary, all things have been changed for the worse. “How is the 
most fine gold changed” and “my harp also is turned into mourn- 
ing.” 17 Wherever I turn I find only reasons for fear and uneasiness. 
The sea refuses to give us a peaceful passage, all the regions round 
about are subject to the enemy, and the neighboring kingdoms are mak- 
ing preparations to destroy us. The cupidity of one man has brought all 
these misfortunes upon us, and his avarice, the root of all evil, has 
clouded the serenity which had been vouchsafed us from on high."® 
But let us resume the thread of our story. 

After the death of the sultan and his sons, so undeserved, of which 
we, by our unrighteous conduct, were the guilty cause, Shirkuh held 
the royal power over Egypt as he had desired. But he was not per- 
mitted to rejoice long in his elevation, for he had ruled hardly a year 
when he was removed from the affairs of this world.1® 


11. Shirkuh is succeeded by Saladin, his brothers son, who rules 
the kingdom of Egypt. 


SHIRKUH was succeeded by his nephew Saladin, the son of his brother 
Negem-ed-Din.?° The new ruler was a man of keen and vigorous 


7 Lam. 4:13; Job 30: 31. 

18 This appreciation of the importance of commerce as above politics is strangely 
modern and has often been quoted (see C. Haskins, Renaissance of the Twelfth Cen- 
tury, p. 270). These reflections were probably inserted by William when he was 
revising his work, about 1182, for the conditions described were not prevalent until 
later. 

1° Shirkuh’s death, the result of gluttony, occurred March 23, 1169, barely two 
months after he had become vizier (Beha ed-Din, Saladin, p. 56). 

20 Najm al-Din Ayyub. This family was of Kurdish, not Turkish, descent and 


STRUGGLE FOR EGYPT 359 


mind, valiant in war, and of an extremely generous disposition. It is 
said that at the very beginning of his rule, when he visited the caliph 
to pay the homage which he owed, he struck his lord to the ground 
with a club which he held in his hand and slew him. He then put all 
the caliph’s children to the sword in order that he himself might be 
subject to no higher authority but might rule as both caliph and 
sultan. For the Turks were regarded with hatred by the Egyptians, 
and Saladin feared that sometime when he had occasion to come 
before the caliph his lord might order him to be put to death. Ac- 
cordingly he took means to forestall any such intention and brought 
upon the unsuspecting caliph the fate which, if report be true, the 
latter was preparing to inflict upon him as sultan.?1 

On the death of the caliph, Saladin seized his wealth and all the 
royal treasures for himself, together with everything of value in the 
palace. He disposed of all things according to his own pleasure. To 
his soldiers in particular he gave with such lavish generosity that, 
within a few days, the wardrobes were empty and he was obliged to 
borrow money from others. Thus he incurred a heavy burden of debt. 

Some of the late caliph’s sons are said to have been secretly saved 
by loyal adherents of their father, to the end that, if at some future 
time the Egyptians should regain control of the government, an heir 
of his name, rank, and blood might not be lacking. 


12. Bernard, abbot of the monastery of Mt. Tabor, is established 
over the church at Lydda. Frederick, archbishop of Tyre, 
departs for the West to ask ad from the princes there. 


Arter the king’s return to the kingdom nothing worthy of note 
happened during the first part of that year except the death of 
Raynerus, bishop of Lydda, of happy memory, and the installation of 
Bernard, abbot of the monastery of Mt. Tabor in his place. 


hence related more nearly to the Persians. Saladin himself was called Yusuf. The 
family is commonly referred to as the Ayyubid dynasty. 

21 This account of the death of the caliph is not confirmed by other sources. It is 
possible that William is confusing Saladin’s part in the destruction of Shawar and 
his family (note 16 above) with the death of the caliph. Caliph Adid seems to have 
died a natural death, September 13, 1171. The Abbasid caliphate had been pro- 
claimed in Egypt even before his death without causing any disturbance (see G. 
Wiet, L’Egypte arabe de la conquéte arabe & la conquéte ottomane, 642-1510 de 
Dére chrétienne, p. 302). The change occurred so quietly that it may have been 
years later before William heard of it. The Fatimid caliphate ended with Caliph Adid. 


360° STRUGGLE FOR EGYPT 


The following spring, which was the beginning of the sixth year of 
King Amaury’s reign,?? the wise men of the kingdom began to realize 
that the subjugation of Egypt by the Turks had been a serious injury 
to us and that our situation had become materially worse. By sailing 
out from Egypt with his large fleet, Nureddin, our most powerful 
enemy, could effectively shut in the realm and blockade all the coast 
cities by land and sea, with his two armies. Still more to be dreaded 
was the fact that he could hinder the passage of pilgrims on their way 
to us, or even refuse them permission to pass at all. It was deemed 
imperative, therefore, that an embassy chosen from distinguished 
dignitaries of the church be sent to the princes of the West to set 
forth with the utmost care the intolerable distress under which the 
kingdom was laboring, the affliction of the Christian people, and the 
dire calamities which were threatening the brethren. To undertake 
this mission, the Patriarch Hernesius, archbishop of Caesarea, and 
William, bishop of Acre, reverend men endowed with wisdom and 
persuasive eloquence, were unanimously selected. Accordingly they 
set sail. They carried with them letters from the king and all the 
bishops: to Frederick, emperor of the Romans; Louis, king of the 
Franks; Henry, king of the English; and William, king of Sicily; 
also to the noble and illustrious counts, Philip of Flanders, Henry of 
Troyes, and Theobald II of Chartres—in fact, to all the other great 
nobles of the West. The night after their departure, however, a 
violent tempest suddenly broke forth; the ship was tossed hither and 
yon, the oars were broken, and the masts thrown down. After three 
days, the envoys returned greatly terrified; they had barely escaped 
shipwreck. Another delegation was therefore chosen and dispatched 
in place of the first. It consisted of Frederick, archbishop of Tyre, who 
had been finally prevailed upon to accept the task by the urgent en- 
treaties of the king and the nobles, and John, bishop of Banyas, 
suffragan of that same church. The two embarked under more fortu- 
nate auspices and, after a prosperous voyage, arrived at their desti- 
nation. They accomplished little, however, in the matter which had 
been entrusted to them. The bishop died at Paris, soon after reaching 

*? King Amaury returned in January, 1169. He would be completing six years 
of his reign in the following February. The following spring would mark the begin- 


ning of his seventh year, therefore. The embassy referred to in this chapter reached 


Rome in July and Paris in September, 1169 (see R. Rohricht, Geschichte des Kénig- 
reichs Jerusalem, 1100-1291, p. 344). 


STRUGGLE FOR EGYPT 361 


France, and the archbishop, after a stay of two years abroad, returned 
without having succeeded in his mission. 


13. The emperor, anxious to carry out the treaty, sends a fleet 
to Syria under command of some of his nobles. 


THAT summer passed uneventfully without any occurrence worthy of 
note. At the beginning of the following autumn, the emperor, mind- 
ful of his agreement, sent the promised fleet in fulfillment of the 
treaty which he had made with the king at our suggestion and desire. 
In this matter he is highly to be commended, for with imperial mag- 
nificence he interpreted the treaty very liberally and more than 
carried out his promises. There were in this naval force one hundred 
and fifty ships of war equipped with beaks and a double tier of oars. 
These vessels were known as galleys and were especially designed for 
use in war. There were in addition sixty larger boats, well-armored, 
which were built to carry horses. They were fitted with large openings 
in the stern for greater convenience in loading and unloading the 
animals, and they also had bridges by means of which both men and 
horses might be more easily embarked and landed. The fleet included 
also ten or twenty vessels of huge size called dromones, which were 
loaded to capacity with commissary supplies of all kinds. These latter 
also carried arms of many kinds and, in addition, engines and 
machines of war. 

The emperor placed in command of the entire fleet Megalducas,”8 
one of his nobles and a kinsman of his own. Accompanying him was 
another noble called Maurice, who stood very high in the confidence 
of his imperial master. On the experience of this man the emperor 
relied greatly, as was later shown when he put Maurice in charge of 
all the affairs of the empire. Associated with these two in the com- 
mand was Count Alexander of Conversana, a nobleman of Apulia. 
The emperor regarded him with sincere affection because of the deep 
and loyal devotion displayed by the count toward himself. 

To these three nobles was committed the command of the imperial 

23 This was Alexius Contostephanus, whose title, grand duke, William has used. 
The other two commanders were Alexander of Gravina, or Conversana, who had 
been a member of the embassy from Manuel in 1168, and Theodore Maurozumes 
whom William here calls Maurice. The fleet, after a review by Manuel, left the 


neighborhood of Constantinople shortly after July 10, 1169 (see Chalandon, Les 
Comnéne, Il, 538). 


362 STRUGGLE FOR EGYPT 


army when it was sent into our part of the Orient. About the end of 
September after a prosperous voyage, the fleet entered the harbor 
of Tyre. Thence it proceeded to Acre, where it lay at anchor ina quiet 
roadstead between the river and the port. 


14. The king goes down into Egypt with his army. The Greeks 


accompany him with both land and sea forces. 


In the year of the Lord 1169, the sixty-eighth of the liberation of 
the city and the sixth of King Amaury’s reign,”* the king, having set 
the affairs of the realm in order and left a force of knights to protect 
the realm during his absence from the wiles and inroads of Nureddin, 
who was still hovering in the vicinity of Damascus, ordered the entire 
host both Latin and Greek to assemble on October 15 at Ascalon. The 
fleet had sailed from the port of Acre several days before, bound for 
the land of Egypt. 

The army marched forth from Ascalon on August 16.°° In order 
that the infantry forces might not be unduly wearied, they advanced 
by easy stages and made frequent use of stopping places where there 
was no lack of water. On the ninth day the ancient city of Farama was 
reached. They wished to follow the shore road, but a recent occur- 
rence made it necessary to take the longer inland route. For some of 
the dykes between the plain and the neighboring sea had been broken 
down by the constant lashing of the waves, and the waters had forced 
a passage through the opposing barriers. Now unchecked, they over- 
flowed the road into the plain beyond, where they formed a pond 
which, although narrow at first, broadened out within the field into a 
_much wider expanse. This influx of the sea brought in with it such a 
quantity of fish that thenceforth a supply of that kind of food in 
abundance never dreamed of before was afforded not only to the 
cities in the vicinity but even to places more remote. Since the sea 
had inundated the country along the coast, travellers who had in- 
tended to go to Egypt by the shore route were obliged to make a 
detour of ten miles or even more around this pond before.they could 
return to the road. 

These details have been given because of the novelty of this marvel- 


24 Here again William is confused in the application of his formulae for the equation 
of the Christian era with the era of Latin Jerusalem and the statement of the regnal 
year. The date should read “1169, the seventieth year of the liberation of the city 
and the seventh of King Amaury’s reign.” 


25 This is evidently a slip of the pen, for October 16 is clearly intended. 


STRUGGLE FOR EGYPT 363 


lous occurrence and also because, by the constant inflow of the sea, this 
desert region, which was formerly exposed to the intense heat of the 
sun, was now covered with water and frequented by boatmen. This 
region, now become very productive, was Alled with the nets of fisher- 
men and yielded a harvest heretofore unknown. 

The city of Farama, referred to above, is now uninhabited, but it 
was once the home of a large population. It is situated on the border 
of the desert near Carabes, the first arm of the Nile, at the point 
where that branch of the river flows into the sea. It lies, therefore, 
between the river, the sea, and the desert; yet it is three miles distant 
from the mouth of the Nile. 

When our army reached Farama, they found that the fleet had 
already arrived. The necessary oarsmen were immediately provided, 
and the entire army was ferried across to the opposite shore. Then, 
leaving on the left Tanis, formerly a noble city but now merely a 
small town, the army proceeded for about twenty miles along a road 
between a marsh and the shore and finally, after a march of two days, 
arrived at Damietta. - 


15. The king blockades Damietta. In the siege of that city both 


the Greek and Latin armies exert themselves without result. 


Damietta is one of the oldest and most famous cities of Egypt. It 
lies on the bank of the Nile nearer us at the point where the river 
flows into the sea through its second mouth. It is conveniently placed 
between the river and the sea, from which it is about a mile away. 
Our land army reached Damietta on October 27 and encamped be- 
tween the city and the sea to await the arrival of the fleet, which was 
detained by rough seas and adverse winds. After three days the tu- 
mult of the waves subsided, and the fleet, taking advantage of favor- 
ing winds, entered the river and anchored in a quiet harbor along the 
shore midway between the city and the sea. 

On the opposite bank a high tower, well garrisoned by a company 
of armed men sufficient to afford it complete protection, stood out 
boldly by itself. From this tower to the city was stretched an iron 
chain which completely barred the passage to the upper part of the 
river and proved a great hindrance to our forces. All ships coming 
from above, however, from Cairo and Babilyun, could pass to them 
freely without hindrance. 


364 STRUGGLE FOR EGYPT 


When the fleet had been stationed in position, the troops passed on 
through the orchards which lay between their place of encampment 
and the city itself and set up their tents quite near Damietta, where 
the approach to the walls was unhindered. They deferred making the 
attack until three days had elapsed, however, and thereby learned by 
experience the truth of the saying, “When all is ready it is dangerous 
to delay.” °° For from the upper parts of Egypt came a host of 
Turks, infinite in number, and ships loaded with armed men. Thus 
our army was obliged to look helplessly on while the city which 
earlier had been practically empty was filled to overflowing. It soon 
became apparent that without the assistance of machines and engines 
of war Damietta could not be taken, although on the arrival of the 
Christians it had seemed scarcely able to sustain the first attack. 

Workmen were accordingly chosen and suitable material provided. 
Then, at the cost of much expense and labor, a lofty tower of seven 
stories was built, from the top of which the entire city could be sur- 
veyed, Other machines of various kinds were also constructed. Some 
of these were designed to hurl huge rocks for battering down the 
walls, others, to protect the sappers who, enclosed within them as 
within hidden caverns, could approach the fortifications and, by con- 
structing subterranean tunnels beneath them, cause the walls, thus 
deprived of support, to topple over. 

Meanwhile, the approaches to the city had been levelled in such a 
manner that the engines which had now been built could be applied 
to the walls. The fighters in the movable tower kept up a continual 
pressure upon the besieged. Without intermission, they hurled forth 
showers of arrows and stone missiles together with such other weapons 
as their fury and the confined space furnished. At the same time the 
men stationed at the hurling engines sent forth volleys of huge rocks 
and made zealous efforts to demolish the walls and the houses 
attached to them. 

On perceiving these attempts, the townsfolk endeavored to circum- 
vent ruse by ruse. In order to combat our efforts with equal cunning, 
they erected a high tower opposite ours and manned it with armed 
men who were to resist our efforts from a similar machine and re- 
spond to our attacks with others of equal fury. Accordingly, they 
stationed their engines over against our apparatus and put forth every 


26 Lucan Pharsal. 1. 281. 


STRUGGLE FOR EGYPT 365 


effort to demolish it. The need of defending themselves developed 
skill, and the emergency lent them strength. Those who as to this 
time had felt unequal to resistance now, spurred on by necessity, in- 
vented schemes hitherto unthought of, and the minds a even the 
dullest became alert in devising means to secure their own safety. 
They learned by dire experience the truth of the saying, “Adversity 
develops shrewdness.”? 77 

But at the very time when the Christians should have pressed on 
the siege more fercely than ever, they began to show signs of coward- 
ice and: indifference. This change of morale has been attributed by some 
to treachery and by others to mere carelessness and neglect. It soon 
became evident that our tr oops Were showing less facility and sagacity 
than usual or, at all events, that those in command were acting with 
treacherous intent. They ordered that one of the newly built towers 
be apphed to the walls in a steep and almost impreenable place: 
There were in that same part of the aty many places where the wall 
was lower and far less strong, where it would have been more easily 
taken, vet the movable tower was set up at the strongest and best 
fortihed point, at a place which presented more ditheulties than any 
other for applying the machines. Moreover, from that position the 
damage would be indicted not upen the townspeople or their build- 
ings but only upon the church of the Holy Mother of God, which was 
situated close to the walls. 

There can be no doubt that the delay in attacking Damietta im- 
mediately after our arrival there proceeded from evil intent. At that 
time the aty was practically deserted, occupied only by its own citi- 
zens, Who were weak and peaceable people, utterly ignorant of the 
art of war. If the Christians had attacked the city boldly at once, as 
they should have done, it could have been taken at the first assault. 
But the besie eged were allowed a respite, and during that time their 
number was greatly increased by reinforcements of bray. e and gallant 
fighters. The result was that they were able to withstand our attacks, 
not only within the city itself, but even on the held outside. 


=" Ovid Met vi. sts. 


366 STRUGGLE FOR EGYPT 


16. A famine breaks out in the camp. Our fleet barely escapes 
destruction by fire. All our efforts prove vain and the siege 


as finally raised. 


Ar this juncture, another misfortune was added to the troubles of 
the Christians. The Greeks who had come in large numbers in the 
fleet now began to suffer from a shortage of provisions. Their bread 
supply had entirely given out, and, in fact, no food of any description 
was to be found among them. It happened that a grove of palm trees 
near the camp was being cut down for use in various ways. As the 
trees fell, the starving Greeks eagerly sought a tender morsel which 
grows at the top where the branches spring forth.and which supplies 
them with sap. Being edible, this furnished a kind of food, albeit 
poor, which assuaged the pangs of hunger. The famished condition 
of these people rendered them skilful in seeking food, and the crav- 
ings of a ravenous stomach developed their ingenuity in providing 
for its needs. For some days they managed to eke out a miserable 
existence with this food. Others of their number, not wholly destitute, 
satisfied the demands of hunger with oats, raisins, and chestnuts. The 
Christians had a sufficient supply of bread and other provisions of 
various kinds, but, mindful of the future, they were sparing of their 
small stock. For if they were improvident enough to share supplies 
with those who had none, there was danger that they themselves 
might sometime be in want. Moreover, they were uncertain how 
lengthy a stay was to be made at Damietta and suspected that it would 
be of long duration. 

A great deal of rain fell at this time, and the storms were so 
violent that the poorer people were unable by any device to keep the 
water from dripping through their tents. Nor were the rich in much 
better condition, for their pavilions were drenched by the downpour 
or rather cloudbursts from the sky. Only by digging ditches around 
the tents to carry off the floods of water could they obtain even a 
slight protection. 

Another serious calamity now fell upon them. The galleys and 
other vessels of various kinds had been brought into the river from 
the sea and stationed near the city in a position apparently quite safe. 
The townspeople, however, observing that the wind was from the 
south and that the waves of the Nile were rolling in with great 


STRUGGLE FOR EGYPT 367 


violence, seized the opportunity to carry into effect a plan already 
conceived. They took a boat of ordinary. size, filled it to capacity with 
dry wood, pitch, and whatever inflammable materials would nourish 
flames and set it on fire. It was then launched on the river, where the 
waves of their own volition carried it against our fleet. Fanned by the 
south wind, the flame spread rapidly to the fuel with which the boat 
was loaded. The blazing craft sailed down upon the fleet, where it 
was caught among our closely massed vessels and held fast. In this 
manner the flaming cargo was conveyed to our vessels, and six of the 
beaked ships called galleys were burned to ashes. As the violence of 
the flames increased, the entire fleet would have been enveloped in its 
fury, had it not been for the vigilance of the king. He discovered the 
fire, and without waiting even to put on his shoes, he quickly mounted 
his horse and roused the sailors. With frantic shouts and gestures, 
he called on them to stop the flames. This they succeeded in doing 
by separating the vessels from one another, and thus the fury of the 
all-pervading flames was quelled. Any ship which chanced to catch 
fire from the sparks. and other inflammable materials borne by the 
wind was at once rescued by the application of water, thanks to the 
river so close at hand. 

Assaults on the city were made at intervals of several days, but, as 
usually happens when the outcome of battle is uncertain, victory fell 
now to the Christians and again to the infidels. It was generally the 
Christians who challenged to combat, for the enemy, unless provoked, 
rarely offered battle. Occasionally, however, the besieged, inspired by 
some feeling of confidence, emerged from a postern gate opposite the 
camp of the Greeks and made unexpected attacks upon that part of 
the army. Possibly they had heard that the Greek forces were less 
strong than ours, or rumor may have carried the news that they were 
in dire extremity through hunger and so less able to withstand attack. 
In spite of this handicap, however, whenever opportunity offered the 
commander Megalducas and all the other Greeks fought gallantly 
and boldly in battle array. Encouraged by the example of their 
superiors, those of lower rank again and again attacked with unusual 
vigor and stood their ground with intrepidity. 

The strength of the besieged, however, was continually increased 
by large detachments which were ever arriving both by land and by 
sea. As a result of this, the citizens, although confined within a city 


368 STRUGGLE FOR EGYPT 


under siege, were a source of greater terror to their opponents than 
were the Christians to them. 

Murmurs now began to creep among the people, and the feeling 
was almost unanimous that our toil was being wasted. It was the 
general opinion that the expedition had been undertaken against the 
will of the Lord and that, therefore, His face was turned from us in 
anger; far wiser would it be to return home than to languish away 
in Egypt by famine or to perish by the sword of the infidel. Accord- 
ingly, a treaty with certain secret stipulations was concluded through 
the combined efforts of some of our leaders and certain Turkish sa- 
traps, notably through the energetic work of a chief named Jevelino. 
The Greeks agreed to the same compromise, and presently peace was 
proclaimed by the voice of the herald.”8 


17. The expedition is recalled, and the king returns to lus own 
land. On the homeward voyage, almost the entire Greek 
fleet is lost by reason of unfavorable winds. 


THEN the townspeople and the allies who had come to their assistance 
went out freely to visit our camp, and those of our soldiers who 
wished to do so were likewise permitted to pass back and forth be- 
tween the city and the camp without hindrance. Now at length both 
sides could freely trade with each other, for permission was given to 
all to buy, sell, or exchange as they desired. For the space of three 
days, therefore, the Christians used the market place in common with 
the infidels and made all their preparations for the march. They then 
tore down the engines of war and burned them, after which the land 
army followed the king back into Syria. By forced marches they re- 
traced their steps over the route by which they had come and, on 
December 21, arrived at Ascalon. Because of the approaching feast 


*8 The Greek historians have much to say about this expedition, and, needless to 
add, they place the blame on the Latins. William, despite the mention of charges 
against the Greeks, really affords the Greek historians much support. The Latins were 
evidently divided in sentiment, many of them being none too anxious to divide Egypt 
with the Greeks. Such must have been the meaning of the embassy to seck aid in the 
West in 1169, though they already had an alliance for the purpose with Manuel. 
Such too had been the meaning of Amaury’s hasty expedition to Egypt in 1168, 
though his own envoy was at that very moment returning from Manuel’s court with 
the signed treaty. It would seem that there is much to support Chalandon’s conten- 
tions (Chalandon, Les Comnéne, II, 546). The name of the Turkish leader who 
negotiated the treaty is given by Chalandon as “Djawali.” 


STRUGGLE FOR EGYPT 369 


day, the king hastened on to Acre, which he reached on the eve of the 
Lord’s Nativity. 

Those who had come by ship, however, set sail under evil omens 
and unlucky auspices. Scarcely had they started on the voyage when 
suddenly a severe storm arose. The inevitable perils of the sea were 
experienced, for the boats were shattered by the waves and cast upon 
the shore. Nearly all were wrecked. Of the great fleet which had 
come to us, only a few ships, some large and some small, remained 
uninjured and were able to return under their own power. 

Although the emperor’s envoys had shown all possible diligence in 
their efforts to complete the task entrusted to them, yet they were 
obliged to return unsuccessful and sad of heart, appalled by the ad- 
versity of fate. For they feared that his imperial majesty might charge 
to them, beyond their deserts, the disastrous outcome of the campaign. 
Although this result was wholly due to inevitable chance, yet it was 
possible that he in his anger might unjustly ascribe it to their negli- 
gence or mishandling. 

I recall that after my return, I made earnest and careful inquiry 
of the king and some of the important men of the realm why it was 
that so large an expedition under the direction of such distinguished 
princes had resulted so disastrously. My attention during that year 
had been occupied with my own personal affairs, for to escape the un- 
just enmity of my archbishop I went to Rome.*® On my return, I 
endeavored to investigate the true inwardness of the matter. By lis- 
tening to many widely differing accounts, I sought to discover the 
actual truth, for the results of the expedition were reported to have 
been far other than we had hoped. I used great care in this matter, for I 
had already conceived the idea of writing a history of these events. 
I found that the Greeks had not been without blame in the matter. 
The emperor had faithfully promised to send suthcient money to 
support the great army, but in that respect his promises proved un- 


29 William offers no further explanation of his dithculties with his archbishop. 
It would be reasonable to conjecture that Amaury had insisted upon a generous in- 
come for William as archdeacon and historiographer beyond the usual income of 
the office. There may have been other causes also. At any rate William was absent 
from the kingdom during most of the year 1169 and had to obtain his information 
about the campaign after his return and that of the army, sometime after Christmas 
day, 1169. His statement that he had already conceived the idea of writing a history 
tends to confirm the implication that this decision was reached in 1167. He was 
collecting notes at this time. 


370 STRUGGLE FOR EGYPT 


reliable. From the moment when his archons went into Egypt, where 
they should have been able to provide for the needs of others from 
the imperial bounty, they themselves began to experience the pres- 
sure of need and had to seek money to provide food as well as pay- 
ment even for their own legions, and no man gave it unto them. 


18. A great earthquake shakes practically the entire East. An- 
cient cities are destroyed. 


In June of the following summer, that is in the seventh year of 
King Amaury,®° a great and terrible earthquake, far more violent 
than any other within the memory of men now living, occurred in the 
Orient. Strongly fortified cities dating from very early times were 
completely demolished. The inhabitants, caught in the ruins of their 
homes, were crushed to death, and only a very few survived. Not a 
spot within the entire country was left untouched by loss of property 
and domestic tragedy. Everywhere were signs of sorrow, everywhere 
obsequies for the dead. The largest cities of our provinces and those 
of Syria and Phoenicia as well, cities famous throughout the ages for 
their noble antiquity, were prostrated. In Coelesyria, Antioch, the 
metropolis of several provinces and once the head of many kingdoms, 
was utterly overwhelmed and its entire population destroyed. The 
massive walls and the immensely strong towers along their circuit fell 
in ruins. Churches and buildings of every kind were thrown down 
with such violence that even now, although much labor and expense 
have been devoted to their restoration, they are only partially re- 
paired. Among other places destroyed in that same province were 
Jabala and Laodicea, famous cities on the coast. Of the cities farther 
inland which were still held by the enemy, there were destroyed 
Beroea, also known as Aleppo, Shayzar, Hama, Hims, and others. 
The number of fortresses wrecked was beyond counting. 

In Phoenicia, on June 29, about the first hour of the day, the great 
and populous city of Tripoli was suddenly shaken by a violent earth- 
quake, and scarcely a person within its walls escaped. The entire city 
was reduced to a heap of stones and became the burial place and com- 
mon sepulchre of the citizens who perished with it. At Tyre, the 
most famous city of this province, the earth movement was so violent 
that several massive towers were overthrown. There was, however, 


3° June, 1170, was in the eighth year of Amaury’s reign. 


STRUGGLE FOR EGYPT 371 


no loss of life here. Both in our territories and in those of the enemy 
were found half-ruined fortresses, open on every side and freely ex- 
posed to the violence and wiles of the foe. But since each man feared 
that the wrath of the Stern Judge might descend upon him individ- 
ually, none dared molest his fellow man. Each was engrossed in his 
own troubles and weighed down by the burden of his own affairs; 
hence none thought of injuring his neighbor. 

Peace, brought about by the desire of all, ensued, albeit for a short 
interval, and a truce was arranged through fear of the divine wrath. 
Each, while momentarily expecting the outpouring of righteous anger 
from heaven in punishment for his sins, refrained from acts of hos- 
tility and curbed his own evil impulses. 

Nor was this revelation of the anger of God a momentary thing, as 
often happens. For three or four months, indeed even longer, that 
awful tremor was felt both by night and by day, three or four times 
repeated, or more. Every movement was now a source of terror, and 
nowhere was safe rest to be found. Even during sleep the subcon- 
scious mind, terrified by the image of that which had frightened it 
while awake, caused the sleeper to start up with a leap into conscious- 
ness again.*+ 

Through the merciful providence of an all-protecting God, the 


upper portions of our province, that is, of Palestine, were spared these 
evils. 


19. Saladin invades our land and lays siege to the fortress of 
Daron. 


In December of this same year, that is the seventh year of King 
Amaury’s reign,?? a persistent rumor spread among the people to the 
effect that Saladin was about to invade our land. From many sources 
it was reported that he had already assembled forces from all parts 
of Egypt and from the land of Damascus as well, that he had en- 
larged his numbers greatly by levying men from both the middle 
and lower classes and was planning to advance against Palestine to 
lay waste the land. As soon as this news reached the king, he at once 
repaired to the land of Ascalon. There he learned definitely from 

31 The vividness of this description reflects William’s own personal experience and 


implies that he was in Tyre when the earthquake occurred. 
32 December, 1170, was in the eighth year of the reign. 


372 STRUGGLE FOR EGYPT 


reliable information received from his own people that this great and 
powerful prince with an immense army, stronger than ever before, 
had for two days been besieging the fortress of Daron. During that 
time he had given the besieged no rest and had done them great in- 
jury. Those in the fortress had been showered with arrows so con- 
tinually that nearly all were wounded and only a few were still able 
to take arms for the defense of the place. The wall had been under- 
mined and laid open by force. Saladin was already in possession of a 
part of the place, and the townspeople had perforce taken refuge in 
the citadel which seemed to be the most strongly fortified part. The 
enemy had forced an entrance into the lower part of one of the tow- 
ers and had burned the entrance, but the besieged were still defending 
the upper part. This was the report which was brought to the king, 
and it proved to be true. 

The commander and protector of the fortress Daron was the noble 
Anselm de Pass, a religious and God-fearing man, a valiant warrior. 
If he had happened to be away on the day when the assault occurred, 
the place would unquestionably have fallen into the enemy’s hands. 

The news of this critical situation filled the king’s heart with grief 
and fury. He immediately assembled cavalry and infantry forces 
from all directions as well as the brief space of time and the close 
proximity of the enemy permitted and, on the eighteenth day of this 
same month, left Ascalon and hastened to Gaza. He was accompanied 
by the lord patriarch, who carried the revered and precious Life- 
giving Cross, and also by the two venerable men, Ralph, bishop of 
Bethlehem, the royal chancellor, and Bernard, bishop of Lydda. A 
few other nobles of the realm also accompanied him. The forces on 
being numbered were found to consist of two hundred and fifty 
knights and about two thousand infantry. 

At Gaza the troops passed a sleepless night, dragging out the weary 
hours oppressed by the weight of deep anxiety. About sunrise the 
next morning they started out from Gaza. The brothers of the 
Knights Templars who had come thither to protect the place joined 
forces with them, and together they proceeded to the fortress of 
Daron. 

This fortress, I believe, was situated in Idumea, that is Edom, be- 
yond the stream called the river of Egypt, which marks the boundary 
between Palestine and the region just named. A few years before this 


STRUGGLE FOR EGYPT 373 


time, King Amaury had built this fortress on a slightly elevated site 
above the ancient ruins, some traces of which still remain. A tradition 
received from the ancient inhabitants of these parts states that in 
earlier days there was a Greek monastery in this place. The present 
name, Daron, that is, the house of the Greeks, is reminiscent of that 
Pack 

As has been said, the king had caused to be built on this site a 
fortress of moderate dimensions, covering scarcely more than a stone’s 
throw of ground. It was square in form and at each corner was a 
tower, one of which was more massive and better fortified than the 
rest. There was neither moat nor barbican. 

Daron les about five miles from the sea and four miles from Gaza. 
Here a few cultivators of the fields near by had united with some 
traders and formed a little settlement. They built a village and a 
church not far from the castle and took up their abode there. It was 
a pleasant spot where conditions of life for people of the lower ranks 
were better than in cities.*3 

The king had built this stronghold with a view to extending his 
boundaries; he also had in mind the fact that from this place he could 
more easily collect the full revenues due annually from those dwell- 
ing in the surrounding villages which our people call casalia. A fixed 
toll could also be levied on those travelling past on the road. 


20. The king hastens thither with a small company of knights. 
Many of our people are slain by the foe, both in the city of 
Gaza and while on the march. 


Our army accordingly set out from Gaza and, while halting on a 
slight elevation along the line of march, caught sight of the enemy’s 
camp. Terrified by the vast numbers, they began to crowd together 
more than usual, with the result that the very density of their ranks 
almost prevented any further advance. The infidels at once charged 
and tried to force them apart, but the Christians, by divine help, 
massed themselves even more closely together and withstood the 
enemy’s attack. Then at a quickened pace they marched on to their 
destination, where the entire army halted and set up tents. The lord 
patriarch repaired to the citadel, but all the rest camped outside, 


33 Such sympathetic concern for the lot of peasants and lesser folk was not common 
in the court literature of the twelfth century. 


374 STRUGGLE FOR EGYPT 


close to the outlying village. It was then about the sixth hour of the 
day. During the course of that day many single combats occurred 
and also some engagements in which entire companies took part. Our 
men displayed great courage, both in attacking and resisting. As night 
was now drawing on apace, Saladin drew up his lines in marching 
formation and led them toward Gaza. That night he rested near the 
river and in the morning marched on to Gaza and halted before the 
city. 

The very ancient city of Gaza was once a famous metropolis of 
the Philistines. It is frequently mentioned in both ecclesiastical and 
secular histories, and the many noble buildings still remaining give 
evidence of its ancient splendor. For a long time it had lain desolate 
without a single inhabitant. Finally, before the capture of Ascalon, 
Baldwin III, of illustrious memory, the fourth king of Jerusalem, 
gathered the strength and resources of the realm and built on one 
part of the hill a fairly well fortified stronghold.** On the completion 
of the place he gave it to the brethren of the Temple to be held by 
them in perpetual right. The fortress, however, did not occupy the 
entire hill upon which, as has been said, the city was built. But, in 
order to provide for their own security, the people who had come 
there to live tried to protect the rest of the hill with a wall and gates. 
This wall was, however, rather low and far from strong. 

When news of the enemy’s approach reached the dwellers on the 
hill, they decided to take refuge in the fortress with their wives and 
children and to abandon the remaining undefended part of the city 
to the enemy. For they were tillers of the soil, unarmed men, wholly 
unfamiliar with things pertaining to war. Milon de Plancy, however, 
one of the great nobles of the kingdom but a wicked man, desired to 
encourage them to resist. He therefore refused them admission and 
bade them defend that weaker section of the city. 

It happened that there was at Gaza a company of sixty-five light- 
armed youths, valiant fighters, natives of a town called Mahumaria, 
near Jerusalem.**® They had arrived that very night at Gaza on their 
way to join the army and by Milon’s order had been assigned to the 
gate of the outer city. Here they were fighting valiantly for their 


34 See Book XVII, chap. 12. 
3° Identified as modern al-Bira, on the main road north from Jerusalem, and is 
called “La Grande Mahomerie” on the Crusaders’ Map of Palestine. 


STRUGGLE FOR EGYPT 375 


country and for liberty, bravely resisting the enemy’s attempts to 
force an entrance by the sword. Suddenly the infidels broke into the 
place from another direction between the citadel and the gate just 
mentioned. They made a sudden attack from the rear on the little 
band which was still stoutly defending the gate and completely sur- 
rounded them. Thus taken by surprise, the latter were unable to re- 
sist longer and perished by the sword. Although many of these val- 
lant youths were slain and still more wounded, yet the enemy did not 
retire from this encounter unscathed, for theirs was a bloody victory. 

The townspeople now made another attempt to enter the citadel, 
but, although the Turks were already inside the walls and were caus- 
ing terrible and indiscriminate massacre everywhere, they were not 
permitted to enter, nor had they any other way of escape. The Turks 
at once rushed in and took possession of the city. Neither age nor sex 
was spared, even suckling babes were dashed against the stones, yet 
the boundless fury of the invaders seemed incapable of satiety. The 
refugees in the tower, nevertheless, kept them at a distance by con- 
tinually hurling down stone missiles and other weapons, and thus, 
by the help of God, the stronghold remained intact. 

After taking the city and murdering the inhabitants, the enemy 
marched back to Daron as if they were holding the palm of victory. 
While on the way thither, they came upon about fifty of our infantry 
forces who were hastening to the army without observing proper 
precaution. These they killed to a man, although the Christians put 
up a valiant fight with their swords in a desperate attempt to save 
themselves. 


21. Saladin returns to his own land. The king returns to Ascalon 
after visiting Daron, now partly in ruins. That same year 
Thomas, archbishop of Canterbury, a glorious martyr in 
Christ, is murdered in his own church, 


Tue Turks now drew up their ranks in battle array according to mili- 
tary rule and divided their forces into forty-two divisions. Of these 
twenty were ordered to proceed by the shore route between Daron and 
the sea. The rest were to follow the road inland until the fortress was 
passed, when all the troops were again to unite into one body. 
Perceiving that the enemy was returning in battle array, the Chris- 
tians also prepared for the conflict. Their numbers were few, yet 


376 STRUGGLE FOR EGYPT 


their trust was in the mercy of God. After first invoking aid from on 
high, they made ready for the encounter, and the Lord gave them 
strength and firm courage. Nothing seemed more certain than that 
the Turks had returned to fight with them. Far different, however, 
was the intention of the latter; they turned neither to the mght nor 
to the left, but made all haste back to Egypt. 

Reliable messengers now brought word that the foe had departed 
without intention of returning. Thereupon, led by the Lord, the king 
also went back to Ascalon with his army. He left behind at Daron a 
force of men to rebuild the half-ruined fortress, which after its recon- 
struction was to be more substantially fortified and carefully guarded. 
Those who had witnessed many campaigns in the kingdom said that 
at no time within their knowledge had so great a host of Turks as- 
sembled. According to report, the number of knights alone was about 
forty thousand.%° 

About this same time, on December 29, there was selebiated at the 
noble and famous city of Canterbury in England, the passion of the 
glorious martyr, St. Thomas, archbishop of that city.27 He was a 
native of London and under Theobald, of blessed memory, arch- 
bishop of Canterbury, he became archdeacon of that church. He was 
later called by Henry II, king of England, to share in the responsi- 
bility of the realm and as chancellor was a faithful, wise, and able ad- 
ministrator of the entire kingdom. After the death of the blessed 
Father Theobald, Thomas was called, at the king’s command, to the 
church at Canterbury, as the reward of his services. With fearless 
vigor he fought for the rights of the church against wickedness and 
tyranny and, as a result, was compelled to flee to France to avoid the 
persecution of King Henry. There for seven years he endured exile 
with notable patience worthy of high praise. On his return from this 
enforced absence, while awaiting the peace that had been promised 
him, he was slain by the swords of wicked men in the very church 
over which, by the will of God, he had presided. While in the act of 
praying for his persecutors, he was ignominiously struck down and, 
crowned with his own blood, received the glorious fate of martyrdom. 
Through him, in that same church and indeed throughout the whole 


36 Meaning a very large number, as it doubtless was, but not to be taken literally. 

37 Thomas a Becket, archbishop of Canterbury, was murdered December 25, 1170. 
This brief sketch of his life and death is substantially correct. His canonization was 
proclaimed by Pope Alexander III, probably at the beginning of Lent, 1173. 


STRUGGLE FOR EGYPT 377 


province, the holy and merciful Lord has deigned to work so many 
miracles almost daily that the times of the apostles seem verily to 
have returned. 


22. The king visits Constantinople attended by some of his 
nobles. The emperor showers many honors upon him. 


In the following year, which was the seventh of Amaury’s reign,*® 
the king summoned all his nobles to him and laid before them the 
needs of the realm. For he perceived that the kingdom was weighed 
down by many troubles, that the enemies of the Christian faith were 
constantly increasing not only in number and valor but in power and 
riches as well. On the other hand, our realm was completely without 
wise and discreet leaders. The younger generation which was taking 
the places of their elders were growing up in wickedness; without 
purpose or result they were occupying the places of illustrious men 
and squandering in disgraceful ways the inheritance received from 
their fathers. As a result, the realm had deteriorated so greatly that 
its weakness was apparent even to the dullest. The king therefore 
requested the advice of his nobles as to how these evil conditions 
could be remedied and the kingdom saved. After consulting together, 
they responded almost with unanimity, “It is because of our sins that 
the realm has fallen into such a desperate condition that it can 
neither attack its enemies nor sustain their onslaughts.” They ad- 
vised that aid from the princes of the West should be implored to 
combat these troubles; they had no other plan of relief to suggest. 
Accordingly, with the common consent of all, it was resolved that 
a delegation consisting of men of high rank be sent to explain the 
difhculties of the kingdom to the princes of the West and to ask their 
aid. The envoys were instructed to visit the pope and those illustrious 
lords, the emperor of the Romans, the kings of France, England, 
Sicily, and the Spains, and also other distinguished dukes and counts 
and implore their assistance in combatting the imminent perils now 
threatening the kingdom. It was further resolved that the precarious 
situation of the realm be made known to the emperor of’ Constanti- 
nople. Since he was much nearer to us and was besides far richer than 
the others, he could more easily furnish the desired aid. It was speci- 
fied also that the envoy sent to the emperor should be a person so 


88 1171 should be the ninth, not seventh, year of his reign. 
7 ) ry & 


378 STRUGGLE FOR EGYPT 


gifted with wisdom, eloquence, and authority that by his tact and 
ability he might incline the mind of that great prince to comply with 
our wishes. 

While they were deliberating over the selection of a suitable person 
to undertake this important mission, the king had been consulting 
with some of his more intimate counsellors. He now laid before the 
assembly a plan which he had conceived. He declared that a mission 
of such importance could be undertaken by no one but himself and 
added that he was prepared to undergo all perils and hardships to re- 
lieve the desperate necessity of the kingdom. The great nobles of the 
realm, though filled with admiration, were almost overcome by this 
proposal and protested that the task was too arduous; moreover, 
without the presence of the king the realm would be desolate. Amaury 
answered, however, “Let the Lord, whose minister I am, rule the 
kingdom; as for me I am determined to go; no one can induce me 
to recall that decision.” 

Accordingly, on March 10, attended by a great retinue as befitted 
the royal majesty, he set out on the journey with an escort of ten 
galleys. In his train were William, bishop of Acre, and the following 
nobles of the realm: Guarmond of Tiberias, John of Arsuf, Gerard 
de Pougy, the royal marshal, Rohard, the governor of Jerusalem, 
and Renaud de Nephins. Philip of Nablus, who had already resigned 
his office as master of the Knights Templars, had been sent on ahead 
by land. Since the favor of the Lord was with him, the king enjoyed 
a prosperous voyage and reached in safety the straits of Abydos and 
the mouth of the Bosphorus, which in common parlance is known as 
the arm of St. George. 

The lord emperor, a wise and discreet prince of great magnificence, 
worthy of praise in every respect, learned with surprise that, con- 
trary to custom, a mighty prince, the ruler of a great and famous 
kingdom beloved of God, was about to visit his empire. His first 
thought was of wonder as to the motive for so unusual and difficult 
a journey. Then, reflecting how greatly such an incomparable favor 
thus freely bestowed upon him from on high would redound to his 
own glory and honor, he was filled with exultation. Nowhere in the 
annals of his empire was such an unusual event recorded, never be- 
fore had a king of Jerusalem, the defender and advocate of the vener- 
able places of the Lord’s passion and resurrection, visited his imperial 


STRUGGLE FOR EGYPT 3/9 


predecessors. He determined to anticipate the king’s arrival and to 
show him great honor. Accordingly he summoned John the protose- 
bastos his nephew, one of the most illustrious nobles of the sacred 
palace, whose daughter King Amaury had married, and sent him to 
meet the royal visitor. He instructed the protosebastos to see to it 
that in all the cities and places through which the king passed great 
honor should be shown him, in accordance with the long-established 
custom of the empire and the incomparable magnificence pertaining 
thereto. Furthermore, he was to advise the king, as a son, to await 
the coming of the imperial representatives who would escort him 
into the royal city. 

In obedience to the emperor’s command, this magnificent prince 
with a noble retinue met the king at Gallipolis, a city on the Bos- 
phorus, not far from the straits of Abydos. Since the wind was not 
in the right direction at the time to waft the ship on to the imperial 
city, the king disembarked here from the galley and with the mem- 
bers of his personal suite proceeded on horseback to Heraclea, a city 
on the same coast. There, in the harbor, he found the fleet. It had 
taken advantage of a favorable change of wind and arrived before 
him. Accordingly he again embarked and after a prosperous sail ar- 
rived at Constantinople. 


23. The king is introduced into the presence of the emperor, who 
receives him with marked honor. Frequent colloques take 
place between them over matters of serious importance. 


In this city, on the shore of the sea facing east is the imperial resi- 
dence known as the palace of Constantine. The approach leading up 
to it from the sea has a marvellous pavement of magnificent mar- 
ble; marble steps descend to the water’s edge, and statues of lions 
and columns, also of marble, adorn the place with royal splendor. 
This entrance was ordinarily reserved for the use of the emperor 
alone when he wished to ascend to the upper part of the palace, but 
contrary to the usual custom, as a mark of special honor, the king 
was given the privilege of using it. Here the great nobles of the 
sacred palace, surrounded by a throng of courtiers, awaited his arrival, 
and a most honorable reception was accorded him. Thence, attended 
by his suite and many attachés of the court, he was conducted through 
various corridors and rooms of many kinds to the upper part of the 


380 STRUGGLE FOR EGYPT 


palace, where the emperor, with his illustrious nobles, had his resi- 
dence. Before the imperial audience hall hung curtains of precious 
fabrics, adorned with handiwork not inferior to the material itself; 
to it, indeed, might be aptly applied the words of Naso, “The work- 
manship far surpassed the material.” °° 

Just outside this hall, the king was met by the great lords of the 
empire, who conducted him beyond the curtains just mentioned. This 
is said to have been done that the dignity of the imperial splendor 
might be maintained and at the same time the good will of the king 
won for the emperor. For, surrounded only by the most illustrious 
nobles of his court, the emperor is said to have risen in a friendly way 
to greet the king, an act which, had it been done in the presence of 
the assembled court, might have seemed to show too great condescen- 
sion on the part of his imperial majesty.*° 

As soon as the king had entered, the curtains were quickly drawn 
aside, and the emperor became visible to those without. He was seated 
on a thfone of gold, clad in the imperial robes. By his side was seated 
the king on another throne, splendid but slightly lower than that of 
the emperor. 

The emperor very graciously bestowed the customary salutation 
and the kiss of peace upon our nobles also and made courteous in- 
quiries about the well-being of the king and the members of his suite. 
Both by his words and expression he plainly showed that their com- 
ing had given him great pleasure. He had directed the attendants and 
ofhcials of the sacred palace to prepare certain apartments of great 
magnificence within the palace itself for the king and his retinue. 
Separate quarters of fitting dignity in the city not far from those of 
the king had also been prepared for each of the attendant nobles. The 
visitors then withdrew from the imperial presence and retired for a 
time in attendance on the king. After naming the hour at which they 
were to return to him, the king also dismissed them and sent them 
away to their own quarters. 

Daily, at hours specially appointed for the purpose, the envoys 
held earnest conferences, now with the emperor and now among 


°° Ovid Met. 11. 6. This, a favorite quotation of William, probably reflects his 
own interest in the products of craftsmanship. 


*° Chalandon, who has retraced Amaury’s procession from the ship to the grand 
palace step by step, denies the significance which William attached to the etiquette 
of the curtain (see Chalandon, Les Comnéne, Il, 547-49). 


STRUGGLE FOR EGYPT 381 


themselves, on the matters which had brought them thither. Above 
all, they gave most careful consideration to the measures by which 
the purpose of their journey (for the furtherance of which they had 
endured so many hardships) might be accomplished so that they 
might return home crowned with success. 

In frequent intimate talks with the emperor, sometimes privately 
and again in the presence of the illustrious nobles of the imperial 
court, the king explained the reasons that had led to his visit and set 
forth at length the needs of his kingdom. He dwelt upon the im- 
mortal fame which the emperor might win by undertaking the sub- 
jugation of Egypt and demonstrated by positive proofs how easily 
the project might be accomplished. Persuaded by his words, the em- 
peror lent a favorable ear to the king’s proposition and promised to 
carry out the wishes of the latter to the full. 

Meanwhile, as befitted his imperial magnificence, he showered 
numerous gifts upon the king and upon the nobles of his suite and 
during frequent visits showed much solicitude about their well-being 
and health. By his orders, even the inner parts of the palace—the 
private apartments usually accessible only to his own people, the pri- 
vate chambers set apart for his own use—were thrown open to them as 
to his own household. These privileges were extended also to the 
basilicas closed to the common people, and to all the priceless treas- 
ures which had been gathered there by his imperial ancestors. Even the 
relics of the saints and the precious memorials of our Lord Jesus 
Christ, the Cross and the nails, the Lance,*! the sponge, the reed, the 
crown of thorns, the linen robe, and the sandals were freely shown 
to them. There was no secret or mystical object reverently preserved 
from the times of the good emperors Constantine, Theodosius, and 
Justinian in the private repositories of the sacred chambers which 
was not shown to them without reserve. 

From time to time, on holidays and at leisure moments, the em- 
peror invited the king and his suite to enjoy the recreation afforded 
by novel entertainments of dignified character such as befitted the 
exalted rank of both monarchs. At times, various kinds of musical in- 
struments were brought in, from which strains of marvellous sweet- 

*1 This was probably the Holy Lance that had figured in the defeat of Karbuqa at 


Antioch in 1098. It had been retained by Raymond of St. Gilles and given to the 
Emperor Alexius when Raymond revisited Constantinople in 1100. 


382 STRUGGLE FOR EGYPT 


ness in harmonious measure were evoked for their delight. Again, 
choruses of maidens sang, and pantomimes of great merit were pre- 
sented. Yet decorum and good manners were always observed. In 
the king’s honor the emperor also commanded that magnificent and 
costly games resembling those which we call theatrical plays or cir- 
cuses should be given for the people living in the city.*? 


24. The purpose of their journey accomplished, the king and his 
nobles return to their own land laden with gifts. 


A sojourn of several days was made in the palace of Constantine. 
Then, for the sake of change, which is the most effective means of 
relieving monotony, the emperor, accompanied by the king, moved 
his residence to the new palace called Blachernae.** There also the 
emperor observed to the full the laws of hospitality. For several days 
he entertained the king most graciously in his own palace, where state 
apartments were assigned to King Amaury in the most private pre- 
cincts of the imperial residence of his ancestors. At the same time digni- 
fied and comfortable quarters not far from this palace were ordered 
provided for the king’s retinue. Here, as before, officers of the ward- 
robe and others specially assigned to this duty did not cease to pro- 
vide magnificently and in superabundance not only for all necessary 
expense but even for superfluous luxuries. 

The king was escorted throughout the whole city both within the 
walls and without. He visited the churches and monasteries of which 
there was an almost infinite number; he looked upon triumphal arches 
and columns adorned with trophies. Great nobles who knew the 
places well were his guides, and on his inquiring the nature and pur- 
pose of each object he was given full information by the oldest and 
best-informed men. 

At this time also, he sailed through the Bosphorus to the mouth of 
the Black sea, where the body of water known as the Bosphorus be- 
gins its course to the Mediterranean. Thus the king, a man of in- 
quiring mind, ever eager to know the reason of things, visited places 
hitherto unknown to him. At length, fully satisfied with what he had 

*? The art of entertainment and public amusement was more highly developed in 


Constantinople at this time than anywhere else in Europe. Doubtless this added to its 
attractiveness for people from the West. 


*8 This was the palace in the northwestern part of the city, in which the emperor 
ordinarily dwelt. 


STRUGGLE FOR EGYPT 383 


seen and heard, he returned to the city and resumed the friendly con- 
ferences with the emperor, for his most earnest desire was to bring 
his mission to a successful end. 

After a suitable time had passed, the necessary matters were 
brought to the happy termination so eagerly desired. The agreement 
was reduced to a treaty agreeable to both the emperor and the king 
and put into writing, to which the seals of both were afhxed. The king 
then took leave and, followed by the good will of all, began to make 
preparations to depart. Then more than ever the lavish munificence 
of the emperor, far beyond praise, was displayed toward the king 
and his following. For an immense weight of gold and quantities of 
silken fabrics together with most excellent gifts of foreign wares were 
bestowed upon the king, while upon his retinue, even to the youngest, 
presents without stint were showered. 

The illustrious protosebastos also showed great generosity toward 
the entire embassy. The same spirit inspired the other princes also; 
they vied with each other in munificent offerings to the king, wherein 
elegance of material and fine workmanship were not lacking as evi- 
dence of their good will. When the fleet was ready, the king, his mis- 
sion successfully accomplished, sailed from Constantinople two hun- 
dred miles through the Bosphorus, which is generally recognized as 
the boundary between Europe and Asia. Passing between the famous 
cities of Sestos and Abydos, the homes of Leander and Hero, he en- 
tered the Mediterranean sea and, borne by favoring breezes, landed 
on the seventeenth day before the Kalends of July at the city of 
Sidon.** 


25. The king assembles the army at Sephorie. Frederick, arch- 
bishop of Tyre, returns from the lands across the sea. Wi- 
liam, bishop of Acre, is murdered in Romania. 


On his return to the kingdom, the king learned that Nureddin with 
a large army was still lingering in the vicinity of Banyas. Fearing 
lest he might try to make incursions into our land from there, the 
king summoned the barons of the realm and advanced into Galilee to 
provide as far as possible against such a contingency. He encamped 
near that famous fountain between Nazareth and Sephorie. Since this 
lies very near the center of the realm, he could easily move from 


44 June 15, 1171. This sentence is redolent of Ovid’s writings. 


384 STRUGGLE FOR EGYPT 


there to any part of the country where he might be needed. Hence, 
for the reason just given, Amaury and his ancestors before him had 
followed the custom of assembling their armies in that place. 

About the same time, Frederick, archbishop of Tyre, our prede- 
cessor, who had been sent on behalf of the realm to implore aid and 
counsel from the princes of the West, returned home unsuccessful 
after a sojourn of two years in the lands beyond the sea. His efforts 
had been utterly futile, and he had obtained nothing which he had 
asked in our name. He had, however, sent before him Count Stephen, 
a man of noble family but of far from noble life. Stephen was the son 
of the elder Count Theobald II of Blois, Chartres, and Troyes. 
Through the archbishop’s agency, he had been summoned by the 
king, who intended to make him his son-in-law. On the count’s ar- 
rival in the kingdom, the king graciously reminded him of the matter, 
but although the offer had already been made and accepted, Stephen 
now rejected it and, after leading a disgracefully licentious life for 
several months in the kingdom, decided to return home overland. In 
pursuance of this purpose he went first to Antioch and from there 
into Cilicia. Thence, after obtaining an escort from the sultan of 
Iconium, he intended to. pass through that land on his way to Con- 
stantinople. In Cilicia, however, near the city of Mamistra, he had 
the misfortune to fall into an ambush which Milo [Malih],** a very 
powerful Armenian prince, the brother of Thoros, had laid for him. 
The bandits rushed upon him from their lurking place and carried 
off as booty all the precious treasures which he had with him. By ur- 
gent entreaties he finally with much difficulty induced them to leave 
a wretched horse for his use. In this ignominious style, after experi- 
encing great hardships, he finally reached Constantinople with a few 
attendants. The hatred of all the people of the East followed him.*¢ 

That same year, another Count Stephen, a son of Count William 
de Sadne, arrived in the kingdom on a pilgrimage of prayer and de- 
votion. Although he bore the same name, he differed greatly from 
that other Stephen, for he was an unassuming man of honorable life, 

*° This was Mich or Malih, the brother of Thoros II of Armenia (see note 50). 


Possibly it was the experience of Stephen or others similarly beset by Mleh that led 
Henry the Lion to reject the offer of an escort through his lands (see E. Joranson, ‘‘The 
Pilgrimage of Henry the Lion,” Medieval and Historiographical Essays in Honor 
of James Westfall Thompson, p. 196). 

*° This is the third Stephen of Blois to figure in William’s account. He was a grand- 
son of the leader in the First Crusade and a nephew of the English king of that name. 


STRUGGLE FOR EGYPT 385 


entirely worthy of great respect. He was accompanied by Henry the 
Younger, duke of Burgundy, the son of a sister of the Stephen spoken 
of above. After a short stay in the kingdom, they returned to their 
own land but stopped on the way at Constantinople, where the em- 
peror showed them marked attention and dismissed them with many 
gifts.47 

In the following year, which was the eighth of King Amaury’s 
reign,*® William of good memory, bishop of Acre, met with a strange 
and undeserved fate. The king had sent him from Constantinople to 
Italy. He had travelled through that country, trying in every possible 
way to accomplish the mission entrusted to him, and was on his way 
home. While retracing his steps, he intended to visit the emperor, 
according to a previous arrangement, and had arrived at Adrianople, 
a famous city of Thracia Secunda. Much fatigued by his long journey, 
the bishop partook of food at the noon hour and then lay down to 
rest his weary limbs. A certain Robert of his staff, one whom he him- 
self had raised to the priesthood and received among his personal 
retinue, was lying in the same room where the bishop was resting. 
He was recovering from a long illness during which he had suffered 
greatly. Suddenly a madness came upon him; he seized his sword 
and stabbed the sleeping bishop, inflicting fatal wounds. The bishop’s 
people outside heard his cries and recognized by his groans and out- 
cries that their master was in the throes of death. They tried to rush 
to his aid, but the door was securely locked on the inside so that en- 
trance was impossible. When the door was finally broken open by 
force, they found their lord almost lifeless although his heart was 
still faintly beating. Their first impulse was to seize the murderer 
and deliver him over in chains to the punishment due him according 
to the laws against homicide. But the bishop forbade them by word 
and gesture and most earnestly implored them that for the good of 
his soul full indulgence should be granted the murderer. He was 
still begging that the present deed should not be held against the 
young man for death when he yielded up his last breath to the Lord. 
This happened on June 29. 

As yet we have been unable to determine the reason for this deed. 

#7 Stephen of Sadne and Henry of Burgundy. It is strange that William does not 
mention the visit of Henry the Lion, duke of Saxony, to Jerusalem in 1172—all the 


more so since one of Henry’s retinue, Conrad, bishop of Libeck, died in Tyre. 
48 The year 1172 would be the tenth of Amaury’s reign. 


386 STRUGGLE FOR EGYPT 


It is said by some that Robert, the perpetrator of the outrage, had 
been suffering from a long illness; that, although convalescent, he 
was attacked by a sudden violent frenzy and therefore was not respon- 
sible for his wicked act. Others, on the contrary, assert that he com- 
mitted the crime through hatred of a certain chamberlain of the 
bishop, who, presuming too much on his lord’s favor, had treated 
Robert and others badly.*® 

On November 23 of that same year, Joscius, a canon and subdeacon 
of that same church, was made bishop of Acre in William’s stead. 


26. Malih the Armenian,® a brother of Thoros, joins forces with 
Nureddin and ravages the land of Antioch. The king hastens 
thither to check his evil.doing. 


Axout this time occurred the death of Thoros, a magnificent and 
noble man whom I have often mentioned as a powerful prince of 
the Armenians. His brother Malih, a most wicked man, desired to 
seize the heritage for himself. He accordingly went to Nureddin and 
earnestly begged that he be given a body of cavalry with which to 
take forcible possession of his brother’s domains. Now after the death 
of Thoros, the great nobles of that land had sent for Thomas,®? a 
nephew of these two lords on the sister’s side, and had placed him 
in peaceful possession of his uncle’s entire principality. Thomas was 
of Latin birth, but he utterly lacked the energy and sense to adapt 
himself readily to those who had called him. 

On certain well-defined terms satisfactory to Nureddin, Malih was 
able to obtain a considerable force of cavalry. By thus employing the 
aid of an enemy and introducing an armed body of infidels into his 
patrimony, the hereditary land of his forefathers, Malih was the first 
of his race to violate the customs of his ancestors. He invaded the 

49 This is an excellent instance not only of William’s judicial attitude but also of 
medieval justice, which evidently recognized insanity as a plea in behalf of a defendant. 
Doubtless William was personally acquainted with the individuals involved. 

50 Mleh or Malih was a renegade in several ways. He had become a member of the 
western church and a Templar. Later he fled to the court of Nureddin, to whom he 
became very devoted. With the latter’s help he conquered his nephew’s kingdom and 
mistreated the Templars. He was finally murdered by his own troops in 1175 (see 
Frédéric Macler, “Armenia,” Cambridge Medieval History, 1V, 1170-71). 

51 Little is known of this Thomas beyond these statements of William. His mother 
was a sister of Thoros II and Malih, his father a Latin noble. He was called upon to 


act as regent for Rupen II, son of Thoros II. Malih drove him out and disposed of 
the true heir (see Joranson, “Henry the Lion,” of. cit., p. 196, note 177). 


STRUGGLE FOR EGYPT 387 


domains of his forefathers by force, drove out his nephew, and seized 
the whole region. One of the first acts of his rule after taking posses- 
sion of the power was to dispossess the Knights Templars of all their 
holdings in Cilicia, although he had once belonged to their order. 
He then formed an alliance with Nureddin and the Turks under a 
treaty such as is rarely made even between brothers. Having become, 
as it were, an infidel, he cast aside the law of God and did the Chris- 
tians all the injury he could. All those who chanced to fall into his 
hands, either in battle or in the storming of fortresses, were cast into 
chains and carried off into the enemy’s country to be sold as slaves. 

The outrages committed by this wicked man against the Christians 
soon showed him to be one of their worst enemies. Accordingly the 
prince of Antioch and the great men of that land took up arms against 
him, although it seemed a dangerous anomaly for Christians to rise 
against one who professed the same faith—almost, in fact, equivalent 
to civil war. Yet, since it was impossible to pass over the wrongs done 
to their brethren, they declared war against Malih and denounced 
him as an enemy of the realm. 

On learning of the trouble that had risen in that country, the king 
hastened with his own forces to the land of Antioch, for he desired 
to do his part in any measure that tended toward peace. From there 
he dispatched his personal messengers to that wretch Malih, a man 
wholly without the favor of God, and urgently demanded that he 
agree to a conference with himself at a suitable time and place. Malih 
pretended that he was pleased by this message, but actually his senti- 
ments were quite different. Several times the king sent envoys to him 
and endeavored to bring about this meeting, but in the end he found 
that he was being deceived by the subtle tricks of the wicked man 
and, accordingly, that nothing could be accomplished in this way. He 
finally assembled all the Christian forces of that locality and with 
this army invaded the land of his enemy. While marching through 
the plain of Cilicia (for to proceed by the steep mountainous way 
would have been too difficult), the troops burned the crops and en- 
deavored to storm the castles along their line of march. But suddenly 
a messenger arrived with the sinister tidings that Nureddin had laid 
siege to Petra, the capital of Arabia Secunda, also known as Kerak— 
a report which proved to be true. 

This news caused the king serious distress. He at once took leave 


288 STRUGGLE FOR EGYPT 


of the prince and hastily set forth with his own personal following. 
But before he arrived in his own land, the barons of the realm with 
prompt and sagacious action had assembled all the military strength 
of the kingdom. Humphrey the constable had been put in entire charge 
of the army, while to Ralph, bishop of Bethlehem, was assigned the 
honor of carrying the Cross of the Lord. Without delay the troops 
were hastening valiantly to the appointed place when they were met 
by a messenger who brought the important news, which proved to 
be true, that Nureddin had abandoned the siege without doing harm 
to the place and had returned to his own land. Thus it happened that 
the king on reaching the kingdom found, contrary to his expectation, 
that all was as peaceful as could be desired. 


27. Saladin besieges Montreal, a fortress beyond the Jordan. His 
efforts prove futile, however, and he returns to his own land. 


TueE following year, about the beginning of autumn, Saladin pre- 
pared to invade our land with mighty forces and a vast number of 
cavalry. At the head of innumerable hosts drawn from all,over the 
land of Egypt, he crossed the desert and reached the place called 
Cannes of the Turks. 

The king had anticipated his coming, however, and had already 
assembled his own army. Accompanied by the lord patriarch, who 
bore the Life-giving and Venerated Cross of the Lord, he had placed 
his camp near Beersheba, whence he would be able to meet the ad- 
vancing enemy more easily. 

The forces of Saladin were reported to be scarcely sixteen miles 
away from the king’s camp, but Amaury was not yet confident that 
the Turks had actually reached that place. The report proved to be 
true, however; Saladin had established his camp there because of the 
convenient water supply. 

After a conference with his nobles, the king decided to change his 
route in order to avoid a meeting with the Turk. Accordingly, under 
pretense of seeking the enemy whom they had carefully avoided 
while he was close at hand, the forces and all the people proceeded 
toward Ascalon. From Ascalon they marched on to Daron and thence 
back again to their original starting point, after a useless waste of 
effort and expense. 


STRUGGLE FOR EGYPT 389 


Meanwhile, Saladin marched through the plains of Idumea and 
led his cohorts into Syria Sobal. There he laid siege to a fortress 
which is the principal and outstanding stronghold of that entire dis- 
trict. This he assailed with furious energy as far as the situation per- 
mitted, for it lay on a lofty hill and was splendidly fortified with 
walls, towers, and ramparts. The village outside was situated on the 
slope of the hill, yet in a place so steep and high that it need fear 
neither assaults nor attacks by machines or bows. The inhabitants were 
all Christians and therefore more reliance could be placed upon them. 
Moreover, the fortress was well supplied with arms and provisions 
and had a garrison of men sufhcient to defend it. 

For some days the infidels expended their efforts on this place 
without success. Finally, convinced that it was impregnable, Saladin 
gave the order to depart and returned to Egypt by the desert route 
with his forces. 


28. Saladin lays waste the entire country beyond the Jordan. The 
king holds his army in a place called Carmel. Count Ray- 
mond of Tripoli returns from prison. 


In the following year, which was the tenth of King Amaury’s reign, 
Saladin again made preparations to invade the realm. Realizing that 
he had accomplished but little against our forces the preceding year, 
he desired to retrieve this failure and accordingly assembled a mighty 
host of warriors from all over Egypt and from elsewhere as well. 
That his movements might be less noticeable and, as a result, greater 
injury might be done to the inhabitants, he advanced by way of the 
desert and, in the month of July, reached the same locality which 
he had occupied with his armies the preceding year.** 

The king, however, had been informed of his advance. Accordingly, 
with the flower of the military forces of the realm, he went out into 
the desert to meet the infidel prince. Again, as in the preceding year, 
he was told that Saladin had turned aside into Syria Sobal. Fearing 
to follow him thither, lest perchance Saladin, on learning that he was 
pursued, might enter from another direction and devastate the realm, 


52 Saladin’s several expeditions into southern Palestine and the region of Kerak and 
Montreal recounted by William are so similar as to raise a question of his possible 
confusion in the matter (see W. B. Stevenson, The Crusaders in the East, pp. 201-2; 
R.K.J., pp. 356-57). 


390 STRUGGLE FOR EGYPT 


the king went up into the mountainous country. There he selected a 
convenient position and retired to Carmel. 

This is not the famous Mt. Carmel on the coast, once the abode of 
Elias, but a village where, as we read, the foolish Nabal formerly 
lived.53 The king chose this position wisely because of the conven- 
ience of water. For there was an ancient pool of great extent there 
which would furnish ample water for the entire army. Moreover, 
Carmel was near the country beyond the Jordan, separated from it 
only by the famous valley which forms the boundary between the 
two regions and in which lies the Dead sea. Hence our army could 
readily obtain frequent news of the enemy’s movements and ascer- 
tain the condition of Saladin’s forces. 

Meanwhile, since the king hesitated to approach that region for 
the reasons just given, Saladin ravaged the whole country as he 
would. He caused everything found outside the fortresses to be 
burned, bushes and vines to be cut down, and villages to be destroyed. 
Finally, toward the end of September, after completely overrunning 
the country at his tyrannical pleasure, he returned to Egypt. 

About this time, Raymond the Younger, count of Tripoli, re- 
turned to his ancestral domains. He had passed eight years as a 
prisoner in beggary and chains but was finally released on payment 
of a ransom of eighty thousand gold pieces and restored to his 
former state of liberty.°* The king welcomed him on his return most 
kindly and, without making any difficulty, restored to him the terri- 
tory which had been under his own care during Raymond’s absence. 
In addition, with royal bounty he gave him large gifts to assist in pay- 
ing the price of his ransom and induced his nobles and the prelates 
of the church also to follow his example. 


29. The sect of the Assassins is described. Also of the embassy 
sent by them to the king. 


Axsout this same time there occurred among us a dreadful affair 
fraught with dire consequences to the kingdom and the church, a 
catastrophe to be regretted even today, perchance forever. In order 
S31 Sam.2§ $2. 
54 He had been captured at Harim in 1164. The eight years of captivity would end 


October 18, 1172, though the general context seems to indicate the summer of 1173 
as the year of his release. 


STRUGGLE FOR EGYPT | 391 


to obtain a clear understanding of the matter it is necessary to begin 
the account somewhat further back. 

In the province of Tyre in Phoenicia and in the diocese of Tor- 
tosa there lives a tribe of people who possess ten fortresses with the 
villages attached to them. Their number, as we have often heard, is 
about sixty thousand or possibly more. It is the custom of this people 
to choose their ruler, not by hereditary right, but by the prerogative 
of merit. This chief, when elected, they call the Old Man, disdain- 
ing a more dignified title. Their subjection and obedience to him is 
such that they regard nothing as too harsh or difficult and eagerly 
undertake even the most dangerous tasks at his command.®** For in- 
stance, if there happens to be a prince who has incurred the hatred or 
distrust of this people, the chief places a dagger in the hand of one 
or several of his followers; those thus designated hasten away at 
once, regardless of the consequences of the deed or the probability of 
personal escape. Zealously they labor for as long as may be necessary, 
until at last the favorable chance comes which enables them to carry 
out the mandate of the chief.5® Neither Christians nor Saracens know 
whence this name, the Assassins, is derived.®? For about four hundred 
years they have followed the law and traditions of the Saracens so 
strictly that by comparison all other peoples seem as prevaricators and 
they alone the complete observers of the law. But during our times 
they happened to choose as ruler over them a very eloquent man, of 
subtle and brilliant intelligence. Contrary to the habits of his an- 
cestors, this man possessed the books of the Evangels and the apostolic 
law. Over these he pored continually and for some time had with 
much labor tried to follow the marvellous precepts of Christ and also 
the apostolic doctrine. 

55 Hitti gives a brief account of this Muslim sect, tracing its origin from the Fatimid 
caliphate. William’s allusion to the extraordinary obedience of the followers of the 
Old Man of the Mountain suggests that he was aware of the story of the hashish cere- 
mony which Hitti quotes from Marco Polo’s account. William may have told it in 
his Gesta orientalium principum, for Jacques de Vitry, who used William’s work, tells 
this story (see P. K. Hitti, History of the Arabs, pp. 446-48). 

56 Both Muslim and Christian leaders were murdered by the Assassins. William has 
already noted Raymond II of Tripoli as one of their victims. Qalanisi ascribes several 
assassinations in Damascus to them. They made an attempt to murder Saladin, but 
his threat to destroy the sect ended those attempts (see Hitti, Arabs, p. 447). 

57 It is now generally accepted that the name is derived from hashashun, or “users 


of hashish,” the stupefying drug derived from hemp, or marijuana (Hitti, Arabs, 
Pp. 446). 


392 STRUGGLE FOR EGYPT 


The gentle and noble doctrine of Christ and His followers, when 
compared with that which the miserable seducer Muhammad had 
transmitted to his accomplices and deluded followers, caused him to 
despise the beliefs which he had absorbed with his mother’s milk and 
to abominate the unclean tenets of that deceiver. He instructed his 
people also in the same way and made them cease observing the su- 
perstition of the prophet. He tore down the places of prayer which 
they had been accustomed to use, absolved them from fasting, and 
permitted the use of wine and pork. At length, desirous of advancing 
into a fuller understanding of the mysteries of God’s law, he sent an 
envoy to the king. This man, Boaldelle [Abdallah] by name, was 
wise and eloquent, skilled in counsel, and fully instructed in the doc- 
trine of his master. He bore secret propositions, the main burden and 
most important article of which was that if the brethren of the Tem- 
ple, who held certain fortresses adjacent to the lands of the Assassins, 
would remit the tribute of two thousand gold pieces which was paid 
to them yearly by his people and would thereafter observe brotherly 
kindness toward them, the race of the Assassins would embrace the 
faith of Christ and receive baptism. 


30. The envoy of the Assassins is slain by the brothers of the 
Knights Templars. As the result of this, a violent disturbance 
arises in the kingdom. Ralph, bishop of Bethlehem, dies. 


Tue king received the envoy gladly and, being a man of good sense, 
agreed fully to the demands made. He was even prepared, it is said, 
to compensate the brethren from his own treasury for the two thou- 
sand gold pieces, the amount of the annual tribute which the Assassins 
asked to have remitted. He detained the envoy with him long enough 
to complete the details of the agreement and then sent him back to 
his master to make the final arrangements, accompanied by a guide to 
lead and protect him on the way. Under the escort of the guide and 
companion thus provided by the king, Abdallah had already passed 
Tripoli and was about to enter his own land, when suddenly some of 
the Knights of the Temple rushed upon the party with drawn swords 
and killed the envoy. The latter, far from anticipating any such ac- 
tion, was pursuing his journey without caution, in full reliance upon 
the king’s safe conduct and the sincere good faith of our nation. By 


STRUGGLE FOR EGYPT 393 


this crime, the knights brought upon themselves the charge of trea- 
son.®8 

The news of this atrocious deed roused the king to violent anger. 
Almost frenzied, he summoned the barons and, declaring that the 
outrage amounted to injury against himself, he demanded their ad- 
vice as to the course of action to be adopted. The barons were of one 
mind that such wickedness should not be passed over. For by that 
crime the royal authority seemed to be put to naught and undeserved 
infamy brought upon the good faith and constancy of the Christian 
profession. Moreover, through this act the church in the Orient 
seemed likely to lose the increase so pleasing to God that had been 
already prepared for it. 

By consent of all, therefore, two nobles, Seiher de Mamedunc and 
Godescalous [Godechaux] de Turout, were selected as special mes- 
sengers to demand from the master of the Templars, Eudes de Saint- 
Amand, that satisfaction be rendered to the king and the entire realm 
for this sacrilegious outrage. 

It was said that one of the brethren named Walter du Maisnilio 
[Mesnil], a one-eyed man of evil repute, wholly lacking in discre- 
tion, “whose breath is in his nostrils,” °° was the actual perpetrator of 
the crime, but that it was done with the cognizance of the brethren. 
It is further said that the master, in his desire to spare this man far 
beyond his deserts, sent word to the king by a messenger that he had 
enjoined a penance on the guilty brother and was about to send him 
to the pope. He forbade anyone, on the part of the pope, to lay violent 
hands upon the said brother.®° He added other remarks, dictated by 
the spirit of overweening arrogance with which he was possessed, but 
it is unnecessary to record them here. 

°8 Lundgreen, who is unable to cite any authority to the contrary, nevertheless scouts 
this story as another instance of William’s prejudice, his desire to accuse them of 
cupidity. His only evidence is the circumstance that Henry, duke of Saxony and Bavaria, 
had given a generous grant of money to the Templars about this time (Wilhelm von 
Tyrus und der Templerorden, pp. 111-14). 

59 Is, 2:22. 

80 The Templars, like the Hospitallers, had by a series of decrees, especially that of 
1154, come under papal protection. As a religious order they could, of course, plead 
benefit of clergy, as here, to gain immunity from secular jurisdiction. This plea, so 
long ignored by feudal authorities, had gained great force during the twelfth cen- 
tury. It is interesting to note, however, that even in the Holy Land Amaury gave it only 


partial respect. The treatment of “‘criminous clerks” had been one of the chief subjects 
of the quarrel between Henry II and Thomas a Becket at almost the same period. 


394 STRUGGLE FOR EGYPT 


The king went himself to Sidon on this matter and found the 
master with many of the other brethren, including the culprit him- 
self. After consulting with those who had accompanied him thither, 
the king caused that man guilty of treason to be dragged forcibly 
from the house and had him sent in chains to Tyre, where he was 
cast into prison. This outrage against the envoy came near plunging 
the whole kingdom into irreparable ruin. By declaring his innocence, 
however, to the master of the Assassins, whose representative had 
perished in so unfortunate a manner, the king was able to clear his 
own honor. In dealing with the brethren of the Temple he exercised 
such moderation that the matter remained in abeyance even to the 
day of his death. It is said, however, that if he had recovered from 
that last illness, Amaury had intended to take up the matter with the 
kings and princes of the earth, through envoys of high degree, when 
it would have been given most careful consideration.** 

In the following spring occurred the death of the royal chancellor, 
the venerable brother Ralph of happy memory, bishop of Bethlehem, 
a man of liberal and genial nature. He was interred with high honors 
in the chapel of his church. After his death, the matter of electing his 
successor came up. While this was under discussion in the same church, 
difficulties caused by the conflicting views of the electors arose, which 
were hardly settled until the second year of King Baldwin, the son 
and successor of King Amaury. Because of this disagreement the 
church at Bethlehem incurred great expense. 


31. Nureddin dies. The king lays siege to Banyas but finally con- 
cludes a truce and withdraws. He is stricken with illness 
and hastens to Jerusalem, where he dies within a few days. 


In the month of May, scarcely a month after this time, Nureddin, 
a mighty persecutor of the Christian name and faith, died in the 
twenty-ninth year of his rule.*? He was a just prince, valiant and wise, 
and, according to the traditions of his race, a religious man. 

On learning of his death, the king immediately convoked all the 


6! William doubtless had this account of Amaury’s intentions directly from the king 
himself. As archbishop, William resented the independence of the Templars from 
local ecclesiastical control and probably lent his own hearty assent to such an appeal. 

6° Nureddin’s death took place May 15, 1174. His father, Zangi, had heen killed 
September 14, 1146, which renders William’s reckoning of the length of his reign 
a third of a year too long. 


STRUGGLE FOR EGYPT 395 


strength of the kingdom and laid siege to the city of Banyas. At this, 
Nureddin’s widow, with courage beyond that of most women, sent a 
message to the king demanding that he abandon the siege and grant 
them a temporary peace. She promised to pay a large sum of money 
in return. The king, however, in the hope of extorting a larger bribe, 
at first pretended to spurn her plea and continued the siege. 

For about fifteen days he prosecuted the undertaking with vigor 
and zeal and caused the foe great trouble with his siege engines and 
in various other ways. Finally he perceived, however, that the ability 
of the Turks to resist was steadily increasing and began to realize 
that he had no chance of success. Meanwhile the envoys of the noble 
lady kept insistently demanding peace. He finally decided to accept 
the proffered money, and, on the release of twenty captive Christian 
knights in addition, he raised the siege with the intention of under- 
taking greater projects later. 

On the way home, he complained to those about him that he was 
feeling rather ill and was far from being in good condition. He dis- 
missed his forces and went on with his personal retinue to Tiberias, 
where he began to suffer from a severe attack of dysentery. Fearing 
the approach of illness, he continued from there on horseback (for 
his strength was still sufficient for that effort) by way of Nazareth and 
Nablus to Jerusalem. There he continued to grow worse, and a vio- 
lent fever came on, although the dysentery yielded to the physician’s 
skill. After suffering intolerably from the fever for several days, he 
ordered physicians of the Greek, Syrian, and other nations noted for 
skill in diseases to be called and insisted that they give him some 
_ purgative remedy. As they would not consent to this, he had Latin 
physicians called and made the same request of them, adding that 
whatever the result might be he would take the responsibility upon 
himself. They administered medicines which produced the desired 
result easily and seemed to give him some relief. But before he could 
take nourishment to strengthen his body which had been weakened 
by the violent remedy, the usual fever returned, and he yielded to his 
fate. He died on July 11, in the year of the Incarnation of our Lord 
1173, in the twelfth year and fifth month of his reign and in the 
thirty-eighth year of his life.** He was buried by the side of his 


63 It should be July 11, 1174. William is thus in error on the last as well as first 
year of Amaury’s reign. Doubtless this ending is part of the chronological framework 


396 STRUGGLE FOR EGYPT 


brother among his predecessors of the same line, before the place 
Calvary. He was a man of wisdom and discretion, fully competent to 
hold the reins of government in the kingdom. It was due to his 
urgent entreaties that we determined to write this history concerning 
the deeds of himself and his predecessors. 


which he constructed, probably in 1182. It is the irony of fate that William should 
have made more chronological misstatements in the reign of Amaury than in that 
of any other ruler. The chief cause of these errors was, of course, the fact that he 
had postponed the work on Amaury’s earlier years, before 1167, until he had com- 
pleted the introductory royal chronicle. The latter task had not been done when Amaury 
died. The year 1174 is established by the known date of Nureddin’s death and William’s 
account of Amaury’s activities as a result of it. William seldom errs in his statements 
of the sequence of related events (see Stevenson, Crusaders, p. 213). 


HERE ENDS THE TWENTIETH BOOK 


THE TWENTY-FIRST BOOK BEGINS 


BALDWIN IV, THE LEPER, FORCED 
TO ASSUME RULE OF JERUSALEM 


1. Concerning the beginning of the reign of Baldwin IV, the 
sixth king of Jerusalem; also of his manner of life, his age, 
and his appearance. 


Tue sixth Latin king + of Jerusalem was Baldwin IV, son of Amaury, 
that king of illustrious memory of whom we have just been writ- 
ing, and the Countess Agnes, daughter of the younger Joscelin, 
count of Edessa, who has also been frequently mentioned in the fore- 
going pages. When Amaury was called by hereditary right to ascend 
the throne of his ancestors, he divorced Agnes, as has been already 
related. He was led to this act by the coercion of the church, for 
Amalrich of good memory, at that time patriarch of Jerusalem, 
following in the footsteps of his predecessor Fulcher, obliged him to 
put her away. It was claimed, as was indeed true, that the blood 
relationship between the two was too close. This fact I carefully ex- 
plained when treating in detail of the reign of King Amaury.” 

While I was archdeacon of Tyre, King Amaury, anxious about the 
education of his son, after many entreaties and under assurance of 
his favor, prevailed upon me to undertake the task of tutor.* The boy, 
then about nine years old, was accordingly committed to my care to 
be instructed and nurtured in liberal studies. While he was under 
my charge, I devoted myself to my royal pupil with vigilant care and 
watched over him with the solicitude befitting his exalted position. I 
endeavored to train him in the formation of character as well as to 
instruct him in the knowledge of letters. He was playing one day 

1 This was obviously written before the Prologue, in which William reached the 


decision to include Godfrey as a king and called Baldwin IV the “seventh” king. 

2 Book XIX, chap. 4. 

® This request could not have been made before the end of the year 1169, for Wil- 
liam was absent in the West during most of that year and Amaury did not return 
from Egypt until December 25, 1169 (see Book XX, chap. 17). William therefore 
undertook the education of young Baldwin in 1170, when he was “nine years old,” 
and continued his duties until Baldwin was crowned king four years later when he 
was “barely thirteen years old.” This helps to correct the misstatement of Amaury’s 
death in “1173.” 


398 BALDWIN IV, THE LEPER 


with his companions of noble rank, when they began, as playful boys 
often do, to pinch each others’ arms and hands with their nails. The 
other boys gave evidence of pain by their outcries, but Baldwin, 
although his comrades did not spare him, endured it altogether too 
patiently, as if he felt nothing. After this had occurred several times 
it was reported to me. At first I supposed that it proceeded from his 
capacity for endurance and not from lack of sensitiveness. But when 
I called him and began to inquire what it meant, I discovered that his 
right arm and hand were partially numb, so that he did not feel 
pinching or even biting in the least. I began to be uneasy, remember- 
ing the words of the wise man, “There is no question that a member 
which is without feeling detracts greatly from the health of the body, 
and one who does not realize that he is sick is in danger.” * 

The lad’s father was informed of his condition, and physicians were 
consulted. Repeated fomentations, oil rubs, and even poisonous 
remedies were employed without result in the attempt to help him. 
For, as we recognized in process of time, these were the premonitory 
symptoms of a most serious and incurable disease which later became 
plainly apparent. 

It is impossible to refrain from tears while speaking of this great 
misfortune. For, as he began to reach years of maturity, it was evident 
that he was suffering from the terrible disease of leprosy. Day by day 
his condition became worse. The extremities and the face were es- 
pecially attacked, so that his faithful followers were moved with com- 
passion when they looked at him. Nevertheless, he continued to make 
progress in the pursuit of letters and gave ever-increasing promise of 
developing a lovable disposition. He was comely of appearance for his 
age, and far beyond the custom of his forefathers he was an excellent 
horseman and understood the handling of horses. He had a retentive 
memory and loved to talk. He was economical but always remembered 
both favors and injuries. In every respect he resembled his father, not 
alone in face but in his entire mien; even his walk and the tones of 
his voice were the same. His intellect was keen, but his speech was 
somwhat halting. Like his father he eagerly listened to history and 
was well disposed to follow good advice.® 

* This phrase reflects Hippocrates 4 phorism vi. 2. 


° William could speak with authority on this point, for he was himself one of the 
advisors. 


BALDWIN IV, THE LEPER 399 


2. Concerning the time of his consecration and coronation. 


Ar the time of his father’s death he was barely thirteen years old. 
An older sister named Sibylla, born of the same mother, had been 
brought up in the convent of St. Lazarus at Bethany by the Lady 
Iveta, her father’s maternal aunt, who was the abbess of the place. 

On the death of King Amaury, the nobles of the realm, both ecclesi- 
astical and secular, met in assembly, and the wishes of all were found 
to be in perfect harmony. Accordingly, on July 15, the fourth day 
after the death of his father, Baldwin was solemnly consecrated and 
crowned, according to custom, in the church of the Sepulchre of the 
Lord. The rites were solemnized by Amalrich, patriarch of Jerusalem 
of good memory, assisted by the archbishops and other prelates of the 
church. 

At this time Pope Alexander III was head of the holy Roman 
church. Aimery was the patriarch of the holy church at Antioch, and 
Amalrich was patriarch of Jerusalem. Frederick was archbishop of 
Tyre. At Constantinople, Emperor Manuel of great renown and pious 
memory ruled. Frederick was the emperor of the Romans, and Louis 
king of the Franks. In England, Henry, son of Geoffrey, count of 
Anjou, was reigning, and in Sicily, William II, son of William the 
Elder. Bohemond, son of Prince Raymond, was governing Antioch; 
and the younger Raymond, son of the elder Count Raymond, ruled 
over Tripoli. 


3. In the first year of the reign of Baldwin IV a fleet sent by 
the king of Sicily suffers an enormous loss before Alexandria. 
The count of Tripoli, as next of kin, demands the regency 
of the kingdom and the guardianship of the king. 


Durine the first year of this king’s reign, about the beginning of 
August,® King William of Sicily sent a fleet of two hundred ships to 
attack Alexandria. With a splendid force of both cavalry and infantry, 
it sailed down to Egypt. During the stay of five or six days made 
before that city, through the lack of caution displayed by the gover- 

® Chalandon has dated this attack on Alexandria as July 28—August 1, 1174. This 
expedition had resulted from Amaury’s call for aid upon the West and failed to receive 


the expected support by land because of Amaury’s death (see F. Chalandon, Histoire 
de la domination normande en Italie et en Sicile, 11, 396). 


400 BALDWIN IV, THE LEPER 


nors and leaders, both the infantry and cavalry forces sustained great 
losses by death and capture and were finally obliged to retire in 
confusion. 

In our kingdom the affairs of the realm were in the charge of 
Milon de Plancy. A serious enmity now arose between this noble and 
some of the barons of the realm. They were jealous of his power and 
could not brook the fact that they were ignored and never summoned, 
while he alone, with overweening presumption and scorn of others, 
was always at the side of the king ready to assist him. Meanwhile, the 
rest were shut out from personal contact with the king, and Milon 
conducted the affairs of state without consulting them. 

About this time, the count of Tripoli came to the king and, in the 
presence of the barons who chanced to be there, demanded the regency 
of the realm. He asserted that by the right of next of kin the legal 
guardianship of the king, who was still a minor, was due to him. 
And this office, he said, belonged to him for more than one reason: 
not only because he was the nearest of Baldwin’s blood relations, but 
also because he was the richest and most powerful of all the loyal 
subjects of the king.? He added as a third very cogent reason, “that 
when he himself was taken captive, from prison itself he had ordered 
his faithful people, under their pledge of loyalty, to surrender all 
his lands, strongholds, and castles to King Amaury, the father of this 
boy, and to place everything under his orders and sovereign care.” 
Furthermore he had added as a final direction that if it should be his 
fate as a man to end his life in prison, he constituted the aforesaid 
king his sole heir, as next of kin. In recognition of all these favors, 
he asked that this return be made to him, rather on account of the 
honor than through any hope of future advantage. A response to 
these demands of the count was deferred on the ground that the king 
had about him at the time only a few of the barons of the realm 
whom he might consult. At an opportune time as quickly and as 
generally as possible they should be summoned and consulted, when, 
by the help of God, fitting response on all these matters would be 
given. On receiving this reply, the count returned to his own land. 
Practically all the people favored the cause of the count. Among the 
barons, Humphrey of Toron, the royal constable, Baldwin of Ramlah, 


7 These statements are amplified in chapter 5. Of interest here is William’s apparent 
implication that Tripoli was a vassal state of the king of Jerusalem. 


BALDWIN IV, THE LEPER 401 
Balian, his brother, Renaud of Sidon, and all the bishops were his 


partisans. 


4. Milon de Plancy is killed at Acre. Frederick, archbishop of 
Tyre, dies. 


Tus MILon DE PLancy of whom we have been speaking was a noble- 
man of Champagne beyond the mountains, from the land of Henry, 
count of Troyes. He had been on very intimate terms with King 
Amaury, his kinsman, who made him the seneschal of his kingdom. 
On the death of the younger Humphrey, son of Humphrey of Toron, 
Stephanie, his widow, the daughter of Philip of Nablus, was given 
by Amaury to Milon as his wife. By virtue of his wife, Milon was 
lord of Syria Sobal, that is, of the region beyond the Jordan which is 
generally called Montreal. By her former husband, however, 
Stephanie had two children, a son and a daughter. 

Milon, as has been said, presumed on the close friendship which he 
had enjoyed with the father of the present king and scorned the 
barons of the realm, even those greater than himself. In character he 
was far from discreet, a proud and even arrogant man, lavish of high- 
sounding phrases and filled with a spirit of excessive presumption. 
With a view to lessening the jealousy of the others in some way, he 
made use of a subterfuge only too apparent. He suborned a certain 
Rohard, guardian of the citadel at Jerusalem, a very ordinary man 
and utterly inefficient. Milon pretended to obey the orders of this man 
as if he himself were under his direction. In reality it was quite the 
contrary; the one bore a title splendid rather than substantial, while 
the other, under that guise, carried on the affairs of the realm just as 
he liked. Though conducting himself carelessly and talking impru- 
dently, he brought under his own direction the affairs of the kingdom 
in spite of the others. He arranged all matters and dispensed all 
favors according to his wish, thereby rousing intense hatred against 
himself. At length matters came to such a pass that certain men were 
secretly incited to plot against his life. 

When this was reported to him, he made light of it and continued 
to conduct himself as usual without taking proper precautions. One 
day while staying at the city of Acre, he was stabbed on the public 
street just at dusk and died after suffering ignominious and shameful 
treatment. The sentiment among the people concerning his death was 


402 BALDWIN IV, THE LEPER 


varied. Some said that he had been murdered because of the devoted 
loyalty which he had showed toward the king. Others, on the con- 
trary, claimed that he was secretly taking steps to seize the royal 
power. It was said that he had sent messengers to his friends and 
acquaintances in France, urging them to hasten to him, that by their 
help he might be enabled to lay hold on the kingdom. I have not 
ascertained definitely whether either of these views is correct. It is 
well known, however, that Balian of Jaffa, the brother of the Rohard 
mentioned above, had been sent to the lands across the sea with royal 
dispatches and gifts and that his return was daily awaited. 

About this time, in fact on the thirtieth of this same month of 
October, Frederick,® archbishop of Tyre, our predecessor, a man of 
very noble rank according to the flesh, died at Nablus, where he had 
been detained for some time by a serious illness. His body was borne 
with fitting obsequies and honors to Jerusalem and buried in the 
chapel of the Temple of the Lord, of which church he had been a 


regular canon. 


5. Lhe count of Tripoli is described; the ancestors from whom 
he descended; and how he undertook the regency. The 
writer of this history is made royal chancellor. 


Azout this same time, also, the barons of the realm and the prel- 
ates of the church having convened and the king also being at Jeru- 
salem, the count of Tripoli returned to receive the answer to the 
petition which he had presented in regard to the regency. Again he 
repeated his demand and pressed the same claims. After a deliberation 
lasting for two successive days, the king finally agreed, with the con- 
sent of all; and amid the loud acclamations of the people the count 
was invested in the chapel of the Sepulchre of the Lord with the 
entire government and powers of the realm, second only to that of 
the king. Since the count’s name is thus brought into prominence in 
the recapitulation of the events which we are presenting, this seems 
a fitting time to record for the benefit of posterity the facts that we 
have learned with certainty about him; not that we propose to write 
a panegyric, but as far as the necessarily limited compass of a brief 
history permits, we shall state who he was and of what lineage. 
Count Raymond, the subject of our discussion, traced his descent 


8 October 30, 1174. 


BALDWIN IV, THE LEPER 403 


according to the flesh to that elder Raymond who was an important 
leader in that army of the Lord by whose zealous work and labors the 
kingdom of the East was restored to the service of Christ. These facts 
were carefully recorded when we were treating of those first chiefs 
who came with the first expedition. This elder Count Raymond, of 
precious memory, had a son Bertram, who after his father’s death 
and the assassination of William Jordan, the latter’s nephew, became 
count of Tripoli. Bertram had a son Pons, who, on his father’s death, 
succeeded to the rule by hereditary right. He married Cecilia, the 
widow of Tancred and daughter of Philip, king of France, and by 
her had a son Raymond, who succeeded him in the government of 
Tripoli. Raymond married Hodierna, daughter of Baldwin, the 
second king of Jerusalem, who became the mother of this Raymond 

now under discussion. The latter succeeded his father as count of 
_ Tripoli when the elder Raymond was killed at the city gate of Tripoli 
in a sudden attack by the Assassins. On the mother’s side, therefore, 
this count was the cousin of King Amaury and King Baldwin, for they 
were the sons of two sisters. On the father’s side he was of lesser 
degree; his grandmother on his father’s side, the Cecilia just 
mentioned, was the sister of King Fulk, the father of kings Baldwin 
and Amaury, having the same mother, but not the same father. For 
the mother of both, who was the sister of Amaury de Montfort, had. 
first been the wife of the elder Fulk, count of Anjou. After the birth 
of the younger Fulk, she left her husband and fled to Philip, king of 
the Franks, by whom she had this Cecilia and several other sons. 
Philip, infatuated with the Countess [Bertrada], had, contrary to the : 
law of the church, driven out the queen, his legitimate wife by whom 
he already had two children, Louis and Constance. Thus the count 
and the two kings mentioned were closely connected on both sides. 

The count was a man of slender build, extremely spare, of medium 
height and swarthy complexion. His hair was straight and rather dark 
in color. He had piercing eyes and carried his shoulders very erect. 
He was prompt and vigorous in action, gifted with equanimity and 
foresight, and temperate in his use of both food and drink, far more 
than the average man. He showed munificence toward strangers, but 
toward his own people he was not so lavish. He was fairly well- 
lettered, an accomplishment which he had acquired while a prisoner 
among the enemy, at the expense of much effort, aided greatly, how- 


404 BALDWIN IV, THE LEPER 


ever, by his natural keenness of mind.® Like King Amaury, he eagerly 
sought the knowledge contained in written works. He was indefati- 
gable in asking questions if there happened to be anyone present who 
in his opinion was capable of answering. 

The same year that he entered upon the administration of the 
-kingdom he married Eschiva, a very wealthy woman, widow of 
Walter, prince of Galilee, by whom she had many children. For some 
unknown reason, however, after her marriage with the count she had 
no more. But he is said to have loved her and her children as tenderly 
as though she had borne them all to him. 

Now, after this short digression, let us return to the main account. 

During the preceding summer,'° Ralph of precious memory, bishop 
of Bethlehem and chancellor of the kingdom, had departed from the 
light of this world. In order that there might be someone in charge 
of the royal correspondence, the king, by the advice of his barons, 
appointed me to that office and invested me with the dignity of 
chancellor. 


6. At the request of the people of Damascus, Saladin takes pos- 
session of that city and the other parts of that region. The 
count of Tripoli marches against him to oppose his plans. 


Durinc the course of that same year, Saladin, son of Najm al-Din, 
who had succeeded his uncle Shirkuh, his father’s brother, over the 
kingdom of Egypt, was secretly summoned by the important men of 
Damascus. Their legitimate lord, Melehe Salah [al-Malik al-Salah], 
son of Nureddin, who had not yet reached the age of maturity, had 
his residence at Aleppo. Saladin committed the care of Egypt to one 
of his brothers named Seifedin [Sayf al-Din] and, hastening through 
the desert wastes of Syria, arrived at Damascus to take possession of 
the kingdom. A few days later, after receiving the city at the hands 
of the citizens, he advanced to Coelesyria where he hoped to bring all 

® This statement seems to contradict the earlier one about his captivity, in which 
he was represented as in chains and confinement. Raymond was generally regarded by 


Muslim historians of the period as a man of very keen intellect, the ablest of the 
Christian leaders at this time. 

10 Ralph’s last extant signature as chancellor is on a document of April 18, 1174 
(R. Réhricht, Regesta regni Hierosolymitani, no. 514), William’s first is on a docu- 
ment of December 13, 1174 (R. Reg., no. 518). Earlier (Book XX, chaps. 30 and 31) 
William implied that the death of Ralph had occurred in April, about a month before 
the death of Nureddin. 


BALDWIN IV, THE LEPER 405 


the cities of that land under his rule without war. Nor did this hope 
prove false, for within a short time the inhabitants of those places 
surrendered and voluntarily unbarred their gates to him. Thus, con- 
trary to the loyalty he owed to his lord and master, Saladin took over 
all the cities of that province: namely, Heliopolis, so called in the 
Greek tongue and now known as Malbec or, in Arabic, Baalbeth 
[Baalbec]; Hims, commonly called Camela; Hama; and Shayzar, 
usually called Caesarea the Great. He took it for granted that 
Aleppo and the young lord would pass into his power through the 
work of certain traitors, but that was prevented by an accident. 

This, then, was the situation in that part of the country. Meanwhile 
the king had taken advice as to the necessary action in so sudden a 
crisis when other important changes were impending. After a long 
conference with the nobles, it was finally decided with the approval of 
all that the count, with an army drawn from the forces of both the 
kingdom and the county of Tripoli, should march as quickly as 
possible toward Coelesyria and use every effort to oppose Saladin’s 
advance. This was a wise procedure, for any increase of Saladin’s 
power was cause for suspicion in our eyes and whatever augmented 
his authority seemed wholly injurious to: the good of the kingdom. 
For he was a man wise in counsel, valiant in war, and generous be- 
yond measure. All the more, for this very reason, he was distrusted 
by those of our nobles who had keener foresight. Even in our day 
there is no better means by which princes can win the hearts of their 
subjects, or, for that matter, of others, than by showing lavish bounty 
toward them; and nothing more readily attracts the minds of 
strangers, especially when it proceeds from princes. So our chief men 
had great reason to fear that when Saladin had doubled his possessions 
and had increased his empire twofold he would by this strength rise 
against the kingdom with greater force and harass us more violently 
than ever. In spite of all our efforts, however, all attempts to restrain 
him have been in vain, and today,'! with tearful eyes, we see that our 
apprehensions have been realized. For so powerfully has he risen 
against us by land and by sea that if the Dayspring from on high 
had not mercifully visited us, we should have no hope of resisting. 

It seemed wiser to lend aid to the boy king who was not yet of age, 
not that some show of kindness might be displayed toward him for his 


11 This was probably not written earlier than 1182, in the latter part of the year. 


406 BALDWIN IV, THE LEPER 


own sake, but to encourage him as an adversary against our distrusted 
rival, Saladin, that the latter’s plans might be hindered and his 
attacks against the kingdom rendered less effective. 


7. Why the enemy became more powerful against the Christians. 


Art this point I must digress somewhat from the course of my story, 
not to wander about aimlessly, but to bring out something of value. 
The question is often asked, and quite justly, why it was that our 
fathers, though less in number, so often bravely withstood in battle 
the far larger forces of the enemy and that often by divine grace a 
small force destroyed the multitudes of the enemy, with the result 
that the very name of Christian became a terror to nations ignorant 
of God, and thus the Lord was glorified in the works of our fathers. 
In contrast to this, the men of our times too often have been con- 
quered by inferior forces; in fact, when with superior numbers they 
have attempted some exploit against adversaries less strong, their 
efforts have been fruitless and they have usually been forced to 
succumb. 

The first reason that presents itself, as we carefully and thought- 
fully study this condition of our times, looking for aid to God, the 
author of all things, is that our forefathers were religious men and 
feared God. Now in their places a wicked generation has grown up, 
sinful sons, falsifiers of the Christian faith, who run the course of all 
unlawful things without discrimination. They are such as, or even 
worse than, those who said to their Lord, “Depart from us; for we 
desire not the knowledge of thy ways.” 12 From such, because of their 
sins, the Lord justly withdraws His favor, as if provoked to wrath. 
Such are the men of the present age, especially those dwelling in the 
East. One who would undertake with careful pen to portray their 
morals, or rather their monstrous vices, would succumb under the 
vast amount of material; in short, he would seem to be writing satire 
rather than compiling history.18 

A second reason occurs to us in passing. In earlier times, those first 
revered men who came to the lands of the East led by divine zeal 
and aflame with spiritual enthusiasm for the faith were accustomed 

12 Job 21: 14. 

*8 This reflects William’s familiarity with the classical writers, Juvenal and perhaps 


other satirists. The general indictment of the morals of his contemporaries may be 
more accurate than the usual discount of a churchman’s views would indicate. 


BALDWIN IV, THE LEPER 407 


to military discipline; they were trained in battle and familiar with 
the use of weapons.'* The people of the East, on the contrary, 
through long-continued peace, had become enervated; they were un- 
used to the art of war, unfamiliar with the rules of battle, and gloried 
in their state of inactivity. Therefore it is not strange that men of 
war, even though few in number, easily held their own even against 
larger numbers and could boast of their superiority in carrying off the 
palm of victory. For in such matters (as those who have had more 
experience in war know better than I), facility in arms due to long 
and continual practice, when opposed to untrained strength and lack 
of persistence, generally wins. 

A third reason, no less important and effective, forces itself upon 
my attention. In former times almost every city had its own ruler. 
To speak after the manner of Aristotle, they were not dependent on 
one another; they were rarely actuated by the same motives but, in 
fact, very often by those directly opposite. To contend in battle 
against adversaries of widely differing and frequently conflicting 
ideas, adversaries who distrusted each other, involved less peril. 
Those who feared their own allies not less than the Christians could 
not or would not readily unite to repulse the common danger or 
arm themselves for our destruction. But now, since God has so willed 
it, all the kingdoms adjacent to us have been brought under the power 
of one man. Within quite recent times, Zangi, a monster who ab- 
horred the name of Christian as he would a pestilence, the father of 
this Nureddin who has lately died, first conquered many other king- 
doms by force and then laid violent hands on Rages, also called 
Edessa, which even within our memory was the splendid and notable 
metropolis of the Medes. He took this city with all its territories and 
put to death all faithful believers found within its borders. 

Then his son, Nureddin, drove the king of Damascus from his own 
land, more through the treachery of the latter’s subjects than by any 
real valor, seized that realm for himself, and added it to his paternal 
heritage. Still more recently, the same Nureddin, with the assiduous 
aid of Shirkuh, seized the ancient and wealthy kingdom of Egypt as 
his own, in the manner already related more fully when the reign of 
King Amaury was under discussion. 


14 Their training in the use of arms was more pronounced than their discipline in 
the ordinary military sense. 


408 BALDWIN IV, THE LEPER 


Thus, as has been said, all the kingdoms round about us obey one 
ruler, they do the will of one man, and at his command alone, how- 
ever reluctantly, they are ready, as a unit, to take up arms for our 
injury. Not one among them is free to indulge any inclination of his 
own or may with impunity disregard the commands of his overlord. 
This Saladin, whom we have had occasion to mention so frequently, 
a man of humble antecedents and lowly station, now holds under his’ 
contro] all these kingdoms, for fortune has smiled too graciously upon 
him. From Egypt and the countries adjacent to it, he draws an in- 
estimable supply of the purest gold of the first quality known as 
obryzum.1® Other provinces furnish him numberless companies of 
horsemen and fighters, men thirsty for gold, since it is an easy matter 
for those possessing a plenteous supply of this commodity to draw 
men to them. But let us resume our story.7® 

It seemed desirable in the opinion of all present, as we have said, 
that every possible effort be made to oppose this magnificent man in 
his swift progress through successive triumphs to the highest pinnacle 
of his ambition. It was the general feeling that, as he became more 
and more powerful, he might prove to be a most formidable adver- 
sary to us. Accordingly, the count assembled forces from all about 
and, accompanied by the barons of the realm, hurried to the land of 
Tripoli. There he took up a position in that part of the district known 
as the land of Galifa and established his camp near the city of Arka. 


8. The lord of Mosul hastens to the aid of his nephew. Saladin 
prevails over him and seizes the whole region. The count 
makes a treaty with him. He receives hostages. 


WuiLe these things were happening in our midst, the uncle of 
Nureddin’s son, a very great prince named Cotabedi [Qutb al-Din], 
one of the most powerful among the Orientals of the Parthian race, 
had learned of his brother’s death and all the circumstances following 
it. Now Saladin, in defiance of the laws of humanity, wholly regard- 
less of his lowly condition, and ungrateful for the benefits that had 
been showered upon him by the father of that boy king, had risen 
against his rightful lord. Gathering a great force of cavalry in which 

1° Obryzum is one of the few late Latin terms used by William. 

76 Any comparison of this analysis of the causes for the change in the relations of 


Latin crusaders and their Muslim foe between the First and Third crusades with that 
of modern historians reveals William’s remarkable ability as an historian. 


BALDWIN IV, THE LEPER 409 


he was said to be very strong, Qutb al-Din crossed the Euphrates and 
marched against the traitors to bear aid to his nephew. 

This great prince was the lord of that very ancient and famous city 
of Nineveh, which is said long ago to have repented in sackcloth and 
ashes at the warning of the prophet Jonah. Not far from that more 
ancient city a new one under the altered name of Mosul has arisen. 
Built from the remains of ancient Nineveh, it houses the descendants 
of that former city and retains the honorable distinction of being the 
metropolis of all Assyria. On his arrival, the prince placed his camp 
in the plain around Aleppo. 

During this time Saladin was by no means idle. He had laid siege 
to Bostrum, the most important city of Arabia Prima, and also to 
Heliopolis, now usually called Malbec, both of which the citizens 
surrendered voluntarily without battle. He then laid siege to Hims, 
known also as Camela. 

Without the slightest delay, the citizens surrendered the lower part 
of this city, for those who remained faithful to the young king had 
retired to the citadel. This was situated upon a somewhat elevated 
hill and had been previously stoutly fortified and well furnished with 
arms and provisions. Saladin had also received at the hands of their 
citizens the surrender of some other cities in the vicinity of this prov- 
ince, namely, Hama, Shayzar, and all the country as far as Aleppo 
itself. 

Meanwhile, the refugees in the citadel of Hims had dispatched 
messengers to the count of Tripoli and to our forces who had en- 
camped in the place named above and were waiting in the hope that 
in so great a disturbance one side or the other would call them under 
the desired conditions. These envoys were instructed to beg them to 
come without delay and to promise that any aid which they might 
render against such a pestilential enemy should not lack a fitting 
reward. 

Furthermore, it was in this same fortress that the hostages were 
held whom the count had given to Nureddin, father of the young 
king, in exchange for his own release from captivity and as guarantee 
for a sum amounting to at least sixty thousand pieces of gold. Certain 
hostages given by Renaud of Sidon for the restoration of his brother 
Eustace were also held there. 

Stimulated by the hope of effecting some arrangement whereby 


410 BALDWIN IV, THE LEPER 


they might obtain the release of these prisoners from the commander 
of the citadel where they were confined, in return for the prospect of 
assistance, the Christians hastened thither as speedily as possible with 
all their forces. They discovered, however, that no reliance could be 
placed upon the words of the infidels, for the latter had some hope 
that through the efforts of the above-named prince the siege might 
be raised. After carefully considering the matter from various angles 
for a long time, the Christians at length returned to the camp which 
they had left shortly before. 

The fact that the Christians had retired as if in anger increased 
Saladin’s arrogance, and placing too much importance on their with- 
drawal, he began to approach Aleppo. There, by a series of repeated 
attacks, he harassed the chiefs’ forces greatly and tried to provoke 
them to combat. Finally, after many such challenges the forces met 
in a fierce and desperately contested battle at close quarters in which 
the tide of battle finally turned in favor of Saladin, and the Ninevites 
were forced to give way. It is said that they were betrayed by some of 
their own people who had been bribed by large sums of money. 
Saladin now returned to Hims and seized the citadel just as he had 
previously taken the city. 

From Hims he sent a message to the Christians requesting the 
count not to interfere with his victorious progress but to permit him 
to contend alone with the son of Nureddin and the others who had 
come to his aid. Lest this proposition be rejected with scorn as without 
due recompense, he offered to release without payment the count’s 
own hostages and those of Renaud. The count agreed to this proposal ; 
the hostages were returned as agreed upon in the pact; and the rest 
of the nobles who had taken part in this expedition were dismissed 
with fitting munificence. The camp was then abandoned and all 
returned home. 

Humphrey of Toron, the king’s constable, is said to have been the 
mediator in these negotiations, and he was accused of having been 
too closely associated in the bonds of friendship with Saladin. His 
action was decidedly detrimental to our interests, for thus this prince 
who should have been resisted to the utmost, lest his insolence toward 
us increase with his power, won our good will, and he whose ever- 
increasing strength was to the disadvantage of the Christians dared 
to count upon us. 


BALDWIN IV, THE LEPER AI 


Thereupon, the forces which had left the kingdom about the first 
of January returned home again about the first of May.17 


9. Mainard, bishop of Beirut, dies. The author of this history is 
raised to the dignity of metropolitan of Tyre. 


AxoutT this time, on April 25, Mainard of happy memory, bishop 
of Beirut, died at Tyre after a lingering illness of some duration. 
May his soul rest in peace! 

The church at Tyre had now been without a head for seven suc- 
cessive months. In this same month,1® however, by the unanimous 
wish of the clergy and people, the king also, as is customary, confirm- 
ing it, I was called, through the long-suffering of God rather than 
by any merit of my own, to undertake the charge of that church. Ten 
days later, on June 8, by the will of God, I, though all unworthy, 
received the gift of consecration in the church of the Sepulchre of the 
Lord at the hands of Amalrich, patriarch of Jerusalem. 


10. The king invades the land of the Damascenes and ravages 
the country. Hernesius, archbishop of Caesarea, dies. 


Asout this same time, while Saladin was busily engaged in the 
vicinity of Aleppo, news reached the king that the land of Damascus, 
without an army and without a leader, lay exposed to pillage, an easy 
prey to any damage which by right of war an enemy might inflict 
upon it. On receiving this information, Baldwin gathered a force of 
cavalry and crossed the Jordan. He passed through the forest near 
the city of Banyas, from which it derives its name, and, with the 
famous range of Lebanon on his left, arrived in the plain of Damascus. 
It was the time of harvest. Our forces dispersed over the plains and 
roamed freely in every direction. The growing crops and the stacks 
standing in the fields as well as the harvests already stored away in 
barns were consigned to the flames. The farmers themselves, how- 
ever, forewarned of our coming, had retreated with their wives and 
little ones to places more strongly fortified. Consequently our forces, 


17 January to May, 1175. 

18 Hardly the “same” month, though justified in the Latin reckoning, which counts 
the last half of the month in terms of the Kalends of the next month. He does not 
reckon the date of his own election, about May 30, in the same manner, however. Wil- 
liam thus became archbishop of Tyre on June 8, 1175. 


412 BALDWIN IV, THE LEPER 


having the whole region at their command, proceeded as far as 
Daria. This is a village of the plain in the neighborhood of Damascus, 
about four miles away from that city. From there they went on to 
Bedegene, which lies at the foot of Mt. Lebanon; the clear waters 
flowing from those heights have given the place the name of the 
house of Pleasure. This place they took by force in spite of the brave 
resistance of its people. Then they departed, carrying off with them 
rich booty and plunder before the very eyes of the helpless Dama- 
scenes and, after several days, arrived at home safe and sound. 

About this same time, Hernesius of good memory, archbishop of 
Caesarea, died. Heraclius, archdeacon of Jerusalem, was chosen as his 
successor and duly consecrated. 


11. The king again invades the territory of the enemy and lays 
waste a valley called Baccar. Renaud de Chatillon and Jos- 
celin, the king’s uncle, are released from the chains of the 
enemy. 


In the second year of the reign of King Baldwin IV, on the first 
day of the month of August,’® while Saladin was still engaged before 
Aleppo, the king summoned the chief men of the kingdom, assembled 
his cavalry, and again invaded the territory of the enemy. After pass- 
ing through the land of Sidon, he went up into the mountains which 
lie between our land and that of the enemy and came to Messaara, 
a place blessed with fertile soil and well watered by springs, in fact, 
seemingly supplied with almost every temporal good. From there he 
again descended into a valley called Baccar, where he found the land 
flowing with milk and honey, as we read in the Scriptures. Some think 
that this 1s the region which in ancient times was called Ituraea, of 
which, as we are told in the Gospel of Luke, Philip, son of Herod 
the Elder, was tetrarch, as he was also of the land of the Traconites. 
In still more remote time, perhaps during the days of the kings of 
Israel, it was called the forest of Lebanon because the valley extended 
to the foot of Mt. Lebanon. This region is highly desirable on ac- 
count of its fertile soil, its healthful waters, the numerous population 
of its many hamlets, and its agreeable climate. In the lower part of 

19 This is one of William’s most precise dates and indicates his normal intention to 


begin the regnal year from the day of accession. At this day Baldwin’s second year 
is about two weeks old. The events are clearly of 1175 and offer additional correction. 


BALDWIN IV, THE LEPER 413 


this valley is shown a city even today surrounded by strong walls, the 
buildings of which, under the modern name of Amegara, give many 
evidences of its early grandeur. 

Some students of antiquity think that this is Palmyra, once a noble 
colony of Phoenicia, which Ulpian of Tyre mentions in the new 
Digest under the chapter “De censibus.” *° 

As soon as our forces reached this place, they began to overrun the 
whole region without hindrance and set fire to everything. No one 
prevented them, for the inhabitants had fled to the mountains, whither 
no road that was passable for the troops led. Forewarned of our ap- 
proach, they had driven the greater part of their flocks and herds to 
the marshy meadows in the middle of the valley where the pasturage 
was very luxuriant. 

Meanwhile, the count of Tripoli, having passed through the plain 
of Jubail near the castle called Monethera, as had been arranged, 
suddenly advanced with his men into the vicinity of Heliopolis in the 
same valley, where he was reported to be burning everything. At this 
news, our people eagerly hastened in that direction, and as the count 
was no less desirous of meeting us, the two armies joined forces nearly 
in the middle of the valley. 

Semsedolus [Shams al-Dula], the brother of Saladin, was residing 
as governor at Damascus. As soon as news of this movement reached 
him, he at once assembled his forces and with the assistance of the 
townspeople made an effort to resist. He drew up his lines in battle 
array and prepared to march against us. Our forces likewise arranged 
their battalions in good order and came on with valiant spirit to the 
encounter. Both sides fought manfully. Many were killed, more 
wounded, and great numbers taken prisoners. At last, however, by 
the help of God, the enemy was put to flight. Shams al-Dula escaped 
with a few followers and fled to the steep hilly country. But the 
Christians went back laden with the spoils of the enemy, with herds 
of cattle and a vast amount of plunder. The victors suffered the loss 
of a few men who, though unfamiliar with the roads, had impru- 
dently ventured into the marshes to pillage and did not know of the 
sudden withdrawal of the Christian forces. 

Thus the king and his men by the will of God returned in entire 
safety to Tyre. With them they brought rich possessions of every 


20 Corpus juris civilis, Digest L. XV. 1. §. 


414 BALDWIN IV, THE LEPER 


kind, including herds of cattle and flocks of sheep, as notable proofs 
of their victorious prowess. 

The count of Tripoli, also richly laden with immense booty, joy- 
fully led his troops back to his own domains by the same road along 
which he had come. 

During that same year,?! Renaud de Chatillon, who by espousing 
Constance, the widow of Raymond, prince of Antioch, had succeeded 
to that principality, was restored to freedom. After many years of 
hard captivity at Aleppo, he obtained his release when a large ransom 
was paid by his friends. With him was Joscelin, son of Count Joscelin 
of Edessa and uncle of the king, who through the persistent efforts 
of his sister, the Countess Agnes, wife of Renaud of Sidon and mother 
of the king, was rescued from prison and restored to liberty. 

In that same year, on the second day of the month of May, Odo, 
bishop-elect of Sidon, who had been precentor of the church at Tyre, 
and Raymond, bishop-elect of Beirut, received through our ministry 
the gift of consecration in the church at Tyre. 


12. The emperor of Constantinople is defeated ignominiously at 
Iconium. 


Axout this same time also Manuel, emperor of Constantinople, of 
illustrious memory and loving remembrance in Christ, whose favors 
and most liberal munificence nearly everyone had experienced, met 
with a serious disaster in Iconium. With praiseworthy piety he was 
endeavoring to extend the Christian name by fighting against the 
monstrous race of the Turks and their wicked leader, the sultan of 
Iconium. But, because of our sins, he suffered there a great massacre. 
This involved not only his own personal following but also the 
imperial forces which he was leading with him in numbers so vast as 
almost to exceed human imagination. This engagement was attended 
by an enormous loss of men, among whom were some illustrious kins- 
men of his own, well worthy of special mention. In the number was 
his nephew, John the protosebastos, his brother’s son, a man of dis- 
tinguished liberality and noteworthy munificence, whose daughter 
Maria King Amaury had married. While making a vigorous resistance 

°1 Presumably the regnal year is meant, July 15, 1175—July 14, 1176, so that the 


release probably occurred in 1176 as did the consecration of the two bishops which 
is mentioned next. 


BALDWIN IV, THE LEPER 415 


against the foe he fell, pierced with many wounds. The emperor him- 
self succeeded in rallying most of his army and reached his own land, 
safe in body but almost overwhelmed in mind by the unfortunate 
disaster. This tragedy is said to have been due rather to the impru- 
dence of the imperial officers in charge of the battalions than to the 
strength of the foe. For, although there were broad and open roads 
well adapted for the passage of the army and for transporting the 
mass of baggage and impedimenta of all kinds, which is said to have 
been beyond estimating, they incautiously entrusted themselves head- 
long to dangerous narrow places which had been already seized by 
the enemy. Under such circumstances it was impossible to offer resist- 
ance, nor was there any opportunity to turn the tables against the 
enemy. From that day the emperor is said to have borne, ever deeply 
impressed upon his heart, the memory of that fatal disaster. Never 
thereafter did he exhibit the gaiety of spirit which had been so 
characteristic of him or show himself joyful before his people, no 
matter how much they entreated him. Never, as long as he lived, did 
he enjoy the good health which before that time he had possessed in 
so remarkable a degree. In short, the ever-present memory of that 
defeat so oppressed him that never again did he enjoy peace of mind 
or his usual tranquillity of spirit.?? 


13. William the Younger, marquis of Montferrat, arrives in 
Syria and marries the king’s sister. 


In the third year of King Baldwin IV, about the beginning of Octo- 
ber, Marquis 2° William, surnamed Long Sword, son of the elder 
William, marquis of Monferrat, arrived at the port of Sidon by invita- 
tion of the king and all the barons of the realm, both ecclesiastical and 
secular. Within forty days after his arrival, he was given the king’s 
elder sister as wife. This marriage had been arranged the year before at 
the time when William was invited to come for this purpose and had 
been confirmed by the hand of the king and all the barons, under solemn 
oath. With his wife, William received the maritime cities of Jaffa 
and Ascalon with their appurtenances and the entire county also, as 


22 This was the famous disaster of Myrokephalion, 1176 (see F. Chalandon, Les 
Comnéne, II, 507 ff.). 

23 This title never really descended to William Long Sword, for he died before his 
father. Our historian, however, applies it no doubt as a title of courtesy. The arrival 
of William Long Sword is here dated October, 1176. 


416 BALDWIN IV, THE LEPER 


had been agreed upon at that time. Some, however, were opposed to 
this measure and did not hesitate to express themselves openly. They 
had been among those who, without giving the matter adequate con- 
sideration, had approved of the invitation to William. Now, as is 
characteristic of changeable and inconstant natures, they changed their 
views. 

The marquis was a rather tall, good-looking young man with blond 
hair. He was exceedingly irascible but very generous and of an open 
disposition and manly courage. He never concealed any purpose but 
showed frankly just what he thought in his own mind. He was fond 
of eating and altogether too devoted to drinking, although not to such 
an extent as to injure his mind. He had been trained in arms from 
his earliest youth and had the reputation of being experienced in the 
art of war. His worldly position was exalted—in fact, few if any could 
claim to be his equals. His father was the uncle of King Louis of 
France, the brother of the king’s mother. His mother had been the 
sister of Conrad, the illustrious emperor of the Romans, and aunt 
of Frederick who now, since the death of Lord Conrad of distin- 
guished memory, his paternal uncle, vigorously administers the 
Roman empire. Thus the marquis was connected with these two illus- 
trious monarchs by the same degree of relationship. 

Barely three months after his marriage he was seized with a serious 
illness. For about two months he suffered without intermission, and 
in the following June, at the time when the king likewise was very 
ill at Ascalon, he died, leaving his wife pregnant. His body was borne 
to Jerusalem and buried with great magnificence in the vestibule of the 
church of the house of the Hospital to the left of the entrance, the 
present writer officiating.*# 

About that time, Humphrey of Toron, the king’s constable, married 
the Lady Philippa. She was the daughter of Prince Raymond of 
Antioch and sister of Bohemond III, who now governs this princi- 
pality, and of Maria, empress of Constantinople. Philippa had first 
married Andronicus, a kinsman of the emperor, but he put her away 


** The writer’s modesty almost causes the reader to overlook the importance of 
the statement. The funeral of the king’s brother-in-law and intended successor was an 
event of major importance at which the head of the church, the patriarch, would 
normally preside. The choice of William to act for him, presumably because he was 
old and ill at the time, carried with it some possibility of succession in the event of 
the patriarch’s death, 


BALDWIN IV, THE LEPER 417 


and clandestinely carried off Theodora, the widow of King Baldwin 
and his own niece, an act both shameless and unchaste.2° This Hum- 
phrey, of whom we have just been speaking, had no sooner led 
Philippa home than he began to be desperately ill; his wife too was 
seized with a grave malady and died within a few days. 


14. The count of Flanders, whose coming had been long 
awaited, arrives in the kingdom. 


In the fourth year and the second month of the reign of King Bald- 
win IV, about the first of August, Philip, count of Flanders, whose 
arrival had been expected for a long time, landed at Acre.2° The 
king, although still ill, caused himself to be carried in a litter 
from Ascalon to Jerusalem. Greatly delighted, he sent some of his 
barons and ecclesiastical nobles to welcome Philip with due ceremony. 
On the count’s arrival at Jerusalem, where the king was still lying 
seriously ill, by the unanimous advice of the lord patriarch, the arch- 
bishops, bishops, abbots and priors, the masters of the Hospital and 
the Temple, and all the chief laity, Philip was offered the power and 
the general administration of the entire kingdom without restraint. 
In peace and in war, both without and within, he was to have 
full jurisdiction over the greater and the less and to exercise his will 
freely over the treasure and revenues of the kingdom.?" 

After conferring with his followers, the count responded that he 
had not come for the purpose of receiving any power, but to devote 
himself to the divine service which was the object of his visit. Nor 
was it his plan to commit himself to any responsibility; on the con- 
trary, he wished to be free to return to his own land when his per- 
sonal affairs recalled him. Let the king appoint anyone he chose as 
governor in his realm, and he himself would obey that one for the 
good of the kingdom, as he would his own lord, the king of France. 


25 See Book XX, note 4. Philippa represents one of the earlier and passing affairs 
of Andronicus. 

26 William’s chronology is still precise, his statement being equivalent to August 2, 
1177, thus further correcting the error of 1173 as the year of Amaury’s death and 
Baldwin’s accession. 

27 It may be of some interest to note that the terminology here employed is reminiscent 
of the forms used by the Roman emperors in conferring powers upon their procurators. 
The legists of the twelfth century appear to have combined formulae from the Code 
and the Digest; it is probable that William drew from them (cf. Corpus juris civilis, 
Code 1. xii. 10; Digest 1. xix. 13 U1. iii, 1. 585 XV. i. 7. 1). 


418 BALDWIN IV, THE LEPER 


Perceiving that he utterly refused the honor which we had offered 
him, the king, through his barons, again earnestly requested that he 
at least consent to take command of all the Christian forces on the 
campaign about to be undertaken. This expedition had been arranged 
with the emperor of Constantinople long before, and the king now 
besought him to take care of the battles of the Lord against the 
Egyptians. To this request the count gave the same answer as before. 

Thereupon the king constituted Renaud, formerly the prince of 
Antioch, regent of the realm and commander in chief of the army, 
as had been arranged before the count arrived. Renaud was a man 
of proved loyalty and remarkable steadfastness. On him was to rest 
the duty, if the king was unable to appear in person, of directing the 
affairs of the kingdom and ruling over all things, with the assistance, 
however, of the count. 

When this was reported to the count, he answered that such a 
procurator did not seem to him necessary. On the contrary, someone 
should be appointed who would personally receive the glory of this 
war, if so it should please the Lord, or the disgrace of defeat, if God 
should thus ordain. To such a leader, also, should be given the king- 
dom of Egypt, if the Lord should bring that under our sway. 

To this we who had been sent by the king made answer that the 
king could not appoint an official with such powers without making 
the same a king, which was not the idea of the king nor of ourselves. 
This being the situation, the count at last revealed the secret thought 
of his mind and did not try to conceal to what end all his plans were 
directed. He remarked that it was strange that no one had approached 
him on the subject of the marriage of his kinswoman [Sibylla]. 

As we listened to these words, we were amazed at the subtlety of 
the man and his evil designs. For the count who had been so courte- 
ously received by the king was now, in defiance of the laws of hos- 
pitality and the claims of kindred, attempting to supplant him. 


15. Lhe followers of the count influence him falsely and per- 
suade him not to acquiesce in the views of the barons of the 
realm. 


Ir is necessary to digress a little at this point, that our readers may 
understand more fully the wicked plan which the count was endeavor- 
ing to carry through. Our information on this subject has been ob- 


BALDWIN IV, THE LEPER 419 


tained not only from many individual accounts but also from his own 
confession. 
_ Accertain man of great influence, the advocate of Bethune, had ac- 
companied the count on his pilgrimage and had brought with him his 
two sons, who were already grown men. It is said that the advocate, 
with the help of Count William de Mandeville, who was also on 
this same pilgrimage, began to influence Philip to believe that he 
could turn the situation of the kingdom greatly to his own advantage. 
He claimed to own extensive hereditary estates in the count’s own 
land, all of which he promised to relinquish to the count as a per- 
petual possession with hereditary rights, if Philip would bring about 
a marriage between the two daughters of King Amaury and the two 
sons of the advocate. King Amaury had left two daughters: one of 
these was the widow of the marquis; the other, now of marriageable 
age, was living with her mother the queen at Nablus. The count 
agreed to this proposal and was endeavoring to bring about the mar- 
riage. But to return to our story. 

We had now learned the goal toward which the count’s ambition 
was directed. Accordingly we answered that the matter must first be 
submitted to the king; on the following day, we would report the 
response which the king, after taking counsel, should deem advisable 
to give. 

In the morning, after first holding a conference, we returned to 
the count and made answer as follows: that it was our custom, ap- 
proved by long usage, not to consider the remarriage of a widow, es- 
pecially of one who was pregnant, within one year after the death 
of her husband, for that would not be honorable mourning. In the 
case of this lady, scarcely three months had passed since the death of 
the marquis; therefore he must not take it ill that we could not 
treat of her remarriage, since that would be contrary to the customs 
of the times and of our land. Yet it would meet with the favor and 
approval of us all if the aforesaid proposal could be handled with the 
advice of him from whom it now came, for assuredly, in this as in 
all other matters, the king desired to be governed by the count’s ad- 
vice and wished, as far as was consistent with his own honor, to con- 
cur with his wishes. Let the count take the initiative and name a suita- 
ble person for that alliance, and we were ready, in the present matter, 
to act according to the general desire. 


420 BALDWIN IV, THE LEPER 


The count was offended at this reply and answered that he would 
in no wise consent to do this unless all the barons would first swear 
to abide by his proposal without dispute, for any noble would con- 
sider himself insulted if, after being named, he should suffer rejec- 
tion. 

To this we responded that it would reflect on the honor of the king 
as well as on our own, if we should give his sister to one unknown to 
us even by name. The will of the king and of all the barons being 
at last plain, the count abandoned his design, but not without evinc- 
ing much angry resentment. 


16. Ambassadors arrive from the emperor of Constantinople. 
They demand that the treaty which the king had concluded 
with their lord be carried out at once and an expedition 
against Egypt made ready. 


TuereE was in Jerusalem at this time an imperial embassy composed 
of eminent men of high rank: namely, Lord Andronicus, surnamed 
Angelus, the son of the emperor’s sister; the Megaltriarch [sic] 
John, a very magnificent man; Count Alexander of Conversana in 
Apulia, a nobleman of high rank; and Georgius of Sinai [George 
Sinaites], a member of the imperial court.?8 They had come to the 
king by command of the emperor, who considered the time now ripe 
for carrying out the treaty which had been made between himself 
and King Amaury and had subsequently been renewed under similar 
terms with the present King Baldwin. He hoped much also, with 
the aid of God, from the coming of the count of Flanders. Ac- 
cordingly, a general assembly was called at the same Most Holy City 
to consider this matter, and thither all the barons of the realm re- 
paired. One and all cherished the same hope, that by the counsel and 

28 This embassy consisted of Andronicus Angelus, John Dukas, the grand heteriarch, 
George Sinaites, and Count Alexander de Gravina (see Chalandon, Les Commnéne, I, 
551). This is the third mission of Count Alexander to Jerusalem reported by William. 
Few persons of the twelfth century had more diplomatic experience. A Norman of south- 
ern Italy, he had been dispossessed of his lands in a revolt of the barons against Roger II. 
For some years he shuttled back and forth between the courts of Conrad III and of 
Constantinople seeking to recover his lands with the help of either. Both courts made 
use of him as an envoy. Finally he settled down at Constantinople, where Manuel en- 
trusted him with the command of the Norman troops and sent him on missions to 


Germany and Sicily as well as to the Holy Land. His name appears prominently for 


an extraordinarily long time, 1132 to 1177 at least (see Chalandon, Les Comnéne, I1, 
551 et passim). 


BALDWIN IV, THE LEPER 421 


aid of the count and his train the kingdom beloved of God might 
receive the desired enlargement and that effective measures might be 
taken for the destruction of the enemies of Christ. Then without 
warning, as we have said, the count made an about turn and, unmind- 
ful of his promises, devoted himself to other projects. Thus the very 
foundations of our hope were destroyed. 

Notwithstanding the defection of the count, the imperial envoys 
insisted that the treaty should be carried out. They argued that delay 
was likely to be attended with danger; there was no reason on the 
part of the Greeks why the proposed campaign should not proceed; 
they were prepared to fulfil all the terms of the treaty in good faith 
and that with a broad interpretation. 

After listening to the words of the envoys and conferring together, 
we decided to lay the matter before the count in the fullest detail. 
He was called; and when he arrived the substance of the agreement 
between the emperor and ourselves was put before him, accurately 
transcribed and sealed with the golden seal of the emperor. 

After he had carefully perused the document and thoroughly un- 
derstood its contents, he was asked for his opinion. He answered that 
he was a stranger, unfamiliar with localities and especially with the 
land of Egypt, which was said to lie far remote from all other coun- 
tries and to be subject to different conditions, as when, at certain sea- 
sons of the year, the waters overflow their banks and completely sub- 
merge the land. We of course knew the nature of the country better 
and the chances of approaching it, yet he had heard from those who 
had often visited Egypt that the present was not a favorable season 
for an invasion. He added that winter was at hand and Egypt was 
covered with the overflow of the Nile. Again, he had heard that 
Turks had flocked there in vast numbers. Finally, he feared—and this 
most of all—that there would be a scarcity of supplies during the 
march and even after they reached Egypt and that, as a result, the 
army would suffer from famine. 

We perceived from these objections that he was seeking to find 
subtle excuses to avoid undertaking the campaign. To prevent this, 
we offered him six hundred camels to transport food, arms, and other 
baggage by land and promised the necessary number of ships to carry 
by sea provisions, engines, and all the necessary equipment for war. 
He rejected these offers entirely, however, and added that he would 


422 BALDWIN IV, THE LEPER 


not go down into Egypt with us on any terms, lest haply he and his 
forces might be compelled to suffer from famine. He added that he 
had been accustomed to lead his armies through rich countries and his 
troops could not endure privations of this kind. But should we choose 
another region whither we could conduct the armies more easily and 
conveniently to strive for the increase of the Christian name and the 
destruction of the enemies of Christ, then he and his men would 
gladly make preparations to set forth. 


17. The count’s opposition to this honorable project hinders the 
carrying out of the treaty. 


However, it was neither safe nor honorable for us to withdraw from 
the treaty.2® The imperial envoys, distinguished men of rank, were 
now in Jerusalem with large pecuniary resources and declared that 
they were ready to carry out in good faith, as we have said, the con- 
ventions initiated between the emperor and ourselves. They had 
seventy galleys lying in the port of Acre, besides other ships, sufficient 
for the voyage and the campaign as agreed upon. To refuse to fulfil 
the agreement to which we had pledged ourselves seemed most dis- 
honorable and in fact dangerous. Even if the imperial deputies would 
consent to defer the campaign till another time, we felt that it would 
be unwise to lose the aid of the emperor now prepared for us; more- 
over, we feared his displeasure, which might have serious results for 
the realm. Therefore, with the consent of both parties, we resolved 
to undertake the campaign, in accordance with the treaty and the ar- 
rangements already made, and to proceed with the preparations for 
the expedition so long ago agreed upon with the emperor. 

When the count of Flanders learned of our decision, he was ex- 
tremely angry and declared that the whole affair had been framed 
as an insult to him. Finally, after much discussion, that we might 
comply with his wishes in some measure, the expedition was again 
deferred until after the end of April with the consent of both the 
Greeks and our people. 

Matters were accordingly settled in this fashion. The count had 
now been at Jerusalem for about fifteen days and had accomplished 

*° The treaty to which William alludes is probably the one made by Amaury on his 


visit to Manuel in 1171. Various events had intervened to postpone the execution of 
the treaty (see Book XX, chaps. 22 and 23). 


BALDWIN IV, THE LEPER 423 


his devotions. Accordingly he assumed the palm, which is with us 
the sign of a completed pilgrimage, and departed for Nablus as if 
intending to withdraw entirely. From there, after several days, he 
sent to us at Jerusalem the advocate of Bethune with others of his 
company. They were commissioned to declare, on the part of the 
count, that he was prepared—and this was the substance of his de- 
liberations—to follow us wherever we wished, be it to Egypt or to 
other lands. This frequent change of mind seemed to us ridiculous, 
and we felt that the count might justly be accused of an unstable 
character, since he never adhered to any definite project. Yet, on the 
receipt of this message containing the news of his decision, we re- 
luctantly conferred with the Greeks. It proved, however, that he had 
no intention of making good his words by works. On the contrary, 
he was trying with all his might to put us in the wrong, that he might 
be able to write to the princes beyond the mountains that we were 
responsible for deferring the campaign.®° He had sent the above- 
mentioned envoys hoping that the Greeks would in no wise consent 
to our request, and that thus his own error would recoil upon us. 


18. The emperor's envoys return to their own land. The count 
proceeds to the land of Antioch. Balian marries the widow 
of King Amaury. 


THEREUPON we addressed the Greeks to ascertain whether they were 
still willing to stand by their original agreement and go down into 
Egypt, provided the count would come with us. They answered that 
although the time was very short to make the necessary preparation 
for their armies, yet if the count would swear by his own hand that 
he would go with us and, in the event of his own illness either here 
or on the march, would send his forces; if he would promise to strive 
for the expansion of Christianity on the entire campaign in good faith, 
without fraud or evil intent; if, furthermore, he would guarantee 
that the agreement which had been arranged and committed to writ- 


30 These negotiations have been described at such length, no doubt, because William 
was apparently the king’s chief advisor at this time and directly in charge of the ne- 
gotiations with Philip. Fearful of Philip’s intentions to discredit the Latin court in 
the eyes of Western rulers, William not only reports the negotiations in detail here, 
but appears also to have sent out letters to the same effect. Thus both Robert of Torigni 
and William of Newburgh, neither of whom lived long enough to have read William’s 
book, gave a somewhat abbreviated account of these events as William recounts them. 


424 BALDWIN IV, THE LEPER 


ing should not be infringed in any particular, be it by advice or aid; 
and if he would cause his people to swear to the same, then, although 
his many changes of feeling seemed to them strange and inconsistent 
with a steadfast and virile character, they would go with us, that the 
glory of the kingdom dear to God and the honor of the emperor 
might be increased. 

The advocate and those who had been sent with him then offered 
to take oath on the terms as given above. Yet they were not willing 
to include therein all the stipulations, nor would they promise that 
the count also would take oath. Thereupon, as we did not care to 
continue the discussion to no purpose, the conference was broken off 
and the matter so often under negotiation was deferred to a more 
opportune season. The imperial legates then took leave and returned 
to their own land. ' 

After their departure, the count’s envoys began to inquire why the 
proposed campaign should not take place at once. “What project 
could the count undertake with the aid of the kingdom, that he might 
not seem utterly idle?” At last those with whom the final decision 
lay determined to move into the territories of Tripoli or Antioch, 
where it seemed possible that something might be accomplished for 
their own honor and the advancement of Christianity. 

There were some who laid it to the charge of the prince of Antioch, 
who was present at the time, and also to the count of Tripoli that the 
count was so averse to the expedition into Egypt.*! They were en- 
deavoring, it was said, to draw him into their own lands, that by his 
aid some project might be undertaken that would lead to the increase 
of their own domains. But that hope was frustrated, for neither among 
us nor, forsooth, among them was the count permitted from on high 
to do anything worthy of record. It was indeed fitting that he from 
whom the Lord had withdrawn His favor should prosper in nothing, 
for “God resisteth the proud, and giveth grace to the humble.” 3? 

However, the king promised to give Philip his codperation and aid 
and, on his departure, granted him a hundred of his own knights and 
a force of two thousand foot soldiers. 

This was the condition of our affairs about the first of October.?3 
At that time, accompanied by the count of Tripoli, the master of the 


5} William is here not sparing his friend Raymond of Tripoli from a possible share 
in the blame for the failure of the negotiations. 


32 1 Pe. 5:5. 33 October 1, 1177. 


BALDWIN IV, THE LEPER 425 


Hospital, and many brethren of the Knights Templars, the count left 
with his forces for the land of Tripoli. 

About the same time Balian d’Ibelin, the brother of Baldwin of 
Ramlah, with the king’s consent espoused Queen Maria, widow of 
King Amaury and daughter of John the protosebastos, so often re- 
ferred to above. With Maria, Balian received the city of Nablus, 
which had been given her under the name of jointure at the time of 
her marriage and which he was to hold during the life of his wife. 


19. The count of Flanders, with the help of the prince of Antioch 
and the count of Tripoli, lays siege to the fortress of Harim, 
but their efforts are without result. 


On arriving at Tripoli, after all necessary preparations for the march 
had been made and the troops well organized, the count, accompanied 
by the count of Tripoli, led his forces into the land of the enemy. 
They remained for a time near the cities of Hims and Hama, a step 
which resulted in some loss to the enemy. For Saladin, after accom- 
plishing his purpose in that vicinity and making peace with the son 
of Nureddin on his own terms, had departed for Egypt. The prepara- 
tions to which I have alluded above seemed to him to indicate that 
the long-threatened campaign, arrangements for which had been made 
long ago, was about to take place. Accordingly he led with him all 
the forces to be obtained from any source and concentrated his im- 
mense strength of cavalry at the strategic points where it seemed 
probable that the most important events would occur. As a result, the 
count and his forces found the country without defenders and were 
able to overrun the land without opposition. The fortified towns and 
the citadels of the cities were, however, well supplied with provisions 
and had sufficient guards and arms for their defense. 

When the prince of Antioch learned that the two counts had en- 
tered the enemy’s country, he hastened to join them by another route, 
as had been agreed upon between them. The forces thus united in 
body were of one mind also; accordingly, as the best plan under the 
circumstances, it was decided to besiege the fortress of Harim. This 
place lies in the territory of Chalcis and is now called Artasium. It 
was once a noble city but is now reduced to the status of a very small 
stronghold. Both city and fort are about twelve miles distant from 


Antioch. 


426 BALDWIN IV, THE LEPER 


On arriving before Harim, the camp was established in a circle 
about the place. Thus surrounded on all sides, the besieged were en- 
tirely prevented from emerging, nor could anyone, however desirous, 
approach to lend them aid. Machines and all the necessary engines 
for carrying on a siege were at once constructed. As an intimation that 
operations would be continued to the end, the Christians also built 
huts of osiers and, as winter was approaching, they fortified the camp 
with palisades to prevent their possessions from being swept away by 
the torrential rains. Meanwhile, the inhabitants of the surrounding 
country and the Christian people worked zealously to bring in the 
necessary provisions from Antioch and the places in the vicinity. 

The fortress of Harim belonged to the son of Nureddin and was 
the only one in that part of the country which Saladin had permitted 
him to retain. After a complete blockade on all sides had been ef- 
fected, the Christians, in relays according to custom, made assaults 
on the place at regular intervals and battered the walls with their 
engines and machines so constantly that the besieged could obtain no 
rest whatever. 


20. Saladin arrives from Egypt with vast forces and invades the 
kingdom. He takes up a position before Ascalon. The king 
marches out to meet him with all the strength of the realm. 
An important engagement takes place before the city. 


Tus, then, was the condition of affairs in Antioch. In the meantime, 
Saladin had learned that the count and the entire Christian army had 
advanced into the land of Antioch while he, not without grave ap- 
prehension, had been awaiting them in the land of Egypt. It seemed 
to him with reason that he could safely invade a land thus stripped 
of its troops, when one of two things might easily be secured: the in- 
vasion would either force the enemy to abandon the siege of Harim, 
or, if they persisted in continuing that, he could obtain a victory over 
those left in the kingdom. 

He accordingly assembled troops in great numbers from all sources 
and caused them to be equipped even better than usual with arms and 
all manner of things commonly used in warfare. Then with this 
army he marched out of Egypt. After traversing by forced marches 
the vast intervening wilderness, he arrived at the ancient city of 


BALDWIN IV, THE LEPER 427 


al-Arish, now deserted. There he left part of the heavy baggage and 
the packs of the soldiers. Then, taking with him the lighter-armed 
troops and the most experienced fighters, he passed by our fortresses 
Daron and Gaza, the latter a very famous city, and, sending scouts on 
in advance, appeared suddenly before Ascalon. 

However, the king had received warning of his advance some days 
before; he had hurriedly mustered the forces still left in the kingdom, 
and his troops were already occupying the city. 

As already stated, the count of Tripoli was gone, taking with him a 
hundred of our knights, picked men selected from a large number; 
the master of the Hospital with his brethren and a large number of 
the Knights Templars had also left. The rest of the brethren had 
retired to Gaza in the expectation that Saladin would lay siege to that 
place, since it was the first of our cities which he would reach. Hum- 
phrey, the royal constable, was suffering from a serious illness, as has 
been mentioned. The king therefore had but few with him. When he 
learned that the enemy were roving freely about in hostile fashion, 
scattered through the plains adjoining our territory, he left a few 
men to guard the city and, invoking aid from above, marched out 
with his forces prepared to fight. 

Saladin had concentrated his troops in one body near the city. When 
the Christian army advanced and saw the vast numbers of their ad- 
versaries, those of greater experience in warfare advised that the 
forces remain in their present position rather than risk the uncertain 
chances of battle. Accordingly the Christians stood off the enemy’s 
attacks until evening, although during that time single combats took 
place at intervals, for the two armies were not far apart. As the day 
drew to a close, the Christians prudently retired to the city again, for 
in view of the enemy’s superior numbers it seemed hazardous to trust 
their modest forces to a camp for the night. This act roused Saladin 
and his men to such a pitch of arrogance that they no longer remained 
in close array but paraded about in admiration of their own prowess. 
As though already victorious, Saladin began to allot definite parts 
of his conquered possessions to his fellow soldiers, and his forces, as 
if they had already secured all they desired, began to conduct them- 
selves with utter disregard of caution. In scattered bands they wan- 
dered freely about and scoured the country in every direction. 


428 BALDWIN IV, THE LEPER 


21. The Turks devastate the land far and wide; they burn cities 
and outlying districts. 


WE supposed that during the night the enemy were engaged either 
in establishing their camp before the city, where they had been the 
day before, or had drawn nearer and were already investing it. But 
on the contrary, without allowing themselves or their horses to rest, 
they spread in bands over the whole region hither and yon, as the 
impulse seized each one. Among their satraps was a certain Jevelino, a 
valiant fighter, ever ready for any daring exploit. He was an Ar- 
menian by birth, an apostate who, abandoning the faith of the Medi- 
ator between God and man, had gone over to the Gentiles and was 
following devious ways.°* With the troops which he commanded, 
this man proceeded to Ramlah, a city in the plain, and, finding it 
deserted, burned it. Since the place was not well fortified, the citizens 
had abandoned it in despair; some had gone with Baldwin’s expedi- 
tion to Ascalon, and others, with the weaker ones and the women and 
children, had repaired to Jaffa. Still others had gone up to a fairly 
well fortified stronghold in the mountains called Mirabel. After 
burning Ramlah, Jevelino marched on with all his forces to the neigh- 
boring city of Lydda; here he divided his troops and quickly sur- 
rounded the place. Then, with showers of arrows and weapons of all 
kinds, he attacked the citizens and harried them without intermission. 
The entire population fled to the church of the blessed martyr St. 
George. 

At this point such desperate fear laid hold on the Christians that 
their only hope seemed to lie in flight. Great terror descended not 
only upon the people in the plains, where the enemy was roving 
about freely without opposition, but even upon those living in the 
mountains. The citizens of Jerusalem itself were almost ready to 
abandon the Holy City; having no confidence in its fortifications, 
they hastened in all eagerness to the tower of David, as it is com- 
monly called, and abandoned the rest of the city. Some of the ma- 
rauders had advanced as far as the place called Calcalia and had 
spread over almost the entire surface of the plain. Now they were 
about to leave the level country and ascend to the hills. 


*4 Jawali (see Book XX, note 28). Beha ed-Din (The Life of Saladin, p. 89) 
calls him a mamluk. 


BALDWIN IV, THE LEPER 429 


Now was the appearance of this region desolate and overwhelmed 
with bitterness, as in the day when the Lord, provoked to wrath, 
“covered the daughter of Zion with a cloud.” ** Yet, “even in his 
anger, he did not withhold his pity, nor did he forget mercy;” °° 
“but he inclined toward us; he consoled and aided us 37 and was still 
favorable toward us” *® and “according to the multitude of sorrows 
in our hearts, his comforts delighted our souls.” °° 


22. The king goes forth from Ascalon and meets the enemy. 
Both sides are drawn up in battle array prepared for the 
encounter. 


WHILE these events were happening in that part of the country, 
news was brought to the king that a host of the enemy, scattered far 
and wide over his land, had seized upon his domain. Thereupon, he 
immediately left Ascalon with his men and prepared to march against 
the foe, for he felt that it was wiser to try the dubious chances of 
battle with the enemy than to suffer his people to be exposed to 
rapine, fire, and massacre. So, marching along by the seashore, he was 
following the coast, that he might come upon the enemy stealthily 
and suddenly when he reached the place where Saladin was en- 
camped on the plain. He immediately directed all his forces, both 
cavalry and infantry, in all their martial array against him. He was 
joined by the brethren of the Knights Templars who had remained 
at Gaza, and together, with ranks in battle formation, they prepared 
to meet the foe. As they advanced, intent on the one purpose of 
avenging their wrongs, the sight of the fires on every side and the 
reports of the massacre of their people inspired them with divine 
courage, and they hastened on as one man. Suddenly, opposite to 
them and not far away, they saw the enemy’s lines. It was about the 
eighth hour of the day. 

During this interval, Saladin had learned that the Christians were 
advancing in the hope of fighting. Dreading the engagement which 
heretofore he had apparently desired, he sent out messengers to re- 
call his troops, who had scattered in various directions. By the sound 
of the trumpet and the roll of the drums and by admonitions also, as 

35 Lam. 2:1. In this and the following passages William is paraphrasing Scripture 


to meet his needs. 
36 Ps. 76: 10. 87 Ps. 70:2, 38 Ps. 76: 8. 29 Ps, 93:19. 


430 BALDWIN IV, THE LEPER 


is usual at such times, he sought to encourage his men for the con- 
flict and to rouse them by his words.*° 

With the king were Eudes de Saint-Amand, the master of the 
Knights Templars, and eighty of his brethren, Prince Renaud, Bald- 
win of Ramlah and his brother Balian, Renaud of Sidon, and Count 
Joscelin, the king’s uncle and seneschal. Their numbers, including all 
ranks and conditions, were barely three hundred and seventy-five. 
Led by the wondrous Life-giving Cross which was borne by Albert, 
bishop of Bethlehem, and after first invoking aid from on high, they 
all advanced in battle formation, eager for the encounter. 

In the meantime, the enemy’s forces who had ventured some dis- 
tance away to seek booty and spread conflagration began to arrive 
from different directions, a circumstance which greatly increased Sala- 
din’s strength. In fact, had not the Lord, who never fails those who 
put their trust in Him,*? graciously inspired our men with inward 
courage, the Christians would have been driven to despair, not only 
of victory, but of liberty and safety as well. However, they nonethe- 
less drew up their forces in battle array and arranged their lines ac- 
cording to military rules, disposing in proper order those who were 
to make the first attack and the reserves who were to come to their 


aid. 


23. A battle ensues. Saladin is defeated and put to flight with ex- 
treme danger and ignominy. 


Tue ranks of fighters on both sides now gradually approached each 
other, and a battle ensued which was at first indecisive, but the forces 
were very unequal. The Christians, however, strengthened by the 
grace shed upon them from on high, soon began to press on with 
ever-increasing boldness; Saladin’s lines were broken and, after a 
terrible slaughter, were forced to flee. 

Wishing to ascertain the actual facts, I made a careful investiga- 
tion of the enemy’s numbers and, from the narratives of many trust- 
worthy people, found that twenty-six thousand light-armed cavalry, 
in addition to others mounted on camels and beasts of burden, had 
entered our territory.*? Of these, eight thousand belonged to those 


#0 Reminiscent of Virgil Aen. 1x. 717. 41 Ps, 33:23. 

*°It is probable that William accompanied the king on this campaign. The use 
of the first person here, the definiteness of detail, and the fullness of his description 
seem to indicate that fact. 


BALDWIN IV, THE LEPER 431 


splendid soldiers called in their own language toassin; the other 
eighteen thousand were the common knights known as carnagoles.** 
A thousand of the most valiant knights acted as a bodyguard to 
Saladin. All these wore yellow silk over their breastplates, the color 
that Saladin himself bore. It is the custom of Turkish satraps and of 
the great chiefs, who in the Arabic tongue are called amirs, to rear 
with great care certain young men, some of whom are slaves captured 
in war, others are bought or perhaps born of slave mothers. These 
youths are instructed in military science, and when they have reached 
manhood are given wages or even large possessions, according to the 
merit of each. These men are called in their own language mamluks. 
To them is entrusted the duty of protecting the person of their lord 
in the vicissitudes of battle, and upon them in no slight degree de- 
pends the hope of obtaining the victory. Always surrounding their 
lord, they endeavor with one accord to protect him from harm, and 
they cling to him even unto death. As one man, they continue to 
fight until he has fled. Consequently it often happens that while the 
rest make good their escape by flight, nearly all the mamluks fall.** 

The Christians pursued the defeated foe from the place called 
Mons Gisard to the swamp known as Cannaie des Etourneaux, until 
day declined and night fell upon them. For twelve miles and more, 
during this entire flight, the foe was mercilessly slaughtered, nor 
would any of their number have survived, had not the swift descent 
of night rescued them from their pursuers. To assist them in their 
flight, the stronger men and those who had swift horses threw away 
their arms and apparel, abandoned their packs, and, leaving the 
weaker people behind, fled with all their might. Thanks to the ap- 
proach of night, these escaped death. The remainder met with a 
worse fate, for all were either captured or put to the sword. 

At the very beginning of the engagement, we lost four or five 
knights and some foot soldiers, but the exact number of these is not 
known. 

When those who had escaped by flight reached the marsh just men- 
tioned, they cast into the sedges and into the water itself whatever 

28 Rohricht quotes Néldeke in identifying toassin, or tawasin, as a designation of 
troops having religious significance, and carnagoles, or Caragholam, as literally “black 


servants” or mamluks (see R. Rohricht, Geschichte des Kénigreichs Jerusalem, 1100- 


1291, P. 377; note 1). 
44 This is the usual description of mamluks. 


432 BALDWIN IV, THE LEPER 


they still carried, namely, their breastplates and ironshod boots, that 
they themselves might proceed unimpeded. Even weapons were 
thrown into the water, that the Christians might not use them even 
as tokens of victory. 

All these things, however, were soon recovered by our people, for, 
following hard on the footsteps of the flying foe, that very night and 
the next day they carefully searched the reedy swamp just mentioned 
and, by combing the swamp itself with poles and hooks, speedily 
found whatever the foe had hidden there. 

We have heard from persons worthy of credence that in one day 
they saw a hundred breastplates recovered from that place, besides 
helmets, iron greaves, and other articles of less worth which still 
were valuable and useful. 

This notable mercy, worthy of remembrance forever, was conferred 
upon us by divine grace in the third year of King Baldwin IV, on 
November 25, the feast day of the holy martyrs, Peter of Alexandria 
and the virgin Catherine.*® 

The king went back to Ascalon, where he awaited the return of 
his forces who had pursued the fugitives by different roads. Within 
four days they had all arrived, loaded with plunder. Carrying tents 
and driving before them slaves, troops of camels, and horses, they 
came, according to the words of the prophet, “as men rejoice when 
they divide the spoil.” #6 


24. Stormy weather and unusual cold exhaust the endurance of 
the fugitives who had escaped from the battle. Great num- 
bers die while many others are captured. The king returns 
victorious to Jerusalem. 


STIL another circumstance plainly showed that divine clemency was 
with us. On the following day and for ten successive days thereafter, 
violent rains accompanied by unusual cold occurred so that it almost 
seemed that the very elements had conspired against the foe. They 
had lost all their horses, which, during the three days’ occupation of 
our territories, had received neither food nor drink, nor even rest. 
They had also voluntarily thrown away their baggage and all kinds 

*° Tt should be “fourth year.” Either William is here using the calendar year or is 


guilty of a slip of the pen, probably the latter. The date is November 25, 1177. 
48 Ts. 9: 3. 


BALDWIN IV, THE LEPER 433 


of clothing, as we have said. To add to the sum of their miseries, 
they were entirely without food and were perishing from cold and 
hunger, from fatigue of the march and the burden of unaccustomed 
hardships. Everywhere were to be found, now a few of these fugi- 
tives, and again larger numbers, against whom even the weak and 
powerless could vent their fury as they would. Many, in their igno- 
rance of the localities and thinking that they were on the way home, 
presented themselves in our villages either to travellers or to those 
who were hunting them. 

Meanwhile the Arabs, that race of unbelievers, perceiving the ca- 
tastrophe that had befallen the Turks, hastened to those who, as we 
said above, had been left to guard the baggage at the city of al-Arish. 
By reporting the disaster that had overtaken their people, they so 
terrified them that they fled in dismay. These Arabs also persistently 
pursued any who by chance had managed to evade our clutches. Thus 
those who thought they had escaped from us fell into their hands as 
prey, so that the prophecy seemed to be fulfilled which says, “that 
which the locust hath left, hath the canker-worm eaten.” ‘7 The fol- 
lowing is said to be a custom of that wicked race. Under whatever 
chief they advance to battle, they always avoid the dangers of com- 
bat, and, as long as the result of the battle is uncertain, they look on 
at a distance; when it is decided, they attach themselves to the victor, 
pursue the conquered enemies, and enrich themselves by the spoils. 

For many days captives were brought in from the forests and moun- 
tains, even from the desert. Sometimes they came to us of their own 
accord, preferring to be held in chains and prisons rather than to 
waste away under the torture of cold and hunger. 

Meanwhile, the king, after distributing the spoils and treasures ac- 
cording to the rules of war, hastened to Jerusalem to give thanks and 
make offerings for the blessings bestowed upon him by the Lord. 
But Saladin, who had gone up in a spirit of great arrogance with a 
numerous array of knights, returned stricken by the divine hand, at- 
tended by barely a hundred followers. He himself is said to have 
been mounted on a camel. . 

Let us regard more closely and carefully the bounty of this divine 
gift and consider how in the liberality shown toward us, the Holy 
Comforter desired all the glory to be His own. For if the count of 


*7 Joel 1:4. 


434 BALDWIN IV, THE LEPER 


Flanders, the prince of Antioch, the count of Tripoli, and the great 
company of knights who were not present had participated in this 
victory brought about by divine grace, they would not have hesitated 
to think, even though they did not say, “Our hand is high, and the 
Lord hath not done all this.” #8 For heedless and inconsiderate per- 
sons are wont to creep in thus when all is prosperous. 

But now, according to His word as it is written, “my glory will I 
not give to another.” #® He has retained all the glory and authority 
for Himself, while employing the aid not of the many but of the few. 
In His loving kindness he renewed the miracle of Gideon, he scat- 
tered a great multitude and thus made it plain that it was He alone 
and not another, by whose aid one could “chase a thousand, and two 
put ten thousand to flight.” °° 

Therefore to Him from whom comes every good and perfect 
gift 51 let it be ascribed, for in this present instance there is nothing 
which man can attribute to his own works. It is the gift of divine 
grace, and it has been shown to those who do not deserve it. “Thou 
stretchedst out thy right hand, the earth swallowed them,” °? “an 
the greatness of thine excellency thou hast overthrown them that rose 
up against thee.” °% 


25. The besieging forces before the fortress of Harim in the land 
of Antioch abandon the task and return to their own land. 


Wuite these events were taking place among us, the count and 
those with him continued to besiege the castle referred to above, but 
without result. For they were given over to frivolity and paid more 
attention to games of chance and other evil pleasures than military 
discipline or the rules of siege operations permitted. They were con- 
tinually going back and forth to Antioch, where they spent their time 
at the baths and at banquets and indulged in drunken debauches and 
other pleasures of the flesh, thereby forsaking the work of the siege 
for the delights of idleness. 

Even those who seemed to be assiduous in attendance there became 
lazy and careless and accomplished nothing of importance. They 
passed their time in idleness and led vicious lives.®* The count himself 
daily remarked that he must return home and intimated that he was 


* De. 32:27. #9 Ts. 42:8. 50 De, 32:30. 51 Ja. 1:17. 
52 Ex, 15:12. 53 Ex. 15:7, 54 Persius Sat. v. 60. 


BALDWIN IV, THE LEPER 435 


detained at Harim against his will. This attitude not only hindered 
those who were honorably endeavoring to carry on the siege outside, 
but it furnished an incentive to a bolder resistance on the part of the 
townspeople. The hope that the siege would soon be raised enabled 
them to endure all things for a short time. To bear the injuries in- 
flicted upon them was hard, yet even that was better than to surrender 
to the hated race the stronghold which had been committed to their 
loyalty and thus to incur forever the opprobrium of traitors. 

The fortress of Harim occupies an elevated position on a hill which 
is apparently largely artificial and is accessible to assailants on one 
side only. The other sides are practically unapproachable to anyone 
wishing to make an assault, yet it is possible for hurling machines to 
scourge it from all directions without hindrance. 

Repeated attacks had been made, with varying results. These 
seemed to indicate that if a vigorous assault were made, with divine 
assistance the place might be taken. Yet the affair had lapsed into a 
state of indifference, as we have said and, because of our sins, all valor 
had departed from us and all prudence had vanished. Although those 
shut up within its walls had now fallen into the last state of despair, 
the Christians began to consider returning home. We cannot sufhi- 
ciently marvel at the fact (for it seems beyond human understanding) 
that the Lord brought such darkness over the minds of these great 
princes and in His wrath so blinded them. For, although no one con- 
strained them and the castle was now almost in their power, yet, 
under the spur of jealousy and their own desire for idleness, they 
abandoned it to the enemy. When the prince perceived that the count 
of Flanders had determined on his course and was irrevocably set 
upon this decision, he accepted from the besieged a sum of money, 
the amount of which is unknown to us, and raised the siege. 

The count of Flanders then returned to Jerusalem, where he cele- 
brated the holy days of Easter and then made his preparation to re- 
turn. As soon as the galleys and necessary transports were ready, he 
sailed from Laodicea in Syria with the intention of returning to his 
own land after a visit to the emperor of Constantinople, but he left 
behind him a memory in no wise blessed.>® 

About this same time, Frederick, emperor of the Romans, after 
twenty years of schism was reconciled to Pope Alexander at Venice. 


55 He reached his homeland in the fall of 1178. 


436 BALDWIN IV, THE LEPER 


The walls of the holy city of Jerusalem had partly fallen because 
of their great age. Accordingly, about this time the princes, both secu- 
lar and ecclesiastical, joined together and decided that a fixed sum of 
money should be paid annually until, by the help of the Lord, the 
work of repairing the walls should be finished. And thus might be 
fulfilled the saying, “Do good in thy good pleasure unto Zion: build 
thou the walls of Jerusalem.” °° 


26. A general synod at Rome is proclaimed. The king builds a 
fortress beyond the river Jordan under unfavorable auspices 
and commits it, when completed, to the care of the Templars. 


In the year of our Lord 1178, which was the fifth year of the reign 
of King Baldwin IV, in the month of October,*" certain men who had 
been summoned left our East to attend a general synod at Rome 
which had been proclaimed the previous year throughout the entire 
Latin world. The delegates invited were: myself,°* William, arch- 
bishop of Tyre; Heraclius, archbishop of Caesarea; Albert, bishop 
of Bethlehem; Ralph, bishop of Sebaste; Joscius, bishop of Acre; 
Romanus, bishop of Tripoli; Peter, prior of the canons of the Holy 
Sepulchre; and Raynald, abbot of Mt. Sion. Joscius not only attended 
the synod with us, but also went as envoy to Henry, duke of Bur- 
gundy, charged with the mission of inviting him to come to the king- 
dom. For we had unanimously agreed that he should be given the 
king’s sister in marriage under the same conditions which had been 
made at the time of her previous marriage to the marquis. The duke 
received this offer at the hand of Bishop Joscius graciously and is said 
to have sworn by his own hand that he would come. However, for 
reasons still unknown to us, he later disregarded his oath and refused 
to fulfil the solemn promise by which he had bound himself. 

During the same month in which we started on our journey to at- 

56 Ds, 51:18. 


57 The statement is again precise in terms of the regnal year reckoned from the 
day of accession. 

58 This list is of interest not only in that it places William at the head of the dele- 
gation, but also because of the omission of several prelates, notably the patriarch 
Amalrich and the archbishop of Nazareth, both of whom were too old and feeble to 
attempt the journey. Peter, prior of the canons of the Holy Sepulchre, went as personal 
representative of the patriarch, though William does not mention the fact (see J. D. 
Mansi, Sacrorum conciliorum nova et amplissima collectio, Vol. XXII passim). 


BALDWIN IV, THE LEPER 437 


tend the synod, the king, with the entire strength of the realm, began 
to build a fortress beyond the Jordan in the place commonly called 
Jacob’s ford.°° 

Old traditions say that this is the place where Jacob, as he was re- 
turning from Mesopotamia, divided his people into two bands and 
sent messengers to his brother, saying, “With my staff I crossed this 
river and now I am returning with two bands.” ®° It lies in the region 
of Cades Nephtalim between Nephtalim and Dan, the latter of which 
is known both as Banyas and as Caesarea Philippi. These form part 
of Phoenicia and are suffragan cities of Tyre. The place is ten miles 
from Banyas. There, upon a hill of moderate height, they laid foun- 
dations of suitable depth and within six months had erected a fortifi- 
cation of solid masonry in the form of a square, of marvellous thick- 
ness and adequate height. 

While they were engaged in building operations there, it hap- 
pened that bandits emerged from the land of Damascus and so beset 
the highways that none could go to and from the army without peril, 
neither could travellers pass along any of the ways. These bandits 
came from a place in the mountains near Acre called Bacades or, in 
the vulgar tongue, Bucael. This is most delightfully situated in the 
land of Zebulon, and, although on the top of a mountain, it is well 
watered and planted with thick groves of fruit trees. Its inhabitants 
are insolent men, fierce fighters and men very proud of their great 
numbers, through which they have made all the surrounding fields 
and villages tributary to them. To evildoers fleeing from due punish- 
ment, to brigands and highwaymen, they offer a safe refuge among 
them, in consideration of which they receive a share of the booty and 
spoils taken by violence. Because of their intolerable arrogance, these 
people had become hated and abhorred by all around them, both 
Christians and Saracens, and frequent attempts had been made to 
exterminate them utterly, but without success. As a result, they be- 
came bolder every day. The king finally found himself unable longer 
to endure their insufferable arrogance and the thefts and murders 
perpetrated by them. He suddenly seized the place by force of arms 
and put to death all whom he could apprehend. The majority es- 
caped, however, for, having learned of the king’s intention, they had 


59 October, 1178. 80 Ge, 32: 10. 


438 BALDWIN IV, THE LEPER 


fled with their wives and little ones to the land of Damascus. From 
here they kept up their ancient habits and made frequent, though 
stealthy, sallies into our territory. 

At this time, with associates of the same type, they had invaded our 
territories, as has been said. The knowledge that men of this stamp 
were rendering the public highways so dangerous roused the Chris- 
tians to wrath; accordingly they laid ambushes in strategic places and 
bent all their energies to outwitting the rascals. It happened one night 
that these highwaymen, after making a raid, were coming down from 
the mountains of Zebulon, intending to return to the place whence 
they had set out. But, falling into the ambushes laid by the Christians, 
they gathered the fruit of their ways; nine of their number were 
captured and more than seventy killed. This happened on March 
ee 

At this same time, on March 5, a synod of three hundred bishops 
convened at Rome in the basilica of Constantine called the Lateran. 
This was in the twentieth year of the pontificate of Alexander,® and 
the twelfth of the indiction. 

If anyone desires to know the statutes enacted and the names of 
the bishops, their number and titles, he may read the writing which, 
at the earnest request of the holy fathers who took part in this synod, 
we have carefully compiled. We have directed that this be placed 
in the archives of the holy church at Tyre among the other books 
which we have collected for that same church, over which now for 
six years we have presided. 


27. The king invades hostile territory and suffers an enormous 
loss. Humphrey, the king’s constable, meets death there. 


Wuen the fortress had been constructed and was complete in all 
parts, news reached the king that the enemy in search of pasturage 


$1 March 21, 1179. 
6° Alexander III had been elected pope late in 1159. The Third Lateran council, 
which he had called, convened officially March 5, 1179, though the clergy, like the 
delegation from Jerusalem, had been gathering at Rome for some time before, while 
a few arrived after the council convened. It was quite the largest and most important 
church gathering that had been held in the West for centuries. 
63 The time of this writing is thus after June 8, 1181. His library is evidently a 
matter of pride. No catalogue of its contents has been preserved, but it is reasonable 
to assume that it included all the books to which he referred frequently. 


BALDWIN IV, THE LEPER 439 


had incautiously led their flocks and herds into the forest near Banyas. 
They were without fighting men on whom they might count to repel 
any attack made by us. Accordingly our people, thinking they could 
easily be vanquished if, as had been reported, they were undefended 
and without military protection, stealthily made their way thither. 
In order to fall upon the Turks suddenly and without warning before 
they were aware of the enemy’s vicinity, the Christians made the en- 
tire march by night. The morning found them at their destination. 
While some of the troops were hurrying about in one direction and 
another, looking for booty, and others were following rather slowly 
at some distance behind, the company with which the king was riding 
very carelessly became entangled in a certain narrow place among the 
rocks where some of the enemy were lurking. For, having learned 
that we were coming, they had decided to hide, hoping in this way 
to avoid our attack and provide for their own safety. But when they 
saw the Christians rush upon them without due caution, necessity 
forced them, although reluctant and still despairing of their lives, to 
become brave. Realizing that our men were in a difficult position, 
they suddenly leaped forth and boldly attacked them. Up to this time 
their only desire had been to avoid the adversary by hiding; now, how- 
ever, letting fly a shower of arrows from afar, they killed our horses 
and then pressed hard upon our forces. 

The lord constable, on perceiving that the enemy had so unex- 
pectedly emerged, threw himself impetuously upon them. As usual 
he fought vigorously and faithfully strove with all his might to pro- 
tect the king in this dangerous crisis, that the enemy might not rush 
upon him to his peril. While he was thus engaged, the enemy again 
and again rained furious blows upon him which inflicted fatal wounds. 
From this critical situation he was with difhculty rescued by his men 
and carried off on horseback. 

Several distinguished men, well worthy of pious remembrance, fell 
in that engagement. Among this number were Abraham of Nazareth, 
a youth of fine appearance, whose noble character, high birth, and 
great wealth gave good promise for the future, and Godechaux de 
Turout, who also left a good reputation behind him. Several others 
of lesser rank also fell at that place. 

Such was the situation of affairs when the king, thus rescued from 


440 BALDWIN IV, THE LEPER 


so great danger by the efforts of his followers, returned to the camp 
from which he had set out earlier and recalled the disorganized troops 
who had scattered hither and yon. 

The condition of Humphrey, the royal constable, became more 
critical; accordingly he was borne on April 11 to the new fortress 
which was still under construction. There he lingered for about ten 
days, prolonging his life under stress of great pain. He made his last 
testament wisely and with forethought. On April 22 the exemplary 
life of this man, who will be forever mourned by his country, came to 
an end. He was buried with due ceremony at his noble and famous 
castle Toron, in the church of the Blessed Mother of God, the Im- 
maculate Virgin. 

Immediately after Humphrey’s death, on the twenty-seventh of 
the same month of May,*4 Saladin began to besiege the recently built 
fortress. Without intermission he sent forth dense showers of arrows 
and harassed the besieged within its walls with repeated assaults. But 
suddenly an arrow sent by one of the besieged whose name is said to 
have been Rainerius of Marum [Renier de Maron & Mareuil] 
chanced to deal a fatal wound to one of the richest of Saladin’s amirs. 
The death of this noble threw the infidels into such utter confusion 
that they abandoned their project, raised the siege, and departed. 


28. Saladin invades the land of Sidon. The king assembles the 


mulitary strength of the realm and goes out against him. 


Savap1n had already invaded the land of Sidon by force of arms twice 
or more and without any opposition had freely plundered, burned, 
and slaughtered. In the following month he decided to make another 
invasion. Accordingly he located his camp between the city of Banyas 
and the river Dan and sent out skirmishers in large numbers to drive 
off booty and set fires. He himself, ready to aid in emergencies, re- 
mained in the camp and there awaited their return and the result of 
their aggressions. Meanwhile the news that Saladin was laying waste 
our lands in this fashion reached the king. Taking with him the Cross 
of the Lord, he hastened to the city of Tiberias with all the forces he 

84 This misstatement of “same” month is more excusable, since he dated the previous 
event in terms of the Kalends of May. Humphrey of Toron, who had been made con- 
stable by Baldwin III in 1151, had been a source of strength to three successive kings. 


He was not only a courageous fighter, but also a wise military leader. His death oc- 
curred May 27, 1179. 


BALDWIN IV, THE LEPER 441 


could muster from every source. From there he went on through the 
town of Sephet and the ancient city of Naason and arrived with his 
forces at Toron. 

Here he received accurate information from the messengers who 
were constantly going and coming that Saladin with his army was still 
in the same position. He had sent his light-armed cavalry on ahead, 
however, to lay waste the fields of Sidon; and there in hostile fash- 
ion they were killing, burning, and plundering. After consultation, 
therefore, it was unanimously determined to advance against the foe. 
In accordance with this plan, the Christians directed the army from 
Toron toward Banyas and came to a village called Mesaphar. This 
was located on the top of a mountain, and from it could be seen the 
entire region below as far as the base of the Lebanon range. The 
enemy’s camp was also visible in the distance, and the conflagrations 
and ravages committed by them as they scoured the country hither 
and yon were evident to all. 

The infantry troops, wearied to exhaustion by the long march, 
could not keep up with the pace of the knights as they rode swiftly 
down the mountainside. Accompanied by only a few of the more ac- 
tive foot soldiers, therefore, the cavalry descended to a place com- 
monly known as Merguim in the plain directly below the mountain. 
There they halted for several hours to deliberate over their further 
course. 

In the meanwhile, Saladin became somewhat alarmed at the unex- 
pected arrival of the king. He was anxious about his advance guard, 
who seemed to be shut off from himself and the army, and feared 
also that his camp might be attacked. He therefore ordered the bag- 
gage, impedimenta, and all the equipment to be placed between the 
wall and the forewall of the neighboring city where it could easily 
be found whatever the result of the battle might be. Thus prepared, 
but very doubtful of the result, he awaited the outcome of events. 

Meanwhile the skirmishers, who had gone out on a plundering ex- 
pedition, learned with great alarm of our approach and, laying aside 
all other considerations, determined to reach their own lines if pos- 
sible. But after crossing the river between the land of Sidon and the 
plain where, as I have mentioned, our army was located, they encoun- 
tered our forces. A skirmish at close quarters immediately ensued, 
wherein the Christians, by the help of God, were victorious. After 


442 BALDWIN IV, THE LEPER 


many had been killed and still more thrown to the ground, the enemy 
turned in flight and endeavored to gain Saladin’s camp. 


29. A battle is fought. The Christians are defeated, and many of 


them are taken prisoners. 


Wuite things were in this state Eudes, the master of the Knights 
Templars, accompanied by the count of Tripoli and some others who 
were following them, ascended a hill lying opposite. On their left 
was the river and on the right the great plain and the camp of the 
enemy. 

When Saladin learned of the desperate plight of his men, exposed 
as they were to danger and even to death, he prepared to go to their 
assistance. He had reached this resolution when he caught sight of 
some of his defeated soldiers in full flight. He rode to meet them 
and, on learning the situation, cheered them with encouraging words 
and sent them back to the ranks. Then suddenly he fell upon the 
Christians who were in reckless pursuit of the fugitives. 

In the meantime our infantry, enriched by the spoils of the slain, 
had encamped along the river bank and, in the belief that a complete 
victory had been won, were quietly resting. The cavalry, however, 
realized that the enemy whom they had thought vanquished were 
rushing upon them with renewed vigor. In confused ranks, without 
time or opportunity to reconstruct their lines and draw up their forces 
in battle array according to military rules, they fought bravely and 
for a time resisted and stoutly sustained the enemy’s attacks. Their 
strength, however, was unequal to that of the foe, and, scattered and 
disorganized as they were, they could not aid one another. Conse- 
quently, they finally turned and fled in a disgraceful rout. They might 
easily have avoided the pursuing enemy and saved themselves by 
turning in another direction, but, because of our sins, they adopted a 
poorer plan and plunged into a narrow defile beset with steep cliffs. 
Here it was impossible, except at peril of death, either to advance or 
to retreat through the enemy’s lines. Some crossed the river; most 
of these, in the hope of saving their lives, retreated to the nearest 
stronghold, which was called Belfort, while others, after making the 
crossing, followed along the farther bank to Sidon and thus avoided 
the furious tide of battle. On the way they encountered Renaud of 
Sidon and his men, who were hastening to the army; but on learning 


BALDWIN IV, THE LEPER 443 


of this disaster, Renaud heeded their warning and returned to Sidon. 
This act is believed to have been responsible for manifold disasters 
that day. For if he had continued his march to the fortress, he could 
probably have saved many from the enemy with the help of the 
townsfolk and the country people who knew the locality. As it was, 
these fugitives hid that night in caves among the rocks. The next 
morning the enemy, scouring every nook and corner, discovered them 
and threw them into prison. The king, however, by the aid of his 
royal soldiers escaped without injury. The count of Tripoli also 
reached Tyre with a few companions.®° 

Among the Christians who were captured at that time were Eudes 
de Saint-Amand, the master of the Knights Templars, a wicked man, 
haughty and arrogant, in whose nostrils dwelt the spirit of fury,®* 
one who neither feared God nor revered man. Many people laid at 
his door the loss and never-dying shame of this disaster. It is said that 
within the year he died a captive in a squalid prison, mourned by 
no one. 

Baldwin of Ramlah, a noble and powerful man, was also captured 
there, as was likewise Hugh of Tiberias, the stepson of the count of 
Tripoli, a young man of fine natural promise, greatly beloved by all. 
Many others whose names I do not know were also taken prisoners 
there. 


30. Saladin besieges the fortress recently built. He takes it by 
storm and destroys it. Henry, count of Troyes, and Peter, 
brother of Louts, king of the Franks, arrives in Syria. 


SucH was the condition of affairs in the kingdom at this time. Our 
fortunes were at the lowest ebb when Henry, the illustrious count of 
Troyes and son of Count Theobald the Elder, from whom we had 
parted at the city of Brindisi in Apulia as we were returning from the 
synod, landed at Acre with a numerous following of nobles. As has 
been mentioned, many nobles had come in the same crossing, among 
them Peter de Courtenay, brother of Louis, king of the Franks, and 
Philip, [bishop] elect of Beauvais, son of Count Robert and brother 
of King Louis. The hearts of our people, greatly depressed by the 
late disasters, were revived by their coming, which emboldened them 


85 This battle is dated June 10, 1179 (see Stevenson, Crusaders, p. 221). 
86 Job 27: 3. 


444 BALDWIN IV, THE LEPER 


to hope that under the protection of so many great nobles they might 
be able to avert misfortunes in the future and perhaps avenge those 
of the past. But, since the Lord was against them, this hope was vain, 
they were unable to overcome the results of past evils and fell into 
even worse troubles. For Saladin, our most redoubtable enemy, had 
been raised to such a pitch of arrogance by his many successes and 
good fortune that suddenly, before we had a chance to regain our 
breath, he laid siege to our stronghold which had been completed the 
April previous. 

On its completion, this oft-mentioned fortress was given into the 
charge of the brothers of the Knights Templars, who laid claim to 
all that region for themselves by concession of the kings. 

On learning that Saladin had invested the place, the king called 
out the full strength of the realm and all the military forces. He also 
summoned Count Henry and the other nobles who had recently ar- 
rived and hastened to Tiberias. There he convoked all the leading 
men of the realm with the intention of going to the aid of the be- 
sieged and forcing the enemy to raise the siege. 

But while he was waiting there, having deferred preparations for 
a day, a report arrived which proved to be true that the enemy had 
taken the place and razed it to the ground.®” All the men of the gar- 
rison which had been left there to guard it had either been slain or 
captured. Thus an even greater catastrophe was added to their former 
misfortunes, so that of them it might truly be said, “The Lord their 
God has departed from them.” Truly “thy judgments are a great 
deep”; “how terrible art thou in thy works.” % 

He who, during the year just past, had bestowed such great gifts 
upon His faithful children now suffered them to be clothed with 
great fear and confusion. And who knoweth the mind of the Lord? 
And who is the sharer of His counsels? Wherefore is it then, O Lord? 
Hast Thou withdrawn Thy favor because of the great multitude and 
the many nobles present, lest they ascribe to themselves that which is 
given not by merit but by grace? Or because they did not make suf- 
ficiently rich returns to Thee, their benefactor, for the favors erst- 
while conferred by grace? Or because “whom the Lord loveth he 
chasteneth, and scourgeth every son whom he receiveth.” °° 


6? The castle was taken by storm August 30, 1179. 
68 Ps, 36:6; 66: 3. 69 He, 12:6. 


BALDWIN IV, THE LEPER 445 


Thou hast covered our faces with shame that we may seek Thy 
holy name, which is blessed forever. We know and confess, O Lord, 
that Thou dost not change. For Thou hast said, “I am the Lord, I 
change not.” 7° Nevertheless whatever the cause may be, we know 
that Thou art just, O Lord, and Thy judgments are righteous. 

At this time the negotiations which had been made the year before 
with reference to the duke of Burgundy were renewed through Count 
Henry, his uncle. It was hoped that he would arrive by the next cross- 
ing, but, as was afterward quite apparent, for some unknown reasons 
he still declined to come. 


70 Mal. 3: 6. 


HERE ENDS THE TWENTY-FIRST BOOK 


THE TWENTY-SECOND BOOK BEGINS 
CONFLICT OF INTERESTS 


1. The king marries his sister, the widow of the marquis, to 
a young man named Guy de Lusignan. He concludes a truce 
with Saladin on equal terms, an unprecedented act. 


Ar this same time also, Bohemond, prince of Antioch, and Ray- 
mond, count of Tripoli, arrived in the kingdom with a cavalry escort. 
This caused the king much alarm; for he feared that they might try - 
to bring about a revolution, in which case, after dethroning him, they 
might try to seize the realm themselves. The king’s malady was now 
troubling him more than ever, and from day to day the symptoms of 
leprosy became more and more apparent. 

His sister, who had been the wife of the marquis of Montferrat, 
was still a widow and was awaiting the coming of the duke, as has 
been explained. But the king knew these two nobles well and, al- 
though both were his kinsmen, he distrusted their motives in coming. 
When he learned that they had arrived, he hastened the nuptials of 
his sister. He might have found in the kingdom nobles of far greater 
importance, wisdom, and even wealth, both foreigners and natives, 
an alliance with any one of whom would have been of much greater 
advantage to the kingdom. But without waiting to consider that “too 
much haste spoils everything,” ! the king, for reasons of his own, sud- 
denly married his sister to a young man of fairly good rank, Guy de 
Lusignan, son of Hugh the Brown, of the diocese of Poitiers. Con- 
trary to the usual custom the marriage was celebrated during the week 
of Easter. 

The nobles just mentioned perceived that their coming was re- 
garded with suspicion by the king and his barons; accordingly they 
returned home as soon as they had completed the customary devo- 
tions. They remained for a few days at Tiberias, however, and while 
they were there, Saladin, unaware of their presence, made an attack 
on the city. No harm resulted to the citizens, however, and he again 
withdrew into the country around Banyas. There he remained with 


1Statius Theb. X. 704. 


CONFLICT OF INTERESTS 447 


his armies, waiting, as was afterwards learned, for the arrival of a 
fleet of fifty galleys which he had ordered to be prepared during the 
course of the winter just past. This delay caused the king some un- 
easiness, and he therefore sent messengers to Saladin to discuss a truce. 

Saladin willingly agreed to the suggestion, although not, it is 
claimed, because he distrusted his own strength or had any reason to 
fear our forces, which he had so often defeated during the past year. 
But for five successive years extreme dryness and a dearth of rain in 
the region round Damascus had caused a scarcity of food of every 
description for both man and beast. 

A truce on both land and sea, for foreigners and natives alike, was 
accordingly arranged and confirmed by an exchange of oaths between 
the two parties. The conditions were somewhat humiliating to us, for 
the truce was concluded on equal terms, with no reservations of im- 
portance on our part, a thing which is said never to have happened 
before. 


2. Saladin invades the land of Tripoli and destroys the crops 
and other Christian possessions in that locality. 


THE same year, during the summer immediately following, Saladin, 
after arranging for the safety of the provinces of Damascus and 
Bostrum, led all his cavalry forces to the land of Tripoli. There he 
established a camp and sent out his squadrons over the surrounding 
country. The count had retired with his forces to the city of Arka and 
was there awaiting an opportunity to engage the enemy without too 
much risk. The knights of the Temple, who lived in the same vicinity, 
also remained shut up in their strongholds; they expected almost 
hourly to be besieged and did not wish to risk an encounter with the 
Turks. The brothers of the Hospital had likewise retired in alarm to 
their fortified castle of Krak. They felt that if, in the midst of such 
confusion, they could defend the fortress just named from injury by 
the enemy, their duty had been done. The Turkish army occupied a 
position between these brethren and the forces of the count; conse- 
quently the Christians could not assist one another, nor could they 
send messengers from one army to the other to ascertain the con- 
ditions in each. 

During this time Saladin ranged here and there over the plain, 
especially over the cultivated fields, and without opposition traversed 


448 CONFLICT OF INTERESTS 


the entire locality. He burned all the crops, those that had been 
gathered into the granaries, those still stacked in the fields, and the 
growing grain as well. He drove off cattle as booty and laid waste the 
whole country in every direction. 


3. An Egyptian fleet arrives at the island of Arados, The count 


of Tripoli makes a truce with Saladin. 


Tus was the situation in the land of Tripoli when, about the begin- 
ning of June, Saladin’s naval force suddenly appeared in the vicinity 
of Beirut. But when the commanders of that force learned for a fact 
that Saladin had concluded a treaty with the king, they respected the 
terms of the peace which he had declared and feared to violate any 
provisions of that treaty in the territories of Beirut or indeed within 
the boundaries of the entire realm.2 Learning that their lord was 
with his army in the land of Tripoli, they repaired thither and seized 
Arados, an island opposite the city of Tortosa, some three miles away. 
There in the harbor they found a convenient anchorage for their 
galleys. 

The first person to dwell on this island and establish thereon a 
fortified city is said to have been Aradius, son of Canaan and grand- 
son [sic] of Noah, whence is derived the name Arados. Near by on 
the east, is a once splendid city called Antarados, so named, as we 
have said, because it lies opposite Arados. This name, however, has 
now been corrupted to Tortosa. Here the apostle Peter, when travel- 
ling through Phoenicia, is said to have founded a small church in 
honor of the Mother of God. This edifice is still visited ‘by large 
numbers of people, and here, through the intercession of the Im- 
maculate Virgin, many benefits are reported to have been granted 
from on high in answer to the prayers of the faithful in time of need. 
Both these cities are suffragans of the metropolis of Tyre, as is also 
another place near by known as Maraclea, which is regarded as belong- 
ing to Phoenicia. 

The landing of these forces at the island of Arados sent a thrill 
of terror through the whole region. While awaiting the commands of 


? It should be noted that William here expresses no surprise at the fact that the truce 
made by the king does not apply to Tripoli even though Raymond of Tripoli had 
asserted his claims to the regency as the most important vassal of the kingdom (see 
Book XXI, chap. 3). 


CONFLICT OF INTERESTS 449 


their master, the troops set fire to a house above the harbor of Tortosa 
and sought to injure the citizens as much as possible. Their efforts 
proved futile, however. Meanwhile, Saladin had devastated the 
region to his satisfaction, and he now ordered the fleet to return. He 
then rallied his troops and also retired to his own land. A few days 
later he concluded a treaty of peace with the count and withdrew to a 
more remote part of the land of Damascus. 


4. The archbishop of Tyre returns from Constantinople. Louis, 
king of the Franks, dies. 


Durinc this time, for seven successive months, we had been sojourn- 
ing with Manuel, the great emperor of Constantinople, of illustrious 
memory, a stay which had resulted in great advantages both to our- 
selves and to the church. On the fourth day after the feast of Easter, 
after many earnest entreaties, we obtained permission to return to our 
own land.® 

As we departed, the emperor commended to our care his envoys, 
noble and magnificent men. Then we set sail in four galleys most 
generously furnished with his usual imperial munificence. Our course 
lay past the islands of Tenedos, Mitylene, Chios, Samos, Delos, 
Claros, Rhodes, and Cyprus, with the provinces of Phrygia, Asia 
Minor, Lycia, Lycaonia, Pamphylia, Isauria, and Cilicia on our left. 
At last, on May 12, by the grace of God, we arrived safe in health 
and prosperity at the mouth of the river Orontes and the Port of St. 
Simeon. 

A matter which should be of no slight interest to the present 
history ought not, we believe, to be passed over here. While we 
were staying in the imperial city, as already mentioned, partly be- 
cause the winter season was unfavorable for sailing, but also at the 
express command of the most happy emperor, that monarch, with 
paternal foresight and perchance with some foreboding of his own 
early departure from this world, celebrated the nuptials of a son and 
a daughter. On his son Alexius, who bears the name of his paternal 
grandfather,* he solemnly bestowed Agnes, the daughter of Louis, 


3 William thus obtained leave to depart April 23, 1180. His arrival at Constantinople 
may therefore be dated in late September or early October, 1179. 

* This Alexius, named after the emperor of the period of the First Crusade, was the 
son of Maria of Antioch, the second wife of Manuel. 


450 CONFLICT OF INTERESTS 


the illustrious king of the Franks. Alexius was not yet of age, in fact 
hardly thirteen years old, while Agnes was scarcely eight years old. 
The imperial insignia were conferred on the two in that part of the 
palace of Constantine the Elder called the Trullus. It was here that 
the sixth holy general council is said to have met, in the time of Con- 
stantine, son of Constantine, son of Heraclius. 

The emperor’s daughter was given in marriage to a young man 
named Renier, son of William the Elder, marquis of Montferrat and 
brother of the William to whom we had given the sister of our king. 
The emperor had caused this young man, then about seventeen years 
old, to be summoned by the imperial envoys, and he had reached the 
royal city about fifteen days before our own arrival there. He re- 
mained for a while in the city and also visited the army with the lord 
emperor. On their return thence about the time of Epiphany, in the 
month of February, the emperor called his court together with im- 
perial magnificence in the new palace called Blachernae. There, by 
the hand of Theodosius, patriarch of Constantinople, he celebrated 
the marriage of his daughter Maria and Renier, to whom he gave the 
name of his own father, John, and the title of Caesar. Maria was 
the daughter of the emperor by his first wife, the Empress Irene of 
pious memory, who had come as his consort from the kingdom of the 
Teutons.® By his second marriage with Maria, his only offspring was 
Alexius, the present emperor of Constantinople. 

Because of the immense amount of material, any attempt to describe 
in detail all the wonders of those days would be utterly futile, even if 
a special treatise were devoted to it. We may mention the games of 
the circus which the inhabitants of Constantinople call hippodromes, 
and the glorious spectacles of varied nature shown to the people with 
great pomp during the days of the celebration; the imperial magnifi- 
cence of the vestments and the royal robes adorned with a profusion 
of precious stones and pearls of great weight; the vast amount of 
massive gold and silver furniture in the palace, of untold value. 
Words would fail to speak in fitting terms of the valuable draperies 
adorning the royal abode; to mention in detail the numerous servants 


5 This was Bertha of Sulzbach, whose name had been changed to Irene. She had 
borne no sons, a fact which led to some estrangement on the part of Manuel, who 
feared that the marriage lay under a curse. She devoted most of her time during her 
last years to pious works (see C. Diehl, Figures byzantines, 2d Series, pp. 170-91). 


CONFLICT OF INTERESTS 451 


and members of the court, the magnificence of the nuptial splendour, 
and the generous gifts which the emperor lavished on both his own 
people and on strangers. But to return to the narrative. 

At Antioch we carried out the commands of his imperial majesty 
with the prince and the lord patriarch of that land, and at Beirut we 
found the king, who was on his way to Tyre by land. Continuing our 
voyage, we returned to the church at Tyre by the grace of God on 
July 6, a year and ten months from the time of our departure for the 
synod. 

On September 18, in the seventh year of King Baldwin IV, Louis, 
most pious and Christian king of the Franks, a prince of many virtues 
and immortal memory, laid aside the burden of the flesh, and his 
spirit fled to the skies to enter upon its eternal reward with the elect 
princes. He left an only son and heir, Philip, by his queen Alix, 
daughter of the elder Theobald and sister of Count Henry of Troyes, 
of Theobald, count of Chartres, of Stephen, count of Sancerre, and 
of William, archbishop of Rheims. He died in the fiftieth year of his 
reign and the sixtieth of his life.® 

On October 6 of the following month, Amalrich of precious 
memory, patriarch of Jerusalem, an extremely simple man of practi- 
cally no importance, died after twenty years in that office. Within ten 
days thereafter, Heraclius, archbishop of Caesarea, was chosen to fill 
his place.? 


5. The king gives his younger sister in marriage to Hum- 


phrey III. The emperor of Constantinople dies. 


Tuat same month the king betrothed his sister, then hardly eight 
years old, to a young man named Humphrey.® This Humphrey III 


® Louis VII had become king upon the death of his father in 1137 and had therefore 
ruled over forty but not “fifty” years when he died in 1180. 

™This is a singularly dispassionate recital of a fact that probably constituted the 
greatest disappointment of William’s life. The only evidence of feeling is the negative 
one that he fails to characterize his successful rival in any way. Ernoul describes this 
election at great length. According to Ernoul, William was the choice of the clergy, 
but it was customary for the clergy to submit two names to the king for his final 
choice. Agnes exerted all of her powerful infiuence in behalf of Heraclius, the other 
candidate named, and had her way (see L. de Mas Latrie, ed., Chronique a’Ernoul 
et de Bernard le Trésorier, pp. 82-86). 

8 Isabelle was the daughter of Amaury’s second marriage, that with the Greek 
Princess Maria, and was therefore a half sister of Baldwin IV. Her numerous mar- 


452 CONFLICT OF INTERESTS 


was the son of Humphrey II and Stephanie, daughter of Philip of 
Nablus. The father of Humphrey II was the elder Humphrey of 
Toron, the king’s constable, to whom frequent reference has been 
made. Philip of Nablus, the maternal grandfather of Humphrey III, 
had been lord of Arabia Secunda, which is Petra, now commonly 
called Kerak, and also of Syria Sobal, known now as Montreal, both 
of which lie beyond the Jordan. He later embraced the religious life 
and became the master of the Knights Templars.® 

The negotiations in respect to this alliance were undertaken with 
great ardor by Prince Renaud, the third husband of the mother of 
young Humphrey, who had now reached man’s estate; and on the 
completion of the same, the betrothal of Humphrey and the king’s 
sister was celebrated at Jerusalem. 

On the death of his paternal grandfather, Humphrey had received 
by hereditary right certain domains in the territory of Tyre: namely, 
Toron, Chastel Neuf, and the city of Banyas with their appurtenances. 
He made an exchange of this patrimony with the king under definite 
conditions, the text of which, dictated by us as pertained to our official 
duty, was deposited in the royal archives.*° 

On the third day of the same month, Manuel, the illustrious 
emperor of Constantinople, of immortal memory, the most munificent 
of all the princes of the land, laid aside the burden of the flesh and 
rendered his soul to heaven. His memory will ever be held in bene- 
diction by all the assembly of the saints because of his alms and liberal 
benefactions. He is said to have died in the fortieth year of his rule 
and, as nearly as we have been able to ascertain, in the sixty-first of 
his life. 

About this same time also, Bohemond, prince of Antioch, left his 


riages formed the center of politics of the later kingdom of Jerusalem (see J. L. La 
Monte, Feudal Monarchy in the Latin Kingdom of Jerusalem, 1100-1291, Pp. 47 
et passim). 

® Philip of Nablus, master of the Templars, has been frequently mentioned in these 
pages. For the genealogy of Humphrey of Toron, see La Monte, Feudal Monarchy, 
Pp. 35 ef passim, 

10 This document has not been preserved. Presumably it was drawn up in September, 
1180, and affords clear evidence that William was still discharging the formal duties 
of chancellor even though the court was dominated by a group hostile to him. 

11 The death of Manuel occurred September 24, 1180. William’s penchant for round 
numbers has led him to assign an additional three years to Manuel’s reign. This mis- 
take may have resulted from his failure to establish the year of John’s death, which 
had occurred in 1143 (Book XV, chap. 23; see F. Chalandon, Les Comnéne, II, 606). 


CONFLICT OF INTERESTS 453 


legitimate wife, Theodora, a niece of the emperor, and in defiance of 
the rules of the church dared to marry a certain Sibyl, who had the 
reputation of practicing evil arts.'* 

Joscelin, the king’s uncle and likewise his seneschal, was at this 
time in Constantinople, whither he had been sent by Baldwin on 
certain affairs of the realm. Baldwin of Ramlah was also staying there 
to implore the emperor’s aid in the matter of paying his ransom. Dur- 
ing their sojourn in the imperial city, Manuel, emperor of precious 
memory now being dead, it was discovered on March 1 that certain 
great and illustrious nobles had conspired to bring about a revolution 
against Emperor Alexius, the son of Manuel who was, by the wish 
of his father, still under the guardianship of his mother. These men 
were arrested on the charge of treason and were by the emperor’s 
orders bound and thrown into prison, although some of the guilty ones 
were his blood relations. 

Among the leaders of this conspiracy were Manuel, son of the elder 
Andronicus, who was mentioned above; Alexius, the protosebastos, 
son of Theodora Calusina, the emperor’s niece; the brother of the 
logothete, who held the office of canaclinus; and some twelve other 
distinguished men of high rank. The emperor’s sister, the Lady 
Maria, was also an accessory to the plot. During the night she fled 
with her husband, the son of the marquis mentioned above,'® to the 
church of Santa Sophia, where, in suspense as to her fate, she cast her- 
self on the protection of the church. From that refuge, whither 
weapons and armed men had been assembled, she and her husband, 
with her partisans and those implicated in the same plot, attempted 
to take measures against her brother, the emperor. Even the patriarch 
of the city favored her. The party of the emperor, however, which 
relied especially on the aid of the Latins, kept increasing in strength, 
and finally, with shattered forces and in despair of life itself, she 
humbly begged for mercy through mediators. The emperor granted 
her request and restored her to favor.’ 

12 The belief in magic, sorcery, and soothsaying was widespread in the East as well 
as in the West. Emperor Manuel was required on his deathbed to sign a formal docu- 
ment to dismiss his astrologers and disavow the practice as contrary to the teachings 
of the church (see Chalandon, Les Comnéne, II, 606). 

13 Chapter 4. The logothete and canaclinus were somewhat lesser officials in the 
imperial administration. Their duties were chiefly secretarial, with some concern for 
imperial expenditures as well. 


14 This abortive revolution was but the symptom of the more serious troubles which 
were soon to appear (see chaps. 10-13). 


454 CONFLICT OF INTERESTS 


6. Excommunication is pronounced against the prince of 
Antioch because of the mistress whom he had taken although 
his wife was still living. 


Ar this time the situation of the Latin people in the Orient, espe- 
cially in the principality of Antioch, was greatly disturbed because 
Bohemond, the prince of Antioch, had put away his legitimate wife 
and taken his mistress as a second wife. More than once he had been 
warned to leave the wicked state of adultery in which he was so 
openly living and to take back his legitimate wife. But, “when the 
wicked cometh, then cometh also contempt,” 1° so the prince turned a 
deaf ear to those “charming never so wisely” 1° and refused to listen. 
Consequently, as he obstinately persevered in his sin, he drew upon 
himself the just sentence of excommunication. To this, however, he 
paid but slight attention. On the contrary, he continued on his wicked 
course with redoubled energy. He treated the patriarch, the bishops, 
and other prelates of the church in that land as enemies and laid 
violent hands upon them. He violated the precincts of sacred places, 
both churches and monasteries, carried off their sacred objects, and, 
in a wicked spirit of presumptuous daring, disturbed their possessions. 
It is said that he actually besieged the patriarch together with the 
clergy who had fled to him for refuge in a fortress belonging to the 
church. This place was well equipped with arms and soldiers and pro- 
visioned with food, and he is reported to have made frequent assaults 
upon it as if it were a possession of the enemy. 

At this, certain great men of this land found themselves unable to 
endure his mad conduct longer. Aware that their duty was to God 
rather than to man, they withdrew from him both in body and in 
spirit, in utter abhorrence of his wicked deeds. Among these was a 
powerful nobleman, Renaud Masoier. He retired to one of his own 
fortresses, a strong and impregnable place, and invited those who had 
the good of the cause at heart and the fear of the Lord before their 
eyes to join him there. To these nobles who had been driven from 
their own domains and to others of any condition who had fled for 
the same reason, he offered a safe asylum there. 

As the result of Bohemond’s conduct, the entire land faced an ex- 
tremely difficult situation. Wise men of long experience saw that 
unless divine mercy speedily came to our aid, a way would unquestion- 


15 Pr, 18: 3. $8 'Pa) 78. 


CONFLICT OF INTERESTS 455 


ably be opened by which the enemy would accomplish our ruin and 
the cause of Christianity be injured forever. The whole province 
would again fall into the power of the Turks, from whom, with God’s 
help, it had been rescued through the work of faithful leaders and at 
the expense of untold hardships endured by the people of Christ. 
For unchanging is the word of truth and worthy of all acceptance that 
“every kingdom divided against itself is brought to desolation; and 
every city or house divided against itself shall not stand.” 17 

With their usual sense of responsibility, the king of Jerusalem and 
the lord patriarch met with the other prelates of the church and the 
lay princes to confer earnestly as to what course should be pursued in 
such a critical emergency. Although the reprehensible conduct of the 
rash and dissolute prince seemed to call for strong measures, yet they 
hesitated to use force, lest, in his efforts to resist, he might call the 
enemy’s forces to his assistance. Such an action would open to the 
Turks the country from which thereafter the most earnest efforts 
would not avail to eject them. It was plain also that the present was 
no time for entreaties and wholesome admonition; hence they did not 
venture to send wise men gifted in the art of persuasion to one who 
was rushing madly along evil courses, wholly engrossed in evil doing; 
for that would be like “telling a tale to a deaf ass” 1® and “throwing 
words to the wind.” 

They determined to endure this evil, therefore, lest they should 
fall upon worse things. Meanwhile they continued to look for aid 
from Him who is wont to rescue even those cast down in the depths 
of the sea, the Lord who “giveth snow like wool,” who “scattereth 
the hoarfrost like ashes.” ?° Their hope was that the prince, warned 
by a divine visitation, might be restored to his right mind and, clothed 
from on high with all the virtues of the greatest leaders, might be 
led to strive for the fruit of a better life. 


7. The patriarch of Jerusalem is sent to Antioch to try to find 
a remedy for these dangerous conditions. Pope Alexander 
dies. 


Ir soon became evident to all that the evil was on the increase and 
that there was no hope of any immediate remedy. Not only was the 
prince himself held in the bonds of anathema, but, as a result of the 


AY Mat, 12:25. 18 Horace Ep. 11. i. 199. 
19 Ovid Am. 1. vi. 42, and Her. 11. 25. 20 Ps, 147: 16. 


456 CONFLICT OF INTERESTS 


plundering and burning of the possessions of the venerable places, 
the entire land had been placed under an interdict. Except for the 
baptism of children, none of the sacraments of the church were now 
administered to the people, and the Christians realized with alarm 
that present conditions could not continue long without peril to all. 

By common consent, therefore, it was decided that the lord pa- 
triarch should go to Antioch and endeavor, if possible, by the grace 
of God, to find some remedy, either temporary or permanent, which 
might relieve these great evils. Renaud de Chatillon, formerly prince 
of Antioch and the stepfather of the younger Bohemond, Brother 
Arnold of Toroge, master of the knights of the Temple, and Brother 
Roger des Moulins, master of the house of the Hospital, accompanied 
the patriarch. This step was taken because it was feared that if we 
gave no sign of compassion for the wretched plight of our neighbors 
and did not seek to remedy the situation, the pope and the princes 
across seas might accuse us of negligence or even of evil intent. 

The patriarch was attended also by some of the prelates of the 
church, wise and discreet men, among whom were Monachus, arch- 
bishop-elect of Caesarea; Albert, bishop of Bethlehem; Raynald, 
abbot of Mt. Sion; and Peter, prior of the church of the Holy Sepul- 
chre. With the other companions of his journey, he set out for 
Antioch, taking with him also the count of Tripoli, an intimate and 
dearly beloved friend of the prince, whose words, it was hoped, when 
added to our own might bring about the achievement of their purpose. 

On arriving at Laodicea, the envoys conferred with the patriarch 
and the prince individually and set a day when both should come to 
Antioch. Here, after the matter had been thoroughly discussed from 
every viewpoint, a temporary truce was concluded under the follow- 
ing terms. It was agreed that when all the lost property should be 
restored to the patriarch, the bishops, and the holy places, the inter- 
dict should then cease and the privilege of the sacraments of the 
church be restored to the people. As to the prince himself, he in his 
own person must patiently suffer the sentence laid upon him by the 
bishops, or, if he should seek complete absolution, he must dismiss his 
concubine and take back his legitimate wife. 

When this arrangement had been made, the legates returned to 
their own land, in the belief that they had quieted to some extent at 
least the fires of lawlessness raging in the principality of Antioch. 

The prince, however, obstinately persisted in his shameless course 


CONFLICT OF INTERESTS 457 


and, in addition, entered upon a policy which was attended with great 
danger to the realm. He drove out of the city—and, in fact, from his 
entire domains—the best of his faithful nobles, men of great eminence, 
apparently for the sole reason that they were said to disapprove of 
his conduct. Among those whom he exiled were his constable and 
chamberlain, Giscard de Lille [Guichard de Lisle], Bertrand, son of 
Count Gislebert,?* and Garinus Gainart. These nobles, since they were 
forced to leave Antioch, repaired to Rupinus [Rupen], a noble chief 
of the Armenians.?? He received them all most honorably, gave to 
each splendid gifts, and made ample provision for their support. 

On August 27 of that same year, in the twenty-third year of his 
pontificate, Pope Alexander III ** died and was buried in the church 
of the Lateran. He was succeeded by Lucius III, formerly Hubald, 
bishop of Ostia. The new pope, an aged man of little learning, was a 
native of Tuscany from the vicinity of Lucca. 

About the same time, also, on the Ides of September, our venerable 
brother in Christ, Raymond, bishop of the church at Beirut, of blessed 
memory in the Lord, departed from this life to enjoy, through the 
grace of God, the reward of eternal life. Later an honorable and well- 
lettered man, Master Odo, archdeacon of our church, was chosen in 
his place, and upon him, during the feast days of December, by the 
will of God, we conferred the rank of priesthood and the pontifical 
office. 


8. The son of Nureddin dies. His inheritance is left to Thebeth, 


his kinsman. 


Axsout this time occurred the death of Melechsalah [Malik Salah], 
the son of Nureddin, a youth still in early manhood. Of all the patri- 
mony received from his father there remained to him only Aleppo 
and a few strongholds. In his last will, made as he was dying, he is 
said to have bequeathed Aleppo and his entire patrimony to a certain 
Thebeth, lord of Mosul, who was the son of his father’s brother 
Hezedin. After Malik Salah’s death, his nobles sent messengers to 
Thebeth, who was a great and distinguished Turkish satrap, and bade 
him not to delay coming to them as speedily as possible.** 


21 Their expulsion afforded an interesting test of feudal strength. 

22 Rupen III, 1175-1185. 23 Alexander III died August 30, 1181. 

24 There is some confusion in this statement of relationships. Hezedin probably repre- 
sents Izz al-Din, who was the son of Qutb al-Din, Nureddin’s brother. Perhaps The- 


458 CONFLICT OF INTERESTS 


As soon as he received the message, Thebeth hastened thither and 
took possession of his ancestral property and of all that was his by 
hereditary right. For he feared that Saladin, who had already de- 
spoiled his cousin of most of his possessions, might come again from 
Egypt and, despite the will of the inhabitants, seize this city by force, 
especially since some of the more important nobles secretly favored 
him. 

Saladin, however, after concluding with us a temporary peace for 
the period of two years, had returned to Egypt to attend to his own 
affairs in that kingdom. He had heard with much uneasiness that the 
fleet of the king of Sicily with a mighty equipment and innumerable 
forces, had put to sea with the intention of proceeding against Egypt. 
His fear in this respect, however, was needless, for the course of the 
fleet was directed westward to the Balearic Isles. These islands, one 
of which is commonly called Majorca and the other Minorca, lie near 
Hither Spain. The voyage thither proved disastrous. Driven by un- 
favorable winds, practically the entire fleet was wrecked in the vicinity 
of the coast cities Saone [Savona], Albenga, and Ventimiglia, where 
the tumultuous waves dashed the ships upon the shore. 

At this time, while the kingdom was enjoying a temporary state of 
peace, as has been related, a race of Syrians in the province of Phoe- 
nicia, near the Lebanon range, who occupied territory near the city of 
Jubail, underwent a wonderful change of heart. For almost fifty 
years these people had followed the heretical doctrines of a certain 
Maro, from whom they took the name of Maronites. They had sepa- 
rated from the church of the faithful and had adopted a special liturgy 
of their own. Now, however, by divine leading, they were restored 
to their right minds and abandoned their heresy. They repaired to 
Aimery, the patriarch of Antioch, the third of the Latin patriarchs to 
preside over that church, renounced the error by which they had been 
so long enslaved, and returned to the unity of the catholic church. 
They adopted the orthodox faith and prepared to embrace and ob- 
serve with all reverence the traditions of the Roman church. 

These people were by no means few in numbers; in fact, they were 
beth is intended for Qutb al-Din, in which case William has reversed the relationship 
of father and son. It was Izz-al-Din who did take Aleppo as his inheritance at this 


time and shortly afterward exchanged it with his brother Imad al-Din (see Beha 


ed-Din, The Life of Saladin, pp. 80-81). William doubtless received this information 
from oral report. 


CONFLICT OF INTERESTS 459 


generally estimated at more than forty thousand. They lived, as has 
been said, in the bishoprics of Jubail, Botron, and Tripoli, on the 
slopes of the Lebanon mountains. They were a stalwart race, valiant — 
fighters, and of great service to the Christians in the difficult engage- 
ments which they so frequently had with the enemy. Their conversion 
to the true faith was, therefore, a source of great joy to us. 

The heresy of Maro and his followers is and was that in our Lord 
Jesus Christ there exists, and did exist from the beginning, one will 
and one energy only, as may be learned from the sixth council, which, 
as is well known, was assembled against them and in which they 
suffered sentence of condemnation. To this article, condemned by the 
orthodox church, they added many other pernicious doctrines after 
they separated from the number of the faithful. Now, however, as 
has been stated, they repented of all these heresies and returned to 
the catholic church, under the leadership of their patriarch and several 
of their bishops. These leaders who had hitherto led their people in 
the ways of iniquity, now displayed equal zeal in piously guiding 
them as they returned to the truth.” 


9. A dangerous hostility which soon develops into open enmity 
springs up between the count of Tripoli and the king. 


Ar this time, thanks to the temporary peace which had been con- 
cluded between the king and Saladin, the kingdom was enjoying a 
certain degree of tranquillity, as has already been said. Nevertheless, 
there were not lacking restless spirits, sons of Belial and foster sons 
of iniquity, who were ever on the alert to create discord in the king- 
dom and to bring about civil troubles. 

For two successive years a multiplicity of affairs had detained the 
count of Tripoli in his own county of Tripoli, and for that reason, he 
had been prevented from visiting the kingdom.?® Now, however, the 
responsibility which he felt for the city of Tiberias, his wife’s patri- 
mony, led him to go thither, and he made all his preparations for the 
journey. He had proceeded as far as Jubail when the aforesaid wicked 
men, by their malicious insinuations, induced the too credulous king 
to believe that the count was coming to the kingdom with the wicked 


25 This union of Maronites with Latins has continued down to the present day. See 
article by M. Spinka, “Effect of Crusades upon Eastern Christianity,” Exvzronmental 
Factors in Christian History. 

26 His last visit had been at Easter time, 1180 (see chap. 1). 


460 CONFLICT OF INTERESTS 


design of secretly working to supplant him. He readily lent an ear to 
their seductive words and at once sent a peremptory message refusing 
the count permission to enter the realm. 

At this injury, so little deserved, the count, confused and justly 
indignant, very unwillingly refrained from advancing farther and 
returned to Tripoli after a useless expenditure of effort and money. 

It was the intention of these troublemakers, unrestrained by the 
presence of the count, an indefatigable and thoroughly upright man, 
to handle the affairs of the kingdom themselves just as they wished 
and to turn the infirmity of the king to their own advantage. Among 
those who shamelessly influenced the king to this course of action 
were his mother, a most grasping woman, utterly detestable to God; 
her brother, the king’s seneschal; and a few wicked men, their 
partisans.°7 

When the principal barons, men of much experience and foresight, 
learned of this action, they were greatly alarmed, for they feared that, 
deprived of the protection of the illustrious count, the kingdom would 
speedily fall from its high estate and, according to the word of the 
Lord, being “divided against itself shall not stand.” °* This was more 
especially the case because the king, whose illness was daily increasing, 
was becoming more and more incapacitated and less and less fit to 
attend to the business of the realm; in fact, he was scarcely able to 
hold himself up and was almost totally paralyzed. 

The more important barons, seeing the danger which would 
certainly result to the realm as the consequence of the above act, bent 
all their efforts toward recalling the count and softening his anger. 
Finally, after much negotiation and various proposals, the king, in 
spite of his unwillingness, was forced to permit them to bring the 
count back into the kingdom. The illustrious man wisely overlooked 
the insults that had been offered him, and peace between the king and 
himself was fully reéstablished.*° 

*7 This is William’s first direct outburst against this pair, who were probably also 
responsible for his own loss of the patriarchate. Such expression of unrestrained emotion 
is unusual in our author and implies that he wrote it either in 1182, when he was still 
in the first flush of indignation about the matter, or in 1184 after the death of Agnes, 
which La Monte dates late in 1183 or early in 1184 (see J. L. La Monte, “The Rise 
and Decline of a Frankish Seigneury in Syria in the Time of the Crusades,” Revue his- 
torique du Sud-Est européen, XV [1938], 313). 

28 Mat. 12:25. 


°° Perhaps this reconciliation was accomplished as early as April 27, 1182. There is 
extant at Jerusalem an intensely interesting document of that date in which Baldwin IV 


CONFLICT OF INTERESTS 461 


10. An uprising occurs at Constantinople in which the wicked 
Andronicus prevails. As a result the Latin race is greatly 


disturbed. 


WHILE these events were taking place in our part of the Orient, 
an important change occurred in the empire of Constantinople. This 
resulted most unfortunately for the entire Latin race and brought 
upon them unheard of affronts and enormous loss. For the evils long 
since conceived by false and perfidious Greece travailed and “brought 
forth falsehood.” °° For on the death of Manuel, that most happy 
emperor of illustrious memory, his son Alexius, a boy scarcely thirteen 
years old, succeeded to the throne, both by his father’s will and by 
hereditary right. He was under his mother’s guardianship, however, 
and the affairs of the empire were administered by Alexius, the pro- 
tosebastos, son of the elder brother of the dead emperor. The principal 
nobles and the people of that city accordingly felt that an opportunity 
had come to carry into effect the evil designs which they had formed 
against our people. 

During the reign of Manuel, beloved of God, the Latins had found 
great favor with him—a reward well deserved because of their loyalty 
and valor. The emperor, a great-souled man of incomparable energy, 
relied so implicitly on their fidelity and ability that he passed over 
the Greeks as soft and effeminate and intrusted important affairs to the 
Latins alone. Since he held them in such high esteem and showed 
toward them such lavish generosity, men of the Latin race from all 
over the world, nobles and men of lesser degree as well, regarded him 
as their great benefactor and eagerly flocked to his court. As the result 
of this eager deference, his affection toward the Latins increased more 
and more, and he was constantly improving their status. 

The Greek nobles, especially the near kindred of the emperor, and 
the rest of the people as well, naturally conceived an insatiable hatred 
toward us, and this was increased by the difference between our sacra- 


makes a grant of certain tithes at Toron to William, archbishop of Tyre. The docu- 
ment is witnessed by Raymond of Tripoli as well as by other great nobles and is 
sealed by William himself as chancellor. The transaction, a generous favor to Wil- 
liam, may imply not only that cordiality was reéstablished between Raymond and the 
king, but also that William was an important factor in that happy solution (R. 
Rohricht, Regesta regni Hierosolymitani, no. 615). 

a Fy a 


462 CONFLICT OF INTERESTS 


ments and those of their church, which furnished an additional 
incentive to their jealousy. For they, having separated insolently from 
the church of Rome, in their boundless arrogance looked upon every- 
one who did not follow their foolish traditions as a heretic. It was 
they themselves, on the contrary, who deserved the name of heretics, 
because they had either created or followed new and pernicious beliefs 
contrary to the Roman church and the faith of the apostles Peter and 
Paul against which “the gates of hell shall not prevail.” ** 

For these and other reasons they had for a long time cherished this 
hatred in their hearts and were ever seeking an opportunity, at least 
after the death of the emperor, to destroy utterly the hated race of 
the Latins, both in the city and throughout the entire empire, that in 
this way they might satisfy their inexorable animosity.*? 


11. The causes of the uprising and dissension are given. 


Wuen the Emperor Manuel was removed from the affairs of this 
world and while Alexius, the protosebastos, had the administration 
of the realm, there seemed to be no favorable opportunity to carry out 
these evil designs. Alexius himself followed the example of the 
emperor, availed himself of the advice and assistance of the Latins, 
and as far as possible made them his friends. In one respect, however, 
he was hated by Latins and Greeks alike. Although, like all Greeks, 
he was extremely effeminate and completely given over to the lustful 
sins of the flesh, yet he was avaricious and sparing of the imperial 
treasure, as if he had earned it himself by the sweat of his brow. It 
was rumored also that he carried on a criminal liaison with the em- 
press, although while her husband was lying on his deathbed she had 
professed the religious life.?* 

His attitude, moreover, was one of extreme haughtiness; he re- 
garded no one as superior to himself but managed everything accord- 
ing to his own wishes without consulting the other lords. He seemed 


31 Mat. 16:18. 

32 This analysis of the feelings of the Greeks is the result of William’s expert knowl- 
edge of the conditions. His recognition of the importance of the religious differences 
as a factor in the revolution is of special interest. This is confirmed from Greek sources 
(see A. Vasiliev, History of the Byzantine Empire, Il, 77). 

33 This charge of illicit relations with the empress, who was now nominally regent, 
was generally accepted by the Greek historians (see Diehl, Figures byzantines, 2d 
Series, p. 195). 


CONFLICT OF INTERESTS 463 


to care nothing for the rest, although they were magnificent men of 
rank quite equal to his own. Hence, moved by extreme hatred against 
Alextus for the reasons just given, the princes of the palace took active 
measures against him. They summoned Andronicus the Elder, a 
cousin of the late emperor, from Pontus, where he was ruling, that 
he might assist them in their wicked plot to drive Alexius, the pro- 
tosebastos, from the control of affairs in the realm. 

This Andronicus, a cousin of the late emperor, was a false and 
wicked man, ever disloyal to the empire and ever active in sowing the 
seeds of conspiracies. In the time of the emperor he had suffered 
chains and imprisonment because of his many crimes. Ignominiously 
treated, as his merits richly deserved, he became an exile and a fugi- 
tive and wandered over the entire East. Yet even in his exile he had 
been guilty of many disgraceful acts, worthy of universal condem- 
nation. Quite recently, however, about three months before Manuel’s 
death, the emperor had restored him to favor once more. In order 
to prevent him from stirring up trouble in the city, according to his 
custom, and fomenting revolutions in the hope of gaining the king- 
dom, he was sent to Pontus under pretext of the office of governor.*# 

This then was the man whom the near kindred of the emperor 
and of the protosebastos as well, those in whom he had especial con- 
fidence, had secretly summoned. Through their envoys they invited 
him to arm against the man who had shamefully thrown his sons and 
other illustrious men into chains. For, as has been said, the proto- 
sebastos had imprisoned certain distinguished men who had been 
caught in a conspiracy and thereby had roused still more enmity 
against himself. 

Thus summoned, Andronicus came to the city bringing with him 
large forces of barbarian troops. He encamped along the Hellespont 
in full sight of the city and took possession of all Bithynia. Certain 
powerful nobles who had been sent against him to resist his attempts 
traitorously deserted to his side. First and most important among 
these were Andronicus Angelus, commander of the troops which had 
been dispatched against him, and Alexius Megalducas, commander 
in chief of the fleet, both kinsmen of the emperor. The desertion of 
those who had gone over to Andronicus thus openly weakened the 
cause of our people greatly as did also the fact that many other no- 


84 See Book XX, note 4. 


464 CONFLICT OF INTERESTS 


table men and a great many citizens as well showed their partisanship 
for Andronicus no longer secretly but in public. They longed to see 
him enter the city and in every possible way helped to hasten the 
time of his crossing. 


12. Andronicus kills the nobles and seizes the palace and the city. 
He oppresses the people by the violence of his rule. 


THE conspiracy continued to gain strength; the protosedastos was 
seized, blinded, and horribly mutilated. This change of affairs spread 
consternation among the Latins, for they feared that the citizens 
would make a sudden attack upon them; in fact they .had already 
received warning of such intention from certain people who had 
private knowledge of the conspiracy. Those who were able to do so, 
therefore, fled from the wiles of the Greeks and the death which 
threatened them. Some embarked on forty-four galleys which chanced 
to be in the harbor, and others placed all their effects on some of the 
many other ships there. 

The aged and infirm, however, with those who were unable to flee, 
were left in their homes, and on them fell the wicked rage which the 
others had escaped. For Andronicus, who had secretly caused ships 
to be prepared, led his entire force into the city. As soon as they 
entered the gates these troops, aided by the citizens, rushed to that 
quarter of the city occupied by the Latins and put to the sword the 
little remnant who had been either unwilling or unable to flee with 
the others. Although but few of these were able to fight, yet they 
resisted for a long time and made the enemy’s victory a bloody one. 

Regardless of treaties and the many services which our people had 
rendered to the empire, the Greeks seized all those who appeared 
capable of resistance, set fire to their houses, and speedily reduced the 
entire quarter to ashes. Women and children, the aged and the sick, 
all alike perished in the flames. To vent their rage upon secular build- 
ings alone, however, was far from satisfying their unholy wickedness; 
they also set fire to churches and venerated places of every description 
and burned, together with the sacred edifices, those who had fled 
thither for refuge. No distinction was made between clergy and lay- 
men, except that greater fury was displayed toward those who wore 
the honorable habits of high office or religion. Monks and priests were 


CONFLICT OF INTERESTS 465 


the especial victims of their madness and wete put to death under 
excruciating torture. 

Among these latter was a venerable man named John, a subdeacon 
of the holy Roman church, whom the pope had sent to Constantinople 
on business relating to the church. They seized him and, cutting off 
his head, fastened it to the tail of a filthy dog as an insult to the 
church. In the midst of such frightful sacrilege, worse than parricide, 
not even the dead, whom impiety itself generally spares, were suffered 
to rest undisturbed. Corpses were torn from the tombs and dragged 
through the streets and squares as if the insensate bodies were capable 
of feeling the indignities offered them.*® 

The vandals then repaired to the hospital of St. John, as it is called, 
where they put to the sword all the sick they found. Those whose 
pious duty it should have been to relieve the oppressed, namely the 
monks and priests, called in footpads and brigands to carry on the 
slaughter under promise of reward. Accompanied by these miscreants, 
they sought out the most secluded retreats and the inmost apartments 
of homes, that none who were hiding there might escape death. When 
such were discovered, they were dragged out with violence and 
handed over to the executioners, who, that they might not work with- 
out pay, were given the price of blood for the murder of these 
wretched victims. 

Even those who seemed to show more consideration sold into per- 
petual slavery among the Turks and other infidels the fugitives who 
had resorted to them and to whom they had given hope of safety. 
It is said that more than four thousand Latins of various age, sex, 
and condition were delivered thus to barbarous nations for a price. 

In such fashion did the perfidious Greek nation, a brood of vipers, 
like a serpent in the bosom or a mouse in the wardrobe evilly requite 
their guests—those who had not deserved such treatment and were 
far from anticipating anything of the kind; those to whom they had 
given their daughters, nieces, and sisters as wives and who, by long 
living together, had become their friends. 


35 The mutilation of the Roman cardinal underlines the importance of the religious 
element in the antipathy of Greeks toward Latins. It was not the political or economic 
importance of the Latins but rather the success of the Latins in gaining Manuel’s ap- 
proval of a possible union of the Greek and Latin churches under Roman headship 
which gave the uprising this fanatical edge. The remains of the cardinal’s body were 
later gathered up and accorded a decent burial (see E. Gibbon: Decline and Fall of the 
Roman Empire, ed. J. B. Bury, VI, 373). 


466 CONFLICT OF INTERESTS 


13. The Latins who had escaped in ships ravage in hostile fashion 
the islands and other places along the shore. 


Turs horrible outrage, unprecedented throughout the ages, did not 
go entirely unpunished, it is said. The Latins who had fled in the 
galleys, as has been related, and the large numbers who followed them 
a little later with a good-sized fleet had assembled in the vicinity of 
Constantinople to await the outcome of events. Here they received 
definite information that those who had excited the first tumult in 
the city had burned the entire Latin quarter and that their wives and 
children with all the members of their households had perished either 
by fire or by the sword. This news roused righteous wrath and resent- 
ment in the hearts of all and inspired them with a fervent desire to 
avenge the blood of their friends. Accordingly they sailed along the 
shores of the Hellespont, from the mouth of the Black sea, which is 
thirty miles from Constantinople, to the entrance of the Mediterra- 
nean sea, a distance of two hundred miles, took by force all the cities 
and fortresses along both shores, and put all the inhabitants to the 
sword. They made their way also into all the monasteries along both 
shores and on the small islands scattered throughout that sea. Here, 
in retaliation for the blood of their brethren, they slew all those 
pseudo-monks and sacrilegious priests and burned the monasteries 
‘together with the refugees who had fled thither. From these places 
they are said to have carried off an immense amount of gold and 
silver, with jewels and silken stuffs in large quantities, and therewith 
repaid themselves many times for the loss of their property and the 
destruction of their goods. For, in addition to the vast wealth of the 
monasteries and the countless treasures which had been accumulating 
there for a long time, the citizens of Constantinople had deposited in 
these holy places for safekeeping immense quantities of gold and other 
treasures. 

Laden with all these spoils, the Latins then left the straits of that 
sea and sailed into the Mediterranean between the ancient coastal cities, 
Sestos and Abydos. 

As they sailed along the shores of Thessaly, they searched all the 
cities and towns of the lands near the sea with the minutest care, gave 
everything over to pillage and fire, and massacred countless numbers. 
Near Chrysopolis, a city of Macedonia, they are said to have found ten 


CONFLICT OF INTERESTS 467 


other galleys, and in various places a great many more. With these 
they formed an exceedingly large fleet which proved a most formi- 
dable engine of destruction to the Greeks. 

Some of the Latins, however, shrank from these deeds of slaughter 
and rapine;** this latter group embarked on some of the many ships 
in the harbor and, with their wives and children and all that remained 
of their effects, left the army and came to us in Syria. 

Meanwhile, Andronicus was in possession of the city, according to 
his wishes, and since there was no one to object he had the emperor 
solemnly crowned on the holy day of Pentecost, together with his 
destined wife, the daughter of the king of the Franks, and showed 
him all reverence. The mother of the emperor, together with his 
sister and her husband, who were still within the palace precincts, he 
as yet treated with kindness. Andronicus personally directed all the 
affairs of the empire, however, both in the city and without, and 
arranged everything according to his own pleasure. 

It is to be feared that he made this show of courtesy toward these 
persons in order to hide his treacherous purpose, until he should have 
held the throne for a time and gradually subjected everything to 
his own power, when he could show openly his real intentions in 
regard to them.*? 

This happened in the month of April, in the ver of the Incarnation 
of the Lord 1182. 


14. Saladin revokes the treaty which he had made with the king. 
The latter marches out beyond the Jordan to encounter 
him. The Turks assault the village of Buria and carry the 


people away into captivity. 


WH3ILE these events were transpiring in Greece, a certain ship with 
fifteen hundred pilgrims on board, driven by adverse winds, was 


36 The effect of these massacres upon the commercial city states of Italy, especially 
Venice, which suffered most heavily, has usually been overlooked. The Fourth Crusade 
has too often been represented as a purely business enterprise of the Venetians. The sons 
and daughters and more distant relatives of the Venetians who lost thir lives in this 
massacre of 1182 would not have agreed with that opinion. It is gratifying to know 
that some of the Latins did not approve of the severity of the revenge, even in retalia- 
tion. William doubtless obtained his information from these refugees. 

37 He disposed of them before the end of the year 1183, first having Maria of 
Antioch strangled and in the same year having her son Alexius treated similarly. Also 
at this time he formally married the young French empress, Agnes, who was about 
twelve years old at the time (Vasiliev, History of the Byzantine Empire, Il, 76). 


468 CONFLICT OF INTERESTS 


wrecked at Damietta in the kingdom of Egypt. However, the ship- 
wrecked people felt confident that they would be saved, for it was 
known that Saladin had made a truce and temporary peace with the 
Christians, on both land and sea. 

But the fate that befell them was far different from that required 
by the law of treaties. For Saladin, overcome by his desire for spoils, 
was reluctant to allow so many Christians to depart freely from his 
land, as he was bound to do by the terms of the agreement. He 
accordingly threw them all into prison and ordered their goods to be 
confiscated for his own use. He then sent a messenger to the king and, 
in direct defiance of the terms of the treaty, made demands upon him 
with which it was practically impossible to comply. He added as an 
ultimatum that, unless all these demands were met in accordance 
with his wishes, he would retain the aforesaid ship as compensation 
for himself and would, moreover, abrogate the pact which had been 
concluded between them.*® 

The messenger was unable to obtain the satisfaction of Saladin’s 
demands, since he tried to invent barefaced excuses under pretext of 
which the ship might be retained rather than to present just causes 
of complaint. Thereupon the prince at once broke the treaty and, 
giving way to his long-cherished animosity, began to plan how he 
might harass the kingdom in his usual manner. He mustered both 
cavalry and infantry forces and increased the size of his army by 
large numbers of men who in former years had left Damascus and the 
neighboring countries and had gone to Egypt to avoid the stress of 
famine. With this force he determined to return to Damascus, where 
as from a nearer base he could cause us greater trouble. 

While on the march to Damascus, he intended also to injure as 
much as possible that part of our possessions which lay beyond the 
Jordan. Here the crops were already white for the harvest, and by 
burning these or by seizing one or more of our strongholds in that 
locality he could do the Christians much damage. 

His special purpose in acting thus is said to have been the desire to 
retaliate on Prince Renaud, the lord of that land. For the prince, 
contrary to agreement, was reported to have seized certain Arabs dur- 


8 William is slow to bring in the charge which Muslim writers make that Renaud 
de Chatillon was first to break the truce. This is stated somewhat later in this chapter. 
Each side accused the other of the violation of the truce (see W. B. Stevenson, The 
Crusaders in the East, pp. 224-25). 


CONFLICT OF INTERESTS 469 


ing the period of the truce and to have refused to release them on 
demand. 

Through his scouts, the king learned of Saladin’s advance and also 
of his designs. He at once held a general council at Jerusalem where 
the terms of the Turkish prince were carefully considered. Then, act- 
ing on the advice of certain of his counsellors, he led all his forces 
across the valley of Sylvester, wherein is the Dead sea, and arrived 
at the spot where he proposed to meet Saladin on his march and 
prevent him from devastating that land. 

Saladin’s march across the desert had been accomplished under 
great difficulties in barely twenty days, and he was now established 
with his forces upon habitable land in our territory, at a distance of 
about ten miles from the Christian stronghold of Montreal. Here he 
was waiting to receive definite information about the condition of the 
locality and of the whereabouts of the king and his army. 

Baldwin had placed his camp near an ancient city called Petra of 
the Desert, in Arabia Secunda, about thirty-six miles from Saladin’s 
camp. He had with him the entire strength of the army. The count 
of Tripoli also remained with the forces, although much against his 
will, for it was contrary to his advice that the king had marched 
thither and thus left the other parts of his realm unprotected and 
utterly stripped of soldiers. Certain of the barons, out of regard for 
Prince Renaud rather than for the general welfare, had influenced the 
king to this course, without giving due attention to what might happen 
in the kingdom thus left without defenders. 

How far from wise this action was subsequent events soon showed. 
For the rulers in the vicinity of Damascus, Bostrum, Baalbec, and 
Hims, perceiving that the flower of the realm was absent and the 
whole region destitute of troops, secretly and silently mustered their 
forces. They crossed the Jordan near the sea of Galilee, that is, near 
Tiberias, and furtively entered our land. After overrunning a part of 
Galilee, they came to a place at the foot of Mt. Tabor called Buria, 
near the ancient city of Nain. The people of those parts were as yet 
unaware that the truce had been broken. Accordingly, in complete 
reliance upon it, they did not take measures to protect themselves. 
As a result the enemy fell upon them stealthily by night and com- 
pletely surrounded the place so that the besieged could not escape 
to the mountains which rose above them. 


470 CONFLICT OF INTERESTS 


When day dawned, the inhabitants saw that they were surrounded 
on all sides by the enemy and hastily retreated to a tower above the 
village. The Turks immediately encircled this tower and put forth 
mighty efforts to undermine it. Within the space of four hours they 
were successful, and the building fell to the ground. Before the final 
catastrophe, however, when cracks began to appear and its downfall 
seemed imminent, the refugees who had fled to it for protection 
surrendered. 

The infidels thereupon gathered up all the plunder from Buria and 
other places near by and, without opposition, led away with them as 
prisoners about five hundred souls. Many dead who had fallen in the 
fight were left on the field. For since the locality was very productive 
and the time of harvest was at hand, large numbers of people had 
come thither from neighboring places to help harvest the crop. All 
of these, as we have said, were carried off by the enemy without 
resistance. Then the Turks again crossed the Jordan and returned, 
safe and sound, to their own land. 


15. Saladin likewise seizes by force one of our strongholds, a 
well-fortified cave, in the land of Sawad. 


Durine this time, while the king and the Christian army were still 
occupied in Syria Sobal, a very serious disaster occurred which exposed 
us to new peril and which will ever be regretted by our people. Be- 
yond the Jordan in the land of Sawad, sixteen miles from Tiberias, 
the Christians possessed a very strongly fortified place. It was thought 
to be impregnable and was of great service to our people. This 
district was nearer to the enemy’s domains than to our realm, and in 
consequence they could easily work their will over it and command 
the inhabitants as they would. Yet, because of the protection afforded 
by this fortress, the custom had prevailed for many years and was 
still in practice at this time of dividing the powers equally between 
the Christians and the infidels; the taxes and tribute were also equally 
divided between them.*° 

The fortress just referred to was situated in a cave on the slope of 
a certain mountain under an immense overhanging cliff. On the upper 
side there was no approach whatever, while on the other there was 

39 The ability of the Latin crusaders and their Muslim neighbors to live peaceably 


together is usually lost to sight in the narrative of warfare. Yet here is a clear instance 
of such codperation that had been going on for years. 


CONFLICT OF INTERESTS 471 


only a narrow footpath by which a man, if free from all encumbrance, 
might with difficulty find his way. The care of this place had been 
committed to Fulk of Tiberias, a loyal and vigilant nobleman of 
great wealth. 

The leaders of the Turkish forces had taken Buria and made 
prisoners of our people there, as has been related above; now they 
appeared suddenly before this place and within five days had taken 
it by storm. 

There is a difference of opinion about the capture of this fortress. 
Some say that the garrison in the citadel surrendered it in considera- 
tion of a sum of money. Others assert that the enemy forced an 
entrance into the cave from the side by mining, a feat which could 
easily be accomplished since the rock was of cretaceous nature. They 
burrowed into the first story and seized it; then, after taking that, 
they compelled the surrender of those in the middle and top stories 
(for the place is said to have had three stories). 

It was later ascertained, however, that the foe gained possession 
of the cave through the treachery of the officers in charge. For, al- 
though the rest wished to make resistance, those in authority forbade 
any defense to be made, and after surrendering they themselves de- 
serted to the enemy. 

The commanders in charge were, it is said, Syrians, a race which is 
regarded by us as weak and effeminate.*° The greatest blame, there- 
fore, rested upon Fulk of Tiberias, who was responsible for placing 
men of such caliber in charge of so important a place. Such was the 
report which spread far and wide through the realm and which finally 
reached the ears of the Christians beyond the Jordan who were try- 
ing to prevent Saladin from crossing into Syria on his way from Egypt 
to Damascus. 

This news overwhelmed the hearts of all with consternation. Espe- 
cially was this true of the count of Tripoli, on whom rested the re- 
sponsibility and care of this fortress. 

And so it happened that those who had so carelessly left the king- 
dom and were conducting themselves still more unwisely in this place 
were unable to accomplish anything acceptable to God or of benefit 
to the realm. They should have met Saladin at the frontiers of our 
kingdom and prevented his entering the land; but, rashly enough, 


40 This passage is usually cited to prove that William, though born in Palestine, was 
not a Syrian. 


472 CONFLICT OF INTERESTS 


they permitted him to advance as far as the place called Gerba, where 
he found a great abundance of the water so desperately needed by his 
thirsty army. From Gerba he sent a part of his forces to the vicinity 
of our fortress called Montreal, where they cut down vineyards and 
inflicted other losses upon the people living there. But, if the 
Christians had hurried to that place-he would unquestionably have 
been forced to retire to Egypt, for he was leading an immense crowd 
of unwarlike people who had already discovered that the water in 
their skins and the bread in their chests was beginning to fail. All this 
multitude must have perished of famine in the desert, for to advance 
was impossible and to engage our forces would be attended with great 
danger.*} ; 

On learning that the prince had already reached the place just 
named, the Christians again decided to attack him, this time at the 
waters called Ras el Rassit. If this plan had been carried out, Saladin 
would have been obliged to attempt a march through the farther 
desert, a feat which could not have been accomplished without great 
loss of men and pack animals. 

Since they neglected to do this, however, he reached the waters 
without difficulty, and then entered his own land without opposition 
and arrived in entire safety at Damascus. 

On learning of his departure, the Christians also returned to their 
own land over the same route by which they had come. But it was to be 
feared that from Damascus, whither he had departed with all his 
following, Saladin might be devising some trickery which would bring 
danger upon the realm. All the people of the country were accord- 
ingly ordered to concentrate at the fountain of Sephorie, between 
Sephorie and Nazareth. The king, the patriarch, and all the princes, 
both secular and ecclesiastical, with the Cross of the Lord, attended 


them, and there from day to day they awaited the approach of the 
enemy. 


16. Saladin invades our land with an armed force. At the fortress 
of Forbelet a battle without decisive results is fought. 


Durine this time Saladin had mustered forces from all over his 
domains to reinforce the army which he had brought with him from 


*1 William has usually not felt himself sufficiently informed or interested in military 
matters to criticize strategy and tactics. 


CONFLICT OF INTERESTS 473 


Egypt. Determined to invade our land, he now advanced to the place 
which is called in their tongue, Raseline, that is, the Head of the 
Waters. This is said to be only a short distance from our land and 
quite near the city of Tiberias. After remaining at Raseline for a 
few days, Saladin suddenly entered our land and encamped between 
two rivers in a place known as Cavan, which is about four miles 
distant from Tiberias. 

Scouts soon reported this fact to our leaders. An immediate attack 
was decided upon, and the forces were hastily dispatched to Tiberias 
to unite with the contingent that had been sent there to protect that 
city and the fortified places in the vicinity, namely Saphet and 
Beauvoir. 

It happened that the count of Tripoli, an able and valiant man of 
great experience in war, was at this time lying critically ill with an 
attack of double [sic] tertiary fever. This added much to the troubles 
of the Christians, for it deprived them at a critical time of the help of 
this great lord, on whose counsel and prudence they placed great 
reliance. 

Nevertheless, they called in additional forces from the neighboring 
places and marched forth against the foe with standards raised. As 
soon as Saladin heard that they were advancing, however, he crossed 
the Jordan with his armies and withdrew into the environs of 
Scythopolis. 

Scythopolis, [once] the metropolis of Palestina Tertia, and also 
known as Bethsan, lies in a plain amid well-watered fields, between 
the mountains of Galboa and the river Jordan. The privileges which 
it once enjoyed, however, have now been transferred to the church at 
Nazareth in the same diocese. For Scythopolis has now very few in- 
habitants and has become merely a small town. 

Thither the enemy’s battalions marched and at once made a vig- 
orous assault on a small fort situated on marshy land. But the towns- 
people offered a stout resistance, and the Turks found that they had 
no prospect of success. In order to march against the Christians, 
therefore, they directed their lines toward a new fortress, now called 
Beauvoir, situated in the hills between Scythopolis and Tiberias. 

The Christians followed the course of the Jordan until they ar- 
rived at the place just mentioned, when they left the valley and went 
up into the mountains. They were greatly exhausted by the intense 


474 CONFLICT OF INTERESTS 


heat which became almost unendurable as they advanced. The night 
was passed in a state of constant vigilance, for they suspected that the 
enemy was in the vicinity. When morning came, they returned to the 
plain which lies between the fortress just mentioned and a village 
called Forbelet. Here they beheld Saladin’s forces stretching out all 
around in numbers far greater than they had ever before experienced ; 
in fact, the older princes of the kingdom declared that at no time 
since the Latins first entered Syria had they beheld such a mighty 
array of foes. The number of knights equipped for battle was about 
twenty thousand, while our cavalry was estimated at barely seven 
hundred. Saladin and his nobles had one common intent and purpose, 
namely to surround our army completely, so that not a man might 
escape—for, relying on their great numbers, just given, they despised 
our small force and were confident that the Christians would be un- 
able to withstand them. 

But far otherwise did it seem to Him who easily overcomes a great 
multitude with a few. Although in comparison with the enemy’s host, 
our numbers seemed as nothing, yet, upheld by the God of mercy, 
the Christians drew up their lines according to the rules of military 
science and with their usual courage advanced upon the foe. Firmly 
they resisted the attacks against them and, although to their own ever- 
lasting disgrace many Christians, whose names we refrain from giv- 
ing, ignominiously fled from the heat of battle, yet in that conflict 
we proved superior to our foes. Baldwin of Ramlah and Balian his 
brother showed magnificent prowess that day and fought with vigor 
and courage. Hugh the Younger, stepson of the count of Tripoli, 
who was with the contingent from Tripoli, also deserves that his 
memory be held in benediction. Although younger than the others, 
he strove with valor far beyond his age and, with the troops under 
his command, routed and put to flight three companies of Turks; 
then, by the grace of God, he returned uninjured to his friends. 

In that battle only a few of our knights fell, about to be received 
in the company of the saints above; but of the people many perished. 
The loss of the enemy was far greater. Some of their principal leaders 
also fell, a catastrophe which caused the infidels to desert the field of 
battle in consternation. 

The fact ought not to be passed over in silence that the heat dur- 


CONFLICT OF INTERESTS 475 


ing those days was so much greater than usual that fully as many in 
both armies perished from sunstroke as by the sword. 

Concerning the number of the enemy slain we could learn nothing 
positive; for to conceal their losses from us, they carried away the 
bodies of those who had fallen in battle and stealthily buried them 
the next night in camp, lest the proof of their death might inspire 
our people with additional courage. We ascertained, however, that 
from the two causes named above about a thousand perished. 

Since matters had not turned out as he had hoped and the Chris- 
tians had proved stronger than he anticipated, Saladin now retired 
discomfited. He recrossed the Jordan and returned to his own land, 
camping a second time in the place from which he had set out. 

The Christians also recalled their troops and returned to the foun- 
tain of Sephorie, which had been their starting point. On this march 
Baldwin, a canon of the Sepulchre of the Lord and treasurer of that 
church, who was bearing the Revivifying Cross, was overcome by the 
intense heat. He was placed in a litter and borne to the foot of Mt. 
Tabor, near the torrent of Cison, where he expired. 

Another brother, Godfrey of Villeneuve, a canon of the same 
church, who had been sent on that expedition as an aide to this Bald- 
win, also perished. Carried away by his zeal for secular interests, he 
was struck by an arrow and perished. It is indeed just, according to 
the word of the Lord, that “all they that take the sword shall perish 
with the sword.” 4? 


17. Saladin summons a fleet from Egypt and lays siege to the 
city of Beirut. 


Tue king now returned with his forces to the place mentioned above. 
Saladin, exceedingly wroth that his campaign had proved so ineffec- 
tive, now for a second time mustered his forces and again reviewed in 
his mind all manner of plans. Anxiously he deliberated with his coun- 
sellors as to the best way to renew aggressive measures against the 
Christians. He came to the conclusion that the most effective means 
of injury was to attack our people in several different places simul- 

42 Mat. 26:52. This quotation reflects William’s own views on the proper relation 


of churchmen and warriors. These events occurred in July, 1182 (see Stevenson, 
Crusaders, pp. 228-29). 


476 CONFLICT OF INTERESTS 


taneously. He accordingly sent strict instructions to his brother, whom 
he had left in charge of his affairs in Egypt, to assemble a fleet from 
Alexandria and Egypt and dispatch it to Syria as soon as possible. He 
explained that, immediately on the arrival of this fleet, he intended 
to blockade Beirut both by land and by sea. To prevent the king and 
his people from hurrying to its relief, he directed his brother to as- 
semble the cavalry forces which had been left in Egypt. With these 
troops he was to enter our land on the south and lay waste all the 
region around Gaza, Ascalon, and Daron, which are the last cities 
belonging to the kingdom on this side the land of Egypt. 

Saladin’s purpose in giving these orders was that, while one part 
of the Christian forces was engaged in opposing the invaders from 
Egypt whereby the army was reduced in strength and numbers, he 
himself might be free to assault the besieged city with greater fury. 

His plans were carried out according to the orders which he had 
given. Within a few days, a fleet of thirty beaked ships arrived as he 
had directed, and his brother conducted to the vicinity of Daron the 
forces which he had raised from all over Egypt. 

That all might be in readiness when the fleet arrived, Saladin him- 
self led a force into the locality commonly known as the valley of 
Baccar. Scouts were stationed upon the hills which jut out into the 
sea between the region just mentioned and the plain of Beirut to 
notify him when the fleet was in sight. During this interval he gath- 
ered additional infantry forces from the adjacent country and with 
great care made all the preparations which he thought would be neces- 
sary for the successful operation of the siege. 

Punctually, about August 1, the fleet arrived off the coast near 
Beirut. The scouts specially detailed for the purpose gave immediate 
notice of this arrival, and Saladin at once crossed the intervening moun- 
tains and led his forces down into the plain. Here he completely in- 
vested the city of Beirut according to the plan long before arranged. 

Conflicting rumors in regard to Saladin’s intentions now began to 
reach our forces which were encamped at Sephorie. Some said that he 
intended to besiege the city of Beirut, which eventually proved to be 
true; others thought that his whole idea was to obtain Aleppo; while 
still others asserted that it was his purpose to engage the lord of 
Mosul, a magnificent and powerful Turkish satrap, who was reported 
to be besieging some of Saladin’s cities in the vicinity of the Euphrates. 


CONFLICT OF INTERESTS 477 


But while these desultory reports were circulating in the camp, all 
uncertainty was ended by the arrival of a messenger who announced 
that Beirut was most certainly in a state of siege. At the same time 
another courier came from the south with trustworthy information 
that Saladin’s brother with an immense force had invaded our land 
in the vicinity of Daron. Thirty-six of the light-armed knights who 
are called Turcopoles had been slain and some of the outlying villages 
burned. 

On receipt of this news, the king, after consulting with his barons, 
decided to attack the point of greatest danger first by relieving the 
besieged city from the peril which confronted it; for he did not re- 
gard his forces as sufficiently strong to repulse both enemies from his 
land at the same time. 


18. The king arrives at Tyre on his way to relieve Beirut. Saladin 
raises the siege. 


AccorpincLy he summoned his forces and at the head of the entire 
army proceeded to Tyre, where he ordered the fleet which lay at 
anchor in the harbors of Acre and Tyre to be made ready. Within 
seven days, sooner than all expectation, a fleet of thirty-three ships, 
well-armed and manned with valiant men, was ready for action. 

While the Christians were making these preparations with zealous 
care, Saladin was besieging the city of Beirut, as has been stated. Both 
his armies were exerting themselves to the utmost to cause the citizens 
all possible trouble. The legions, drawn up around the city, were em- 
ployed in successive relays and for three days kept up such a con- 
tinual pressure that no respite was given the besieged for rest or for 
taking the necessary nourishment. 

Saladin had brought with him neither hurling engines nor any 
other kind of machine generally employed in besieging a stronghold. 
Possibly he thought that by a sudden attack he could take the city 
without the help of such instruments, or, since he was momentarily 
expecting the arrival of the Christian army, he may have deprecated 
such a waste of effort without promise of result. But by his zealous 
and careful efforts he accomplished all that was possible without the 
aid of machines. For, as has been explained, he had placed his great 
host in successive ranks about the city; these divisions relieved one 
another by turns and poured forth such showers of arrows upon the 


478 CONFLICT OF INTERESTS 


defenders, who were fighting upon the walls and in the towers, that 
the city and fortifications were covered as with hail. 

But this was not the only method by which Saladin’s forces tried 
to prevent the inhabitants from defending the city. They also intro- 
duced by force sappers brought for the special purpose of undermin- 
ing the wall. It was hoped that by breaking down the barbicans and 
walls in this way, openings might be made through which bodies of 
armed men might be introduced in spite of the efforts of the besieged. 
That the miners might apply themselves to their work without hin- 
drance, the rest of the soldiers kept continually pouring forth show- 
ers of missiles from their bows and ballistae. So persistently was this 
done that the citizens within the walls were in imminent danger of 
death and scarcely dared to raise a finger. 

Although very few in number, the defenders responded nobly to 
the orders and exhortations of the governor and especially of the 
bishop. The great valor and firmness shown by the latter in this 
emergency is worthy of high praise. All the tactics of the enemy were 
met by the Christians with counteracting measures and no possible 
method of resistance was left untried. Darts and arrows were hurled 
against the archers outside with a skill and enthusiasm equal to that 
of the assailants, with the result that great loss was inflicted upon the 
Turks and again and again those who were boldest in advancing to 
the charge were slain. 

The miners who were striving to undermine the walls were met 
with skill equal to their own so that many of those who were zealously 
engaged in that work were killed or lost their digging tools. 

It was not only the forces which had arrived by land who wrought 
such havoc upon the besieged, but those who had come by sea also 
showed equal fury and courage in attacking. Saladin himself had 
taken up a position on a hill not far away and by his presence and 
cheering words did not cease to encourage his men to the combat. In 
this he was so successful that one of his chief nobles, named Choelin, 
proposed that they raise the ladders to the walls and force an en- 
trance, for he felt that it was disgraceful that so small a force should 
have the courage or the power to resist such a host. He was zealously 
insisting on this plan and by word and example urging the rest to 
agree to it, when he was suddenly hit near the eye by an arrow. This 


CONFLICT OF INTERESTS 479 


accident forced him, as well as the others, to abandon the enterprise. 

For three successive days the city had been besieged in the manner 
just described. But at length, since it was evident that there was no 
chance of success, the naval forces withdrew to the galleys by Saladin’s 
command and at nightfall on the third day silently and furtively 
sailed away. 

Saladin recalled his land forces also and retired a short distance 
from the city. He then divided the cavalry into bands and ordered 
them to scour the plains about the city and raze to the ground every 
tower in the outlying districts. By his orders also all the many or- 
chards and vineyards in the vicinity of the city were destroyed by 
axes and hatchets. 

That the work of the siege might proceed more freely and securely, 
he caused some of the infantry to occupy certain narrow and difficult 
roads between Beirut and Sidon over which our army must pass on 
their way to the relief of the city. He also had barricades of stones 
without mortar built to the very shore of the sea. By the help of these 
two devices, he hoped to hinder our legions from advancing. In the 
meantime, he would be able without restraint to continue the attack 
on Beirut. 

It was reported that he had been firmly resolved not to abandon 
the siege until he had taken the city by force, yet now he changed his 
mind and prepared to return home. The reason for this change of 
purpose is reported to have been as follows: those who were guarding 
the passage happened to intercept a courier who was the bearer of 
encouraging letters from some of the faithful to the people of Beirut. 
This messenger was brought before Saladin and subjected to a most 
severe questioning. From the confession wrung from him by force 
and also from the contents of the letter, Saladin learned that both our 
armies were fully prepared and would without doubt arrive within 
three days. He therefore changed his plans and raised the siege, as 
has been related. 

Our fleet arrived safely at its destination, but finding the city free, 
it returned without much loss of time to the ports from which it had 
sailed. The king, on learning that the enemy had abandoned the 
siege and departed, remained for a few days at Tyre with his entire 
army. He then again assembled his forces and returned to Sephorie. 


480 CONFLICT OF INTERESTS 


19. Saladin crosses the Euphrates and enters Mesopotamia. 


SaLapin, always active and vigilant, desired with his whole heart to 
increase the glory of his name and expand the limits of his kingdom. 
Eager to achieve still greater victories and scorning the strength of 
the Christians as nothing, he resolved to advance toward the east. It 
is not yet entirely plain whether or not he proceeded thither on his 
own initiative, inspired by the greatness of soul natural to him. It is 
possible that this difficult task which seemed beyond his strength was 
undertaken at the request of the princes of that region. However this 
may be, he again assembled a great force of horsemen, caused to be 
prepared, as well as time and place permitted, all the necessary equip- 
ment and baggage for undertaking so long a march, and led his forces 
toward the Euphrates. 

The prevailing opinion among the Christians was that he was 
marching toward Aleppo in an attempt to take that city. For, of the 
entire heritage of Nureddin, Aleppo alone and a few strongholds 
adjacent to it had not yet fallen into his power. After the death of 
Nureddin’s son, it was held by the brother of Qutb al-Din, lord of 
Mosul, by the favor of the latter, on whom it had devolved by heredi- 
tary right on the death of the aforesaid youth.** It was.generally be- 
lieved, therefore, and this seemed probable, that Saladin was march- 
ing thither to take possession of the city. But, as the result proved, he 
had conceived far loftier ideas. Leaving Aleppo behind him, he 
crossed the Euphrates and within a few days took by storm Edessa 
and Haran, those splendid cities of Mesopotamia, together with a 
great many other cities and their dependent towns. In fact, he took, 
either by armed force or by bribes, almost the entire region which 
had formerly been under the power of the prince of Mosul just men- 
tioned. By his great liberality he corrupted the magnates of the land 
who owed loyal allegiance to their lord; and, after receiving their 
fortresses, he also succeeded in winning their allegiance to himself. 
The great and noble prince of Mosul, thus entirely deprived of the 
support of his nobles, was said to be unable either to meet or to resist 
Saladin. It was a matter of common talk that Saladin had corrupted 
the servants and friends of this prince and had caused a deadly po- 
tion to be given him which came near proving fatal. Hence it was be- 


48 See note 24. 


CONFLICT OF INTERESTS 481 


lieved from these reports that Saladin had without mishap reached 
Mosul with his forces. Stories of varying import were in circulation 
among us in regard to this, some to the effect that his march had been 
successful and that everything was turning out according to his wishes, 
others, on the contrary, indicating that the great lords of that land 
had banded together to check his insolent attempts and that his army 
had accordingly met with harsh treatment.** 


20. The king lays waste the territory of the Damascenes in hos- 
tile fashion, 


Tuus the land of the enemy seemed to have been stripped of its 
defenders. The king and the barons of our realm thought, therefore, 
and not without apparent reason, that the long-desired opportunity of 
injuring the enemy had arrived. Their wrath against Saladin was 
greatly increased by the fact that in his superb arrogance he had 
scorned the military strength of the kingdom and, without entering 
into either truce or treaty with the king, had departed to win foreign 
kingdoms. After taking counsel together, therefore, they mustered 
their forces and, accompanied by the patriarch and the precious Life- 
giving Cross, entered the land of the infidel to lay waste the region 
as far as their strength permitted. 

They passed through the country of the Traconites, which forms 
a large part of the land of Bostrum, and entered Syria Minor, of 
which Damascus is the capital. Then, directing their march toward 
the eastern part of this land, they forced their way into the famous 
and populous city of Zoro, not far from Damascus. From there they 
overran the land and destroyed a large part of the outlying places 
which are commonly known as casalia. These they either burned or 
injured in every possible way. The inhabitants of this district had 
learned betimes of our approach and, with their wives and children, 
flocks and herds, had fled to localities which had better defenses. Con- 
sequently, the Christians brought back with them little or no spoils or 
treasure. The crops and other necessaries of life which the enemy had 
been unable to take with them in their flight, however, they either 
burned or damaged in some other way. 


44This campaign into the northeast of Syria extended from September, 1182, to 
August, 1183. William here recalls the attitude of the Latins in 1182 before the 
outcome of the campaign became known (see Stevenson, Crusaders, pp. 229-30). 


482 CONFLICT OF INTERESTS 


After ravaging everything in sight, they had to pass, on their re- 
turn, near a noble city of those parts called Bostrum, commonly 
known as Bosseret. Here our people deliberated on the advisability 
of seizing the suburban districts. However, as this could not be done 
quickly but would require a longer stay than the dearth of water per- 
mitted, they decided to return, lest they and their beasts should suffer 
from thirst. This region is utterly arid and dry, entirely without 
springs, brooks, or rivers. During the winter months, the people are 
in the habit of collecting rain water in reservoirs. This they carefully 
preserve for necessary uses during the entire year, although through 
the heat of the sun and the slime which accumulates on top it becomes 
insipid. To prevent the army as it passed from lingering there, the 
people, forewarned of our coming, had either broken these cisterns 
so that the water ran out, or had contaminated it by throwing in filth. 
The time of year, however, did not permit the Christians to do as 
much damage as they could have desired. The grain and other crops, 
which they would ordinarily have burned, had already been gathered 
into the granaries, which it is the custom in that region to build in 
caverns underground. Since these were covered with earth and very 
skilfully hidden, they were difficult to find. Whatever grain still re- 
mained on the threshing floors had been stripped of its hulls and 
cleaned of straw, and therefore, as grain alone does not catch fire, it 
did not easily burn. Scarcely any damage could be done to the thresh- 
ing floors except to scatter the grain and to carry off some of it with 
them as feed for the horses. Many of the soldiers, however, seeking 
ways of doing damage, mixed hulls and straw here and there with 
the grain already cleaned so that it might more readily take fire. 

The small force of troops which had been left in that district on 
Saladin’s departure was not strong enough to risk an encounter with 
the Christians or to oppose them at close quarters. They followed in 
bands, however, at a distance on the rear of the departing foe and 
tried to do some damage. But even in this way they were unable to 
offer any impediment to the Christians or to injure the army, either 
in part or as a whole. 


21. The Christians blockade the fortress lately held by Saladin. 
They take it by siege and restore it to the Christian faith. 


AFTER traversing the whole region and doing as much damage as 
lay in their power, our people halted, on their return, in that part of 


CONFLICT OF INTERESTS 483 


the same province which is called Sawad. This is the district where 
lies that castle which, as has already been related, the enemy had 
taken from the Christians by trickery shortly before this time, while 
our army was in Syria Sobal. 

Sawad is famous for its products of wine, grain, and olives, and also 
for its salubrious climate and generally delightful situation. Bildad, 
the friend of Job, who took the surname of Shuhite from this land, 
is said to have belonged here. 

On arriving here the Christians judged that it would be desirable 
to besiege the stronghold and thereupon decided to undertake it, that 
the evils which the infidels had brought upon them in treacherously 
capturing and keeping the place might, if Heaven permitted, recoil 
upon themselves. 

Accordingly a camp was established before the castle just named, 
and vigorous efforts were put forth to force those within to surrender. 
The fortress was extremely well defended. Its situation was such that 
it was assailable only by the upper part, and not even there unless the 
rocks were cut through to the dwelling place itself. It was decided, 
therefore, to put stonecutters at work on the upper portion. All the 
helpers needed and also guards were to be furnished, that they might 
work in safety and without danger of attack. 

The cave was located on the side of a very high mountain. Ap- 
proach to it was attended with the greatest difficulty over a path 
arduous even for a single foot soldier if free from all encumbrance. 
The path approaching from the side was scarcely a foot wide, and 
below yawned a deep and dreadful precipice which extended to the 
bottom of the valley. 

This cave had three stories, one above the other. A wooden stair- 
case with narrow openings led from one level to the other. 

Since this was the only method by which it could be attacked, the 
Christians tried to cut into the cave from above, as we have said, in 
the hope that they might be able to penetrate in this way into the 
first and upper level of the citadel. This was their whole aim and in- 
tention, and every effort was put forth to attain that end. All the 
workmen needed were placed in position and helpers provided who, 
as fast as the fragments of rock and stone were cut away, threw the 
refuse down into the valley below. In order that the work might pro- 
ceed without interruption, shifts were arranged during both night and 
day so that when those on the first crew were weary, their places were 


484 CONFLICT OF INTERESTS 


taken by fresh workers who had the necessary skill and ability to 
carry on the work. The labor progressed rapidly because of the num- 
ber and enthusiasm of the workers and also because the rock itself 
was easily cut. For it was of cretaceous nature and readily penetrated 
except where veins of very hard flint obtruded which often injured 
the iron tools and presented a hindrance to the eager workers. The 
fragments were rolled down into the valley below to clear the place, 
as has been explained. All these passed in full view of those shut up 
within the cave and greatly increased their fear; for hourly they 
anticipated the time when the work would be finished and an en- 
trance achieved by force. 

Our army was divided into two sections: one part, as has been said, 
had located a camp on the top of the hill occupied by the cave, from 
which position they could more easily protect those engaged in the 
work from the wiles of the enemy. The other part remained in the 
plain below, placed there for the special task of preventing any going 
or coming on the part of the besieged. Occasionally some of the latter 
force approached the lower level of the cave along the narrow path 
described above and attempted to attack those inside. These efforts 
were, however, futile. For within, well supplied with food and weap- 
ons, was a force of about seventy strong and valiant men. These ex- 
perienced men Saladin had chosen as he was about to depart, and to 
their vigilant care, as to those on whose fidelity and steadfastness he 
had especial reason to rely, he had entrusted the stronghold. 

The work had now reached a point where the almost incessant 
blows of the hammer permitted the garrison in the cave no rest. As 
the strokes redoubled, the whole mass seemed to shake and tremble, 
so that the dread lest a forcible entrance might be effected gave way 
to apprehension that the whole cave, shattered by the repeated blows, 
might suddenly collapse and crush all within. It was useless to hope 
that any aid would arrive, for Saladin, as they knew, had departed 
with all his troops to far distant parts whence he could not easily re- 
turn. Finally, after the siege had lasted for three weeks or a little 
longer, they sent an embassy to the king, and, through the interven- 
tion of the count of Tripoli, obtained permission to depart freely to 
Bostrum. The condition was made that they surrender the citadel and 
give up the arms which they had borne and all their equipment. 
Thereupon, they at once resigned the place and departed. Thus, 


CONFLICT OF INTERESTS 485 


through the superabounding grace of God, we were freed from the 
dangerous situation which heretofore had seemed to menace us. 

Now that the surrender had been made, the king and the other 
leaders saw to it, as seemed wise, that the fortress was supplied with 
arms and provisions. It was then entrusted to the charge of faithful 
men whose loyalty and ability was unquestioned, and after everything 
had been carefully attended to the forces returned to their own land. 

This happened in the year 1182 of the Incarnation of the Lord, in 
the month of October, the . . . day of the month.*® 


22. The king again invades the land of the Damascenes with his forces. 


A sHorT time afterward—that is, in the following December—our 
leaders observed that Saladin, detained by more important matters 
in the country near Mosul, had not yet returned. Loath to lose the 
opportunity which his absence afforded, they again assembled and, 
after consulting together for the good of the kingdom, unanimously 
decided to call a rendezvous at Caesarea on the coast. It was resolved 
with one accord to muster the forces of the realm and to provide 
everything necessary for the use of both men and beasts during an- 
other campaign of fifteen days into the enemy’s land, that the offered 
opportunity might not be neglected. A secret raid in which only 
knights took part was first made into hostile territory near Bostrum, 
as had been arranged in advance. From this they returned in safety 
and brought back much plunder in the form of flocks and herds and 
also many slaves. Since this raid started from the land of Tiberias 
and returned to the same place, it was under the command of the 
count of Tripoli. 

At length, on the fifteenth day, the king and the barons of the 
realm, with as large a force of infantry and cavalry as the kingdom 
could afford at the time, and accompanied by the Cross of the Lord, 
assembled near Tiberias at a place on the sea of Galilee called Castel- 
lum. From there they crossed the river at Jacob’s ford and entered 
the enemy’s land. With Lebanon on the left, the army proceeded 
through the plain as far as a place called Bettegene. This they utterly 
destroyed with all the adjacent hamlets, and, partly by burning and 
partly by razing to the ground, they completely ruined everything 
found there. Still farther along they came to Daria, a place about 


*5 The day of the month is missing in the text. 


486 CONFLICT OF INTERESTS 


four or five miles from Damascus. This also was laid waste in the 
same manner, together with the outlying villages. 

The people in this vicinity had fled, some to the Lebanon moun- 
tains and some to Damascus. Consequently, scarcely a prisoner was 
taken in all that region. We lost some of our men, however, because 
of their own reckless conduct while foraging. Certain Turkish knights, 
trusting to the speed of their horses, had issued forth from Damascus 
and were hovering about our lines. Sometimes they rode a little ahead 
of our ranks, and again they followed. Always watching for an op- 
portunity to do us harm, these knights fell suddenly upon the in- 
cautious foragers just mentioned and in a furious onslaught slew 
them to a man. The Damascenes also emerged from their city and 
massed themselves about the orchards which surround the place in 
large numbers. From this distance they kept a close watch on our 
troops but did not venture to advance nearer. The Christians did not 
dare attack them, nor did they attempt anything against us, but when 
our people departed they too withdrew into the city. 

After overrunning that part of the country and causing much dam- 
age, as already described, the Christian army returned home without 
encountering difficulty or hindrance. The king himself hastened to 
Tyre and there celebrated with us the Nativity of the Lord.*® 


23. A census of the kingdom is taken as a protection against 
future mishaps. 


Durinc all this time, indefinite rumors in regard to Saladin’s activi- 
ties had been circulating. Some reports indicated that he was meeting 
with much success in Mesopotamia in the vicinity of Mosul, where he 
had subjugated the entire region to his power; others, on the con- 
trary, were to the effect that all the princes of the East had united in 
an effort to drive him from the land by force of arms and thus re- 
cover the territory which he had won from them by intrigue and 
bribes. His progress caused the Christians much uneasiness; they 
viewed the increase of his power with great alarm, lest with large re- 
inforcements he should return against them. 

Accordingly, in the following February,*’ a general assembly of 

46 The friendship of Baldwin IV for William continued despite the hostility of the 
court party. William’s decision to stop writing must have been made before this 


time, December 25, 1182. 
47 February, 1183. 


CONFLICT OF INTERESTS 487 


all the barons of the realm was held at Jerusalem to confer about the 
situation. There was great dread of his return, as has been mentioned, 
and for that reason it was resolved to use every possible means to re- 
sist him. 

After much deliberation and expression of varying opinions, it was 
resolved by common consent that a census of all the lands of the 
realm be taken. If such a report were available, it would be possible 
in an emergency to obtain foot and cavalry forces so that the enemy, 
if he returned, might find us prepared for resistance. The king and 
the barons were reduced to such a desperate state of need that the 
revenues were entirely insufficient to provide for the necessary out- 
lay. It was imperative, therefore, that money be collected from the 
people as a whole. A perusal of the rescript which was made on this 
matter will afford an accurate understanding of the method by which 
this levy was made. It was as follows: “This is the method of collect- 
ing the tax which, by the common consent of all the nobles, both 
secular and ecclesiastical, and by the assent of the people of the king- 
dom of Jerusalem in the face of the present stringent necessities, must 
be levied for the.common good of this realm. 

“Tt is decreed on behalf of the state that in every city of this realm 
there be chosen four men of discretion and worthy of confidence, who, 
after taking a solemn oath that they will act in good faith in this 
present matter, shall first themselves give, and then compel others to 
do the same, one besant for every hundred besants which they own, 
or its equivalent either on things in their possession or on credits ow- 
ing to them. From revenues also they shall give two besants for every 
hundred besants. They must so act in compelling others that each 
citizen, whether an inhabitant of a city or of other places over which 
he rules, shall pay toward this fund according to that which they 
shall judge in good faith that his substance is worth, and they shall 
assess this separately upon each according to his ability to pay. 

“But if any man, on being told how much he must give, shall de- 
clare that he is overcharged and taxed beyond his means, he shall 
declare, according to his own conscience, the value of his furniture as 
seems just to him and, having declared under oath that he cannot 
give more, he shall go away in peace, according to the terms cited. 

“The four men shall be held by their oath to keep secret what has 
been offered to them by each citizen, whether much or little, and they 


488 CONFLICT OF INTERESTS 


shall be bound by oath not to disclose the wealth or poverty of any- 
one. They must observe these regulations in respect to those who are 
worth a hundred besants, of whatever language, people, or faith these 
may be, without regard to sex; for, whether male or female, all alike 
shall be subject to this ruling. 

“If the four men thus chosen and assigned to this duty shall know 
for a certainty that the property of anyone is not worth a hundred 
besants, they shall receive from him hearth money; that 1s to say, 
one besant for every fireplace. If they cannot obtain a whole besant, 
they shall take a half; and if they cannot get a half, they shall take 
a raboin, according to what shall seem right to them in good faith. 
All whose goods are not worth a hundred besants, of whatever 
tongue, people, faith, or sex they may be, shall be subject to this condi- 
tion. 

“Tt is likewise decreed that every church and every monastery, and 
all the barons, as many as there are, and also the vassals, as also all 
others in the kingdom who have revenues, shall give two besants out 
of every hundred besants which they have in rents. Wage earners 
also shall give one besant for every hundred. 

“All who own casalia are bound by oath that for every hearth which 
they have in villages or casalia, they shall give in good faith one 
besant in addition to that enjoined above; so that, if a casal has a 
hundred fires, the peasants must be made to pay a hundred besants. 
Afterwards it shall be the duty of the lord of the casal to divide 
among the peasants of that place in suitable portions the above named 
number of besants, so that each one may be made to pay the above 
tax in proportion to his means. Thus the rich may not escape lightly 
nor the poor be overburdened. The ratio shall be the same whether 
the casal has many or few fires. 

“The money thus collected from every city from Haifa to Jeru- 
salem shall be carried to Jerusalem by those who, as we said before, 
are over each city and castle. They shall pay it in a fixed sum and 
weight to those who are in charge of this work at Jerusalem. The 
latter, in the presence of the patriarch or his deputy, and of the prior 
of the canons of the Sepulchre of the Lord, and of the castellan of 
Jerusalem, shall place this money sealed and separate, just as they 
receive it from each city or other place, in separate sealed sacks, which 
shall be placed in a chest in the treasury of the Holy Cross. This 


CONFLICT OF INTERESTS 489 


chest shall have three locks and three keys, the first of which the 
patriarch shall keep, the second, the prior of the canons of the Sepul- 
chre of the Lord, and the third shall be in the keeping of the castellan 
and the four citizens mentioned above, who were appointed to collect 
the money. 

“Those who are in charge of the cities from Haifa to Beirut shall 
carry the money collected in like manner to the city of Acre. There, 
under a fixed sum and weight, just as it is brought from each city and 
stronghold, it shall be handed over to those four in each city who 
are in charge of collecting the money, and it shall be put into separate 
sacks inscribed and sealed. These sacks shall be placed in a chest which 
shall have three locks and three keys, of which the archbishop of 
Tyre shall have the first, Joscelin, the king’s seneschal, the second, 
and the citizens named above who are in charge of the matter shall 
keep the third. Those who have the keys shall receive the above- 
named money in the presence of the said lords. 

“The money thus raised must not be expended on the ordinary 
affairs of the realm but only for the defense of the land; and, as long 
as this money shall last, the tax commonly called taille shall cease to 
be exacted from both churches and citizens. 

“This levy shall be made only once and shall not be regarded as 
a precedent for the future.” #8 


24. Saladin besieges Aleppo and acquires it under a certain agree- 
ment. The prince of Antioch arranges an exchange of 
Tarsus with Rupen, duke of Armenia. 


Durine this time, Saladin, a man of tireless energy who ever acted 
the role of a vigorous leader in everything, had seized the land of 
Syria in Mesopotamia and taken by force cities of great renown. 
Among others, he invested and captured the famous metropolis of 
Amida, which, because of its large population, the massive walls 
which surrounded it, and the very nature of its site, seemed practically 


‘48 This tax, levied to meet a major emergency, did become a model for taxation in 
the West. It is of interest to note that the assent of the people as well as of the nobles, 
both secular and ecclesiastical, is specified in the opening of the document. It would 
have been even more interesting to learn just how the “assent of the people” was 
voiced. The document represents the most systematic and comprehensive scheme of 
taxation thus far devised by feudal authorities and as such impressed both Henry II 
and Philip II as a model for the “Saladin tithe” and later taxation. It is highly prob- 
able that William himself drafted this document. 


490 CONFLICT OF INTERESTS 


impregnable. After its capture he gave it, according to agreement, to 
a Turkish noble, Nureddin, son of Carassalem [Kara-Arslan], whose 
loyal aid had enabled him to prolong his stay in those parts and com- 
plete the subjugation of that region. 

In the following spring he recalled his forces, placed the entire dis- 
trict under the safekeeping of some of his loyal adherents, and cross- 
ing the Euphrates, returned to Coelesyria. Here he stationed his army 
around Aleppo and used every possible method of harassing the city. 

The governor of Aleppo was well aware that his brother, the lord 
of Mosul, a much stronger and more powerful lord than himself, 
had not been able to keep this same Saladin out of his domain; in 
spite of all efforts to the contrary, the great prince had subdued all 
the provinces beyond the Euphrates river. Fearing that a similar fate 
might overtake himself, he secretly sent envoys to the prince without 
the knowledge of the people of Aleppo, to treat for terms of peace. 
If Saladin would restore Semar to him and certain other fortresses 
whose names I do not recall, he in return would surrender Aleppo. 

Saladin received the embassy with great joy; from the very be- 
ginning of his rule his most earnest desire had been, by some means 
or other, to obtain Aleppo, which he regarded as the bulwark of the 
whole kingdom. He therefore graciously agreed to accept the terms, 
handed over the above-named city with its neighboring fortresses, and 
on the Nones of June received Aleppo.*® 

Redoubled fear took hold of our people on hearing this news, for 
the result most dreaded by them had come to pass. From the first it 
had been apparent to the Christians that if Saladin should succeed in 
adding Aleppo to his principality our territory would be as com- 
pletely encompassed by his power and strength as if it were in a state 
of siege. They accordingly tried to strengthen the fortifications of 
their cities and towns in every possible way, especially those places 
that were situated near the enemy’s borders. Above all, they increased 
the defenses of Beirut, which seemed to be particularly weak. 

The prince of Antioch was greatly alarmed at the proximity of so 
powerful an enemy. Realizing that a most redoubtable foe was now 
opposed to him, he repaired to the king, who was at that time staying 
at the city of Acre. He took with him only a small escort, that he 


4° Beha ed-Din (Saladin, p. 89) dates the siege of Aleppo by Saladin as May 21 to 
June 11, 1183, and the surrender on that final day. 


CONFLICT OF INTERESTS 491 


might not leave the land stripped of defenders, and had as his com- 
panion the count of Tripoli. There, in the presence of the princes of 
the realm, he asked for aid against Saladin and it was decided 
that his petition be heard according to his desire. Some three hundred 
knights of the realm of various ranks were granted him in fulfilment 
of his request. They followed him to Antioch prepared to fight under 
his command, but in a short time they returned, having taken leave 
of the prince. He had concluded a temporary truce with Saladin and 
seemed to feel somewhat assured of tranquillity. That he might have 
less anxiety and be able to watch more carefully over the land of 
Antioch, he had, in exchange for a large sum of money, transferred 
the city of Tarsus, the capital of Cilicia, which he had received from 
the Greeks, to Rupen, a powerful Armenian satrap who possessed the 
other cities of that land. He showed much wisdom in doing this. 
Tarsus was far distant, separated from Antioch by the lands of Rupen; 
it was therefore very difficult and costly for the prince to care for it 
—a matter which was quite easy for Rupen. 

After Saladin had arranged all matters in that locality to his satis- 
faction, he left for Damascus with his legions. This movement caused 
even greater fear to our people, especially because it was impossible to 
obtain any definite information through scouts as to his actual inten- 
tion. Some thought that after summoning the naval forces he would 
endeavor to besiege the city of Beirut, as he had done the year before; 
others, that he meant to attack Toron and Chastel Neuf, two strong- 
holds in the mountains above Tyre; still others believed that he pro- 
posed to devastate the lands beyond the Jordan, namely Syria Sobal, 
and to destroy the fortified places in that vicinity. There were even 
some who tried to assert that Saladin, wearied with long-continued 
campaigns in far distant lands, now that there was an interval of peace 
planned to go down into Egypt to rehabilitate his weakened army and 
collect the necessary funds for future campaigns. 

These various conjectures, all so ambiguous, kept the king and the 
barons in a perpetual state of anxiety and suspense. Finally, all the 
available forces of the realm were concentrated at the fountain of 
Sephorie, where the armies from early times had been accustomed to 
assemble, and there the outcome of events was awaited. Messages 
were sent to the prince of Antioch and the count of Tripoli, who after 
urgent entreaty added their strength and counsel to the rest. In this 


492 CONFLICT OF INTERESTS 


manner they waited, expecting from day to day that Saladin would 
suddenly invade some part of the kingdom with unusually strong 
forces. 


25. The king is stricken with serious illness at Nazareth. Guy de 
Lusignan, count of Jaffa, is made regent of the realm. 


Wuie the army was waiting in this state of suspense at the foun- 
tain of Sephorie, the king was suffering from a severe attack of fever 
at Nazareth. In addition, the leprosy which had begun to trouble 
him at the beginning of his reign—in fact, in very early youth—be- 
came much worse than usual. His sight failed and his extremities be- 
came completely deadened so that his hands and feet refused to per- 
form their office. Yet up to this time he had declined to heed the 
suggestion offered by some that he lay aside his kingly dignity and 
give up the administration of the realm, so that, with a suitable provi- 
sion for his needs from the royal revenues, he could lead a tranquil 
life in retirement. 

Although physically weak and impotent, yet mentally he was vigor- 
ous, and, far beyond his strength, he strove to hide his illness and to 
support the cares of the kingdom. When he was attacked by the fever, 
however, he lost hope of life. He summoned his nobles before him 
and, in the presence of his mother and the patriarch, he appointed as 
regent of the realm Guy de Lusignan, count of Jaffa and Ascalon, his 
sister’s husband, who has been so often mentioned in the preceding 
pages. He retained the royal dignity, however, and kept for his own 
use only the city of Jerusalem, with an annual revenue of ten thou- 
sand gold pieces. __ 

To Guy he committed the general administration of all the rest of 
the kingdom without restrictions and commanded his faithful sub- 
jects and all the barons generally that they acknowledge themselves 
vassals of Guy and swear fealty to him. This was done. First, how- 
ever, at Baldwin’s command Guy is said to have sworn that, as long 
as the king lived, he would not aspire to the crown and would not 
transfer to others or alienate from the treasury any of the cities and 
castles at that time in the possession of the king. It is believed that 
this was enjoined upon Guy with the most careful forethought and 
purpose and that he was obliged to bind himself by an oath in the 
presence of all the barons that he would faithfully observe that stipu- 
lation. For he had promised almost all the most important lords of 


CONFLICT OF INTERESTS 493 


the realm individually no slight portions of the kingdom in order to 
secure their votes and interest in obtaining his end. It was even ru- 
mored that he had taken a similar oath to these lords that he would 
carry out his promises. This can not be stated as a fact, for we have 
no definite information on the matter, but constant rumors to this 
effect were in circulation among the people.®° . 

There were those who were displeased at this change; some were 
inclined to object to it because of their own personal interests and 
private reasons; others pleaded the public welfare and, apprehensive 
about the condition of the realm, declared openly that the count was 
not equal to the burden of so great responsibility and was not com- 
petent to administer the affairs of the realm. Others, however, who 
hoped that Guy’s promotion might improve their own condition, 
maintained that it was well done. Among the people there was much 
murmuring and diversity of opinion for, as says the proverb, “so 
many men, so many minds.” *1 

The count did not long rejoice, however, in this eagerly desired 
charge which was now committed to him according to his wish and 
in which he at first rather indiscreetly gloried. 

We have said that he took this responsibility upon himself unad- 
visedly, for this reason: he did not sufficiently consider his strength 
with reference to the task laid upon him. Unequal to the burden both 
in force and wisdom, he assumed an insupportable weight. He had 
not learned the truth of that parable of the evangelist, wherein he 
advises that “one who intends to build a tower first sit down and count 
the cost, whether he have sufficient to finish it lest he fail and it be 
said, ‘This man began to build, and was not able to finish.’ ” 5? 


26. Saladin invades our land with mighty forces and encamps 
in. the neighborhood of Scythopolis. The Christians march 
out against him. 


Tus, then, was the state of affairs in the kingdom, and meanwhile 
the greater part of the army was assembled at Sephorie. During this 


50 William is here describing the methods of party politics in the kingdom at this 
time. The king’s mother, Agnes de Courtenay, and the patriarch are here specified 
as the leaders of the faction. That it was not William’s party is indicated by his reliance 
upon rumor or report. 

51 This is one of William’s favorite quotations, as it was also of the law schools of 
the West. It harks back to Terence, but it was so much used that few persons probably 
knew its origin. 

52 Adapted from Lu. 14: 28-30. 


494 CONFLICT OF INTERESTS 


time Saladin, after much deliberation, had summoned his forces from 
the lands beyond the Euphrates and with all the cavalry which he 
could gather from every source entered the frontiers of the realm, 
followed by his great host armed to the teeth. After traversing the 
land of Hauran, along the sea of Tiberias, he suddenly appeared 
with his legions in several divisions at a place called Cavan in the 
plain of the Jordan. From there, following the course of the river, 
he proceeded toward Scythopolis. As has often been mentioned, this 
place, now called Bethsan, was once the capital of all Galilee. Many 
evidences of its former greatness are still to be seen in the ruins of 
the ancient buildings and in the quantity of marble which exists among 
them. It is now reduced to almost nothing, with only a few scattered 
inhabitants, only a sparsely settled hamlet situated in a marshy place. 

Although the people dwelling there were well supplied with arms 
and food in proportion to their number and the size of the place, yet 
they felt no confidence in the defenses of their citadel. Before the 
hostile army arrived, therefore, they abandoned the fortress, leaving 
all their possessions behind, and repaired to Tiberias. So, on arriving 
at Scythopolis, the enemy found it deserted and were able to work 
their will upon it. Accordingly they bore off with them all the arms 
and food and everything that was of use in the place. From Scytho- 
polis they set out in separate detachments. One of these, because of 
the convenient water supply, encamped by a spring called Tubania, 
which rises at the foot of Mt. Galboa, in the vicinity of a once famous 
city, formerly known as Jezrael but now commonly called Little 
Gerin. 

The Christians were still encamped near the fountain of Sephorie, 
so often mentioned in this history, anxiously waiting to learn from 
what direction the hostile forces would invade our land. When they 
found that the Turks were already in possession of the plains of 
Bethsan and that their legions in many divisions had now invaded 
that country, they seized arms with one accord. Following the Life- 
giving Cross and the royal standards, they crossed the mountains 
where lies Nazareth, the city of Our Lord, and went down into the 
great plain, the ancient name of which was Esdrelon. Thence, with 
troops arranged in battle formation, fittingly disposed according to 
the rules of military science, they directed their course toward the 
springs of Tubania, where Saladin with a strong force of picked 


CONFLICT OF INTERESTS 495 


knights distinguished for their prowess had established himself near 
the waters. 

The intention of the Christians had been to drive out the foe and 
obtain the advantage of the water for their own use. On reaching 
there, however, they felt that it would be impossible to seize the 
place without great difficulty and hazardous combats with the enemy. 
But, suddenly, Saladin broke camp and most unexpectedly abandoned 
the springs. Following the course of the stream, he again encamped 
lower down opposite Bethsan, about a mile distant from us. Then, be- 
fore the Christians could reach the place, the infidels, breaking off 
from the main army into small bands, began to scour and ravage the 
surrounding country in enemy fashion. One of these bands had at- 
tacked Little Gerin, the village named above, and utterly destroyed 
everything it contained. Few or none of the inhabitants were found 
there, however; forewarned of the enemy’s coming, they had fled to 
places more strongly fortified. 

Other bands reached a place generally known as Forbelet; this 
they took by force and in enemy fashion worked havoc with every- 
thing in sight. Others followed the highways, where their presence 
was attended with great peril to both knights and foot soldiers, so 
that those who were hastening from various directions to join our 
army arrived there at the peril of their lives. Some of these same 
enemies even climbed Mt. Tabor, a feat hitherto unknown. There 
they treated the Greek monastery of St. Elias according to their own 
good pleasure and even tried to break by force into the greater cloister 
itself. But the monks with all their household and the people from 
the villages near by retired within the monastery, which was de- 
fended by a wall with towers. Here they made a valiant defense and 
routed from all parts of the encircling ramparts the foe who had 
scaled the mountain. 

Nothing daunted, however, some of these same bands climbed the 
height beyond which Nazareth lies, where from the hills towering 
above they could look down upon the whole city. Their appearance 
caused great terror to the women and children who, together with the 
aged men and the sick, had been left there, and it is said that many, 
while struggling to flee for refuge to the greater church, were suf- 
focated in the crowd. The majority of the citizens able to bear arms 
were either following the campaign with the general expedition or 


496 CONFLICT OF INTERESTS 


had departed with their households to the cities on the coast, espe- 
cially to Acre. 


27. A terrible famine breaks out in the army. Both the Christians 
and the Turks finally depart without having engaged in 
battle. 


TueEseE detached bands from the army of Saladin, ranging far and 
wide over the whole district, caused serious danger to those who 
wished to reach our army. Through fear of them, no one dared ap- 
proach the Christian camp either to trade or to bring assistance. As a 
result, famine soon broke out in the ranks. For in order to march 
without encumbrance against the foe, they had proceeded thither 
without baggage or impedimenta, hoping that the matter would be 
settled within two, or at the most three, days. The people on foot 
suffered the greatest distress, especially those from the coast who 
had been called at a moment’s notice—namely the Pisans, Genoese, 
Venetians, and Longobards. These had left their ships and their 
preparations for sailing (it was already about the middle of October 
and the time of crossing was at hand) and, together with the pilgrims 
whom they had contracted to take back, had joined our forces. They 
had brought no food whatsoever and were scarcely able to carry their 
arms, for the camp was about twenty miles from the sea. Messengers 
were therefore dispatched to the neighboring cities to request those 
in charge to send provisions speedily. The royal orders were at once 
zealously and carefully obeyed, and all the food that could be col- 
lected was sent to the camp without delay. The greater part of these 
stores reached their destination safely and afforded a sufficient supply 
for the temporary emergency. One party, however, carrying a large 
amount of provisions, through lack of proper precaution, fell into the 
enemy’s hands, for the Turks were also in great need. Some of our 
knights had been sent out to act as escort to protect the parties who 
were bringing supplies. Those whom they met they conducted safely 
to the camp, but those who had no such assistance, falling in with 
hostile rangers, either fell by the sword or were forced to serve the 
enemy ever after. 

At that time, if our sins had suffered the Lord to be propitious 
toward us, the power of the Turks might easily have been turned to 
their own destruction and their intolerable arrogance have been made 


CONFLICT OF INTERESTS - 497 


a mockery. For nowhere is it recorded that such large forces of both 
cavalry and infantry were ever assembled from all parts of the East; 
nor do aged men remember that forces so well equipped were ever 
united into one body from a single kingdom. The Christians had 
cavalry to the number of thirteen hundred, and their force of well- 
equipped foot soldiers was said to exceed fifteen thousand. Moreover, 
the army was commanded by great and brilliant leaders, men of il- 
lustrious race, distinguished for prowess in battle: Raymond, count 
of Tripoli; Henry, duke of Louvain, a leader of high rank from the 
kingdom of the Teutons; and Ralph de Mauleon, a warrior of great 
renown from Aquitaine. In addition, there were the following barons 
of the realm: Guy, count of Jaffa; Renaud de ChAatillon, lord of a 
domain beyond the Jordan, who had formerly been prince of Antioch; 
Baldwin of Ramlah and Balian of Nablus, his brother; Renaud of 
Sidon; Walter of Caesarea; Joscelin, seneschal of the king. In view 
of these facts, it seemed highly probable that our enemies had been 
very imprudent in crossing the Jordan and occupying our lands. In 
punishment for our sins, however, contention arose among the nobles, 
as the result of which matters of state which required the utmost care 
are said to have been carelessly and even wickedly handled. Those 
who, it seemed, would have been best able to handle the critical situa- 
tion [refused to act],°° it is said, through hatred of the count of Jaffa, 
to whom, two days before, the king had entrusted the welfare of the 
kingdom. For they took it ill that at so critical and dangerous a time 
matters of the highest importance had been placed in the hands of 
an obscure man, wholly incapable and indiscreet. As a result they too 
patiently, or rather, disgracefully, allowed the enemy to remain for 
eight successive days encamped in the vicinity of our army hardly 
more than a mile away—a thing which, it is said, had never happened 
before in the kingdom. During this time the Turks ravaged the en- 
tire region with impunity. 

Plain people who were with the army and who had no part in the 
wickedness of the Christian leaders wondered why it was that when 
such an opportunity offered no engagement with the enemy occurred, 
nor was anything done about a fight. When the matter was openly 


53 There is an omission in the text at this point, the probable tenor of which is sug- 
gested within the brackets. It must be noted that William is here criticizing his own 
friends. Apparently he considers the needs of the nation as transcending the interest 
of faction, even his own. 


498 CONFLICT OF INTERESTS 


discussed, however, the excuse offered for the delay was that Saladin, 
the commander of the infidel forces, was intrenched in a position sur- 
rounded by rocks and that it would be impossible for our troops to 
approach him without great danger. Moreover, he was said to have 
placed strong bodies of troops in a circle round about who had orders 
to fall upon our forces from every direction if we should attempt to 
engage his army. 

Some said that this was, in fact, the truth and maintained that the 
leaders were justified in their position. Others, on the contrary, as- 
serted that it was only an excuse, a trick deliberately invented to 
avoid battle, lest, if success should attend our arms, it might be as- 
cribed to the count under whose leadership it would have been fought 
to a successful outcome. 

We have stated these reasons as the varying sentiments of many 
people, but we assert nothing positively, for we have not fully as- 
certained the truth of the matter. It is a fact, however, that for seven 
or eight successive days the enemy remained without opposition in 
our territory in the vicinity of the Jordan and daily, with impunity, 
wrought much evil upon our army. 

At length, on the eighth, or rather on the ninth, day Saladin re- 
called his forces and retired unharmed to his own land. The Chris- 
tians, not as yet wholly convinced that he would not return, went 
back to the fountain of Sephorie. 

A certain event worthy of record happened during the time when 
our army was waiting at the spring of Tubania. Up to that time it 
was thought that this spring and the streams flowing from it con- 
tained few or no fish, but during the Christians’ sojourn there it is 
said to have furnished a supply sufficient for the whole army. 


28. Saladin lays siege to the city of Petra beyond the Jordan and 
takes it by force. 


Martrers turned out very much as the Christians had anticipated. 
Scarcely a month had rolled by when Saladin, having recruited his 
forces, again prepared for war. Again he summoned his cohorts and 
mustered his legions, had his engines moved, and made ready with 
utmost care all the usual apparatus employed in siege operations. 
After all these preparations had been duly made, he marched through 
Basan and Gilead, traversed the land of the Ammonites and Moabites 


CONFLICT OF INTERESTS 499 


beyond the Jordan, and prepared to lay siege to the city formerly 
_ called Petra of the Desert, but now known as Kerak. 

As soon as he learned this through scouts, Renaud de Chatillon, 
who was in charge of these regions as belonging to the heritage of his 
wife, proceeded rapidly thither with a body of cavalry which seemed 
large enough to assure the protection of the place. 

He had other interests also at Kerak. Humphrey III, son of Hum- 
phrey II, grandson through his father of the elder Humphrey of 
Toron, the king’s constable, and stepson of that Renaud of whom we 
are speaking, was at this time about to marry the king’s younger 
sister, to whom he had been betrothed almost four years previously. 

Soon after Renaud’s arrival at Kerak, when the nuptial celebration 
was barely over—in fact, on that very day, it is said—Saladin appeared 
before the place. He had with him a vast army and all the para- 
phernalia of machines and hurling engines which are commonly used 
in harassing a city under siege. The camp was immediately placed in 
a circle around the fortress, and the siege began. 

Here, upon a very high mountain surrounded by deep valleys, the 
city of Petra had once been located. For a long time, however, it had 
lain in ruins, utterly desolate. Finally, during the reign of Fulk, the 
third king of the Latins in the Orient, one Paganus, surnamed the 
butler, lord of a domain lying beyond the Jordan, built a citadel on 
this site. It was placed upon the same mountain where the city had 
once lain, but on a less precipitous slope which ran down to the plain 
below. The successors of Paganus, namely Maurice, his nephew, and 
Philip of Nablus, had added a moat and towers to render the place 
still more unassailable. Clustering on the outskirts of this fortress, on 
the site of the earlier city, was now a village whose inhabitants had 
placed their homes there as a comparatively safe location. East of 
them lay the fortress, the best of protection, while on the other sides 
rose the mountain itself, encompassed, as has been said, by deep val- 
leys. Thus, if the village had even a moderately low wall, the in- 
habitants need not fear any hostile attack. At two points only was 
there any possibility of reaching the top of the mountain, and these 
could be easily defended by a few men even against large hostile 
forces. The other sides were supposed to be impregnable. 

When Prince Renaud perceived that the enemy had arrived, he 
proposed rashly enough, as it seemed to those experienced in matters 


500 CONFLICT OF INTERESTS 


of this kind, to try to defend the outer place and the village next to 
. the citadel.** He therefore forbade the people who wished to carry 
their goods into the fortress and to provide for their own safety there 
to forsake their homes or presume to move any of their least posses- 
sions. 

Meanwhile the knights and the infantry detachments were vigor- 
ously engaged in trying to block the enemy’s path up the mountain, 
but the multitude of the foe proved too much for them. Those who 
were trying to obstruct the passage were put to flight; Saladin’s forces 
gained possession of the mountain and opened a path by the sword. 
Thus the enemy nearly succeeded in forcing their way into the citadel 
at the same time that the Christians were trying to retreat thither. Had 
it not been for the remarkable firmness of one knight, named Iven, 
those Turks who were already close to the fortress would without 
difficulty have forced a free entrance for their comrades over the 
bridge and through the gate next to it. 

So through the rash tactics of their lord, the wretched citizens 
suffered the loss of their goods. All their household possessions, all 
their furniture and utensils of every description, were seized by the 
enemy. As an addition to their troubles, those who had fled to the 
citadel in dread of Saladin’s onslaughts, had rashly and inconsiderately 
thrown down the bridge. Since this afforded the only passage across 
the moat, the one way by which those inside the citadel could come 
or go was destroyed. 

Great crowds of helpless people of every description and of both 
sexes filled the castle within, a burden rather than a help to the be- 
sieged. There were many actors and performers on the flute and 
psaltery and other people who had flocked thither from all over the 
country for the festivities attending the wedding. The anticipations 
of all these were sadly thwarted, for where they had expected to find 
gains and wedding jollity they encountered martial combats and war- 
like doings, far different from the pursuits to which they were ac- 
customed. 

Moreover, many Syrians with their wives and children had come 
in from the surrounding country. The place was filled with them so 


54 Here again William criticizes military strategy, this time of Renaud de Chatillon, 
who had been the real commander in the victory of Baldwin IV over Saladin in 1177. 
This may reflect partisan opinion, for William’s information doubtless came from 
nobles who were almost as much opposed to Renaud as to Guy. 


CONFLICT OF INTERESTS 501 


that those who wished to pass back and forth could not do so freely 
on account of the dense crowds. Thus these too became a hindrance 
and an obstruction to the more active men and to those who were 
trying to defend the place. The fortress was well stocked with pro- 
visions, although the supply of weapons was not as large as seemed 
necessary for the defense of the place. 


29. King Baldwin removes the count of Jaffa as general ad- 
mimstrator of the realm. He crowns his nephew with the 
royal diadem. 


Meranwuite the king realized that in the conduct of affairs at the 
springs of Tubania, as described above, the count of Jaffa, to whom, 
as we have said, he had committed the government of the realm, had 
shown himself far from wise or valiant. Through his imprudence and 
general inefficiency, the condition of the kingdom had fallen into an 
evil state. By the advice of wiser counsellors, therefore, Baldwin took 
back into his own hands the charge of affairs which he had entrusted 
to the count of Jaffa. Other causes also are said to have been respon- 
sible for this action. The fact has already been mentioned that when 
the king conferred the responsibility of the realm upon Guy, he had 
retained for his own expenses the city of Jerusalem with a revenue 
of ten thousand gold pieces, payable annually. Later, he repented of 
this action and desired to exchange Jerusalem for Tyre on the same 
terms, because the latter was the best-fortified city in the entire king- 
dom and seemed better adapted to his needs. Since the count ap- 
peared unwilling to entertain this request, the king is said to have 
experienced an entire change of sentiment. 

It was indeed just that one who was reluctant to show himself 
generous in a small matter toward the man who had given him 
everything should be deprived of the supreme control of affairs. Not 
only was the charge of the realm and the honor of administering it 
taken from him, but he was entirely cut off from all hope of succes- 
sion. By the unanimous advice of the barons, especially of Bohemond, 
prince of Antioch, Raymond, count of Tripoli, Renaud of Sidon, 
Baldwin of Ramlah and Balian, his brother, and at the suggestion and 
urgent advice of the king’s mother, Baldwin, a young child scarcely 
five years old, received the royal unction and was solemnly crowned 
in the church of the Resurrection of the Lord. This act was ratified by 


502 CONFLICT OF INTERESTS 


the entire people and agreed to by the clergy present. The count of 
Jaffa was also present but did not dare to speak against it. 

Immediately, without delay, all the barons swore allegiance to the 
boy under the customary formula and rendered him in the fullest 
measure the honor and deference due to royal majesty. The count 
of Jaffa alone was not asked to do him homage. This fact seemed to 
those of long experience, as doubtless it was, convincing proof of a 
deep-seated animosity—or, rather, plain hatred. This will be more 
clearly shown later. 

The opinions of wise men over this great change were many and 
varied. Some said that the elevation of this boy could be of no benefit 
to the realm or advantage to public affairs; for, since both kings were 
hampered, one by disease and the other by youth, it was wholly use- 
less. Far better would it be if, following the general advice of the 
more important men of the kingdom, the care of the royal business 
and the charge of affairs of state were committed to someone strong 
in war and wise in counsel. Others felt that even if the action taken in 
respect to the boy be judged of little utility, yet it might prove ad- 
vantageous to the state in one respect, namely that it removed from 
the count all hope of succession to the crown. Since he was, according 
to all report, entirely incompetent and yet filled with intense longing 
to rule, he might become the source of disputes in the future and the 
incentive toward dangerous sedition which was to be feared after the 
death of the king. This it was hoped would now be completely | 
eliminated. 

Yet in the hearts of all there was but one thought and one desire: 
it was that a regent might be appointed to administer the business of 
the state and especially to lead the armies against the enemy who was 
even now threatening us more violently than ever. The sentiment was 
practically unanimous that the count of Tripoli, and he alone, would 
be capable of undertaking this duty successfully. This happened in the 
year of the Incarnation of the Lord 1183, of the first Indiction, on 
November 20.°° 


°° William’s own hopes and wishes must have inclined him to regard the choice 
of Raymond of Tripoli as “practically unanimous.” Raymond’s chief opponents were 
probably not present at this meeting. 


CONFLICT OF INTERESTS 503 


30. The king assembles his forces and hastens across the Jordan 
to the help of the besieged. Saladin raises the blockade. 


WHILE these events were taking place at Jerusalem, Saladin was 
harassing the besieged city with unremitting diligence and violence. 
His importunate perseverance denied all chance of rest to those shut 
up within the place. He had caused eight machines to be erected, six 
within, where the ancient city had stood, and two outside, in that place 
which is commonly known as Obelet. The attack was carried on in- 
defatigably by night as well as by day, and stones of such great size 
were hurled that no one inside the walls dared raise a hand or look 
out of the openings or try any method of resistance. Terror and 
desperation had now taken such hold of the wretched citizens that 
they did not venture to show themselves even when the enemy slid 
down by ropes and killed with impunity the animals which the refu- 
gees had brought inside the moat around the citadel. Without en- 
countering the least opposition or peril, the Turks cut up the carcasses 
into joints and drew the pieces up to be used as food for themselves. 

Those who acted as cooks and bakers in the enemy’s army and 
those who provided the market with all sorts of commodities placed 
their workshops in the homes of the citizens and there freely carried 
on their work amid conveniences of all kinds. These homes were well 
stocked with grain, barley, wine, and oil, all of which the enemy took 
by force in spite of the owners and used as they would. 

At one time those besieged in the fortress tried to set up a machine 
of their own. The enemy in charge of the engines outside, however, 
aimed the stone missiles with such skill that the Christians, appalled 
by the constant blows and the fear of death which every stone seemed 
to threaten, abandoned the attempt. They judged it wiser to endure 
with patience whatever fate sent rather than to expose themselves to 
death by attempting any kind of defense. 

These dangers, which caused men to shake with terror, assailed not 
only those who crept forth from their hiding places to hurl weapons 
or stone missiles from the ramparts or to gaze down upon the be- 
sieging forces. Even those who had fled to the innermost apartments, 
the most retired seclusion, shrank with terror before the crash and 
roar of the oncoming missiles. It seemed to them like thunder and, 


504 CONFLICT OF INTERESTS 


ever in suspense lest the building be shattered and fall upon them, 
they momentarily awaited the stroke of the bolt. 

During this time the king was earnestly endeavoring to procure 
help for them in whatever way he could and to send the desired relief 
as soon as possible. Summoning the strength of the realm from every 
source, he took the Life-giving Cross and marched thither himself. 
On reaching the sea of Salt which is now called the lake of Asphalt, 
after mature deliberation he made the count of Tripoli the leader 
and commander of the whole army. 

But Saladin, on learning through his scouts that the Christian army 
was close at hand and that the count of Tripoli was in command of the 
legions, abandoned his engines and ordered his men to retreat. Thus, 
after molesting the city for an entire month in this way, he raised 
the siege and returned to his own land.®® 

The king, nonetheless, continued his march to Kerak where his 
arrival brought the longed-for relief to the people of that place. 
Then, sounding the call for departure, he reassembled his troops and 
returned in safety to Jerusalem. 


56 His departure is dated December 12, 1183 (see R. Rohricht, Geschichte des Kénig- 
reichs Jerusalem, 1100-1291, p. 409). 


HERE ENDS THE TWENTY-SECOND BOOK 


HERE BEGINS THE TWENTY-THIRD BOOK 


COULD JERUSALEM BE SAVED BY 
RAYMOND OF TRIPOLI? 


PREFACE 


WearleD by the sad disasters which are occurring in the kingdom so 
frequently—indeed, almost continually—we had resolved to abandon 
the pen and commit to the silence of the tomb the chronicle of events 
which we had undertaken to write for posterity. For there is no one 
who is not reluctant to recount the failings of his country and to bring 
forth into the light the faults of his own people. It has come to be 
almost habitual among men, and indeed is regarded as natural, that 
each one should strive with all his might to extol his own land and 
not disparage the good fame of his fellow countrymen. 

But now every source of glorious renown is taken from us, and the 
only subjects that present themselves are the disasters of a sorrowing 
country and its manifold misfortunes, themes which can serve only 
to draw forth lamentations and tears. 

Up to the present time, in the preceding books, we have described 
to the best of our ability the remarkable deeds of the brave men who 
for eighty years and more have held the ruling power in our part 
of the Orient, and particularly at Jerusalem. Now, in utter detes- 
tation of the present, amazed at the material which is presented before 
our eyes and ears, things unfit to be told even in the songs of a 
Codrus ? or the recitals of a Maevius,? whatever they may be, we lack , 
courage to continue. In the acts of our princes there is nothing which _ 
seems to a wise man worthy of being committed to the treasure house 
of the memory, nothing which can contribute refreshment to the 

1 The state of mind revealed by these opening remarks was probably upon him in 
1182, when the repeated successes of Saladin, culminating in the crowning insult of his 
departure to the north without troubling to make a truce, must have been very dis- 
couraging. The hostile court party was still in control, and doubtless William blamed 
its incompetence for Saladin’s success. Perhaps the fact that he was recording the begin- 
ning of this series of blunders—namely, the marriage of Sibylla to Guy—about this 
time (late 1182) accentuated his feelings. 


2 The allusion is to Virgil Ec. vit. 22. 
3 Another allusion to Virgil Ec/. 111. go. 


506 RAYMOND OF TRIPOLI 


reader or confer honor upon the writer. Truly, we can lament with 
the prophet that there has perished from our midst “law from the 
priest, counsel from the wise, and the word from the prophet.” + 
Among us it has come to pass that “like people, like priest”; ® and to 
us also can truly be applied that prophecy which says, “The whole 
head is sick and the whole heart faint. From the sole of the foot even 
unto the head there is no soundness in it.” ®° For we have now reached a 
point where, “We can endure neither our evils nor their remedy.” ” 
Wherefore, in punishment for our sins, the enemy has become stronger 
than ourselves, and we who used to triumph over our foes and custom- 
arily bore away the glorious palm of victory, now, deprived of divine 
favor, retire from the field in ignominious defeat after nearly every 
conflict. 

It is therefore time to hold our peace; for it seems more fitting to 
draw the shades of night over our failures than to turn the light of 
the sun upon our disgrace. There are some, however, who desire us 
to continue the task once undertaken, who earnestly entreat that every 
phase of the kingdom of Jerusalem, adverse as well as prosperous, be 
recorded in this work for posterity. For our encouragement, they cite 
the example of most distinguished historians, namely Titus Livius, 
who recorded in his history not only the successes of the Romans, 
but also their reverses, and Josephus, who made known in his com- 
prehensive works not only the brilliant deeds of the Jews, but also 
those shameful things which were done to them. 

In their efforts to persuade us to continue this work, they offer 
many other examples also. We are the more readily influenced to ac- 
quiesce in this request, since it is indeed evident that chroniclers of 
past events have recorded without partiality adverse as well as aus- 
picious happenings. For, by narrating successful achievements, they 
hope to inspire posterity with courage, while by furnishing examples 
of misfortunes patiently endured they may render later generations 
more cautious under similar conditions. 

The writer of annals, by virtue of his office, must commit to letters 
not such events as he himself might desire, but such as the times 
afford. The outcome of worldly affairs, especially of wars, is ever 
* Je. 18:18. ° Ho. 4:9. This is another favorite quotation. 


SIs. 1: 5-6. * Livy, Preface. 
* This would seem to indicate his familiarity with the other works of Josephus as 
well as the Antiquities, which he so frequently cites. 


RAYMOND OF TRIPOLI 507 


variable and uncertain; prosperity is never continuous, nor is adversity 
wholly without brighter intervals. 

Accordingly we have given way and, abandoning our previous 
determination, by the help of God while life remains ® we shall con- 
tinue to record with the utmost care, as we have done in the past, 
whatever events the future brings forth. God grant that these may 
be happy and prosperous! 1° 


1. The long prevailing enmity between the king and the count 
of Jaffa breaks out into furious strife. No hope of reconcilia- 
tion seems possible. The count of Tripoli becomes regent of 
the kingdom and guardian of the king. 


MEANWHILE the hatred between the king and the count of Jaffa, 
nourished by secret causes, continued to grow stronger day by day." 
Rancor, up to this time restrained, had now burst forth so violently 
that the king seemed openly to be seeking reasons for separating his 
sister from her husband and annulling the marriage. In pursuance of 
this intention, Baldwin went without disguise to the patriarch and 
demanded that, as he intended to make complaint against the mar- 
riage, a day be set when the annulment might be solemnly pronounced 
in the presence of the patriarch. 

On his return from the campaign the count was informed of the 
entire proceeding. He immediately left the army and set out for 
Ascalon by the shortest way to warn his wife, who was in Jerusalem 
at the time, to leave that city for Ascalon before the king arrived, for 
he feared that if Baldwin should have her in his power he would not 
permit her to return to her husband. 

The king then sent a messenger to summon the count to appear 
and to inform him of the reason for the summons. Guy resisted, how- 
ever, and excused his nonappearance by pleading illness. When, after 


® Vita comite, This phrase occurs both here and in the Prologue and suggests that 
the two were written about the same time. 

10 The ray of hope for the future is doubtless the result of the transfer of the 
regency from Guy de Lusignan to Raymond of Tripoli. 

11 These events must have occurred early in 1184. The evidence of the king’s wrath 
was clear enough in the meeting of November 20, 1183. The campaign for the relief 
of Kerak probably distracted the king’s attention for nearly a month. He could scarcely 
have resumed his antagonism toward Guy before the end of December. Thereafter, 
the series of events here recounted rolled on in continuous succession to the council 
of Acre. 


508 RAYMOND OF TRIPOLI 


repeated summonses, Guy still neglected to obey, the king resolved to 
go to him in person and solemnly deliver the call to justice by word 
of mouth. On his arrival at Ascalon, attended by some of the nobles 
of his court, Baldwin found the gates of the city closed. He beat upon 
them with his hand and three times demanded that they be opened to 
him. Since no one offered to obey his command, he retired in just 
indignation. This took place in full view of all the people of the city, 
who, on learning of the king’s arrival, had established themselves in 
the towers and on the walls to await the result of the matter. 

From Ascalon he proceeded directly to Jaffa. He was met on the 
way by many citizens of that place, the most important men of both 
classes. The city gates were opened to him, and he entered without 
difficulty. After placing a governor there to take charge of affairs, he 
went on to Acre, where he proclaimed a general council in that same 
city. When, on the appointed day, all the barons of the realm had 
assembled, the patriarch, with the support and codperation of the two 
masters, namely of the Temple and the Hospital, addressed the lord 
king and on bended knees began to intercede for the count. He made 
an earnest plea that Baldwin should lay aside his resentment and 
restore Guy to favor. When the petition was not immediately heard, 
the patriarch and his supporters withdrew in great indignation and 
left not only the court but the city as well. 

A proposal had been made before the assembled barons that envoys 
be sent to the kings and other princes beyond the mountains to invite 
them to come to the help of the realm and of Christianity itself. This 
matter should have been taken up first, but the patriarch, as has been 
said, interrupted the proceedings and, forestalling the principal sub- 
ject, entered upon the speech mentioned above. Then, carried away 
by passion, he left Acre, as has been described.1? 

When the count of Jaffa learned that the king would not con- 
descend to make peace with him, he aggravated his previous evil 
conduct by still more violent deeds. With the forces at his disposal he 
directed his course toward the fortress called Daron, where he threw 
himself suddenly upon the camp of certain Arabs who had pitched 
their tents in those parts for the convenience of the pasturage. The 
king had promised them protection and on this they were relying 

12 William is obviously not in sympathy with this conduct of Heraclius. This is one 


of the few instances in which William clearly indicates his attitude toward his success- 
ful rival for the patriarchate. 


RAYMOND OF TRIPOLI 509 


implicitly, but the count, finding them unprepared to resist, drove off 
their cattle and slaves and with this plunder returned to Ascalon. 

When the news of this raid reached the king, he again called his 
barons together and committed the care and general administration 
of the realm to the count of Tripoli, in whose wisdom and magnanim- 
ity he had reason to trust. This act seemed to be satisfactory to the 
wishes of the whole people and to the majority of the nobles, for it 
was plain to all that the only safety lay in placing the affairs of the 
kingdom in the hands of the count of Tripoli.1® 


18 When Jubair visited Acre in September, 1184, he was told that the king, whom 
he calls “king of Acre,” was kept confined from all gaze because he was suffering from 
leprosy. He adds that the “count,” lord of Tripoli and Tiberias, was the most con- 
siderable and powerful person among the Franks. ‘He is worthy of the throne for 
which he seems born and has remarkable intelligence and astuteness” (see R.H.C. Or., 
Ill, 451-55). 


HERE THE BOOK STOPS 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


ABBREVIATIONS 


The following abbreviations are used for all but 
the first reference in the footnotes of each Book. 


H. Chron. H. Hagenmeyer, “Chronologie de la premiére croisade, 
(1094-1100)” and “Chronologie de Vhistoire du royaume de 
Jérusalem, régne de Baudoin I,” Revue de Porient latin, Vols. VI- 
XII. Though the title of this work changes, the numbering is con- 
tinuous throughout, and both parts are referred to as H. Hagen- 
meyer, Chronologie. 

H. Ep. H. Hagenmeyer, ed., Epistulae et chartae ad historiam primi 
belli sacri spectantes quae supersunt aevo aequalis ac genuinae. 

H. F. H. Hagenmeyer, ed., Fulcheri Carnotensis historia Hierosoly- 
mitana (1095-1127). 

H. G. H. Hagenmeyer, ed., Anonymi gesta Francorum et aliorum 
Hierosolymitanorum. 

H. Ga. H. Hagenmeyer, ed., Galterii Cancellarii bella Antiochena. 

Munro-Crusades "The Crusades and Other Historical Essays Presented 
to Dana C. Munro. 

R.H.C. Oc. Recueil des historiens des croisades: Historiens occidentaux. 

R.H.C. Or. Recueil des historiens des croisades: Historiens orientaux. 

R.K.J. R. Rohricht, Geschichte des Ké6nigreichs Jerusalem, 1100- 
1291. 

R. Reg. R. Réhricht, Regesta regni Hierosolymitani, 1097-1291. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Anderson, Romola, and R. C. Anderson. The Sailing Ship. London, 
1926. 

Archer, T. A. “On the Accession Dates of the Early Kings of Jeru- 
salem,” English Historical Review, IV (1889), 89-105. 

Auber, C. A., Abbé. Histoire générale civile, religieuse, et littéraire du 
Poitou. 9 vols. Fontenay-le-Comte, 1885-1893. 

Baldwin, M. W. Raymond III of Tripolis and the Fall of Jerusalem 
(1140-1187). Princeton, 1936. 

Beaumont, A. A., Jr. “Albert of Aachen and the County of Edessa,” 
The Crusades and Other Historical Essays Presented to Dana C. 
Munro, pp. 101-38. New York, 1928. 

Beazley, C. R. The Dawn of Modern Geography. 3 vols. London, 
1897-1906. 

Beha ed-Din. The Life of Saladin (1137-1193 A.p.). Trans. by 
C. W. Wilson; rev. by C. R. Conder. London, 1897. Palestine 
Exploration Fund, Publications. 

Bongars, J., ed. Gesta Dei per Francos. 2 vols. in one. Hanover, 1611. 

Bréhier, L. L’Eglise et Orient au moyen 4ge. 5th ed. Paris, 1928. 

Byrne, E. H. “The Genoese Colonies in Syria,” The Crusades and 
Other Historical Essays Presented to Dana C. Munro, pp. 139-82. 
New York, 1928. 

Genoese Shipping in the Twelfth and Thirteenth Centuries. 

Cambridge, 1930. Mediaeval Academy of America, Monograph I. 

“Genoese Trade with Syria in the Twelfth Century,” American 
Historical Review, XXV (1919-20), I9I-219. 

Cambridge Medieval History, The. 8 vols. London and New York, 
IQII—1936. 

Chalandon, F. Les Comnéne; études sur l’empire byzantin au xIe et 
xIle siécles. 
Vol. I: Essai sur le régne d’Alexis Ier Comnéne (1081-1118). Paris, 
1900. Société de Ecole des chartes, Mémoires et documents, 
Vol. IV. 
Vol. II: Jean II Comnéne (1118-1143) et Manuel I Comnéne 
(1143-1180). Paris, 1912. 

Histoire de la domination normande en Italie et en Sicile. 2 vols. 


Paris, 1907. 











514 BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Chalandon, F. (Continued) Histoire de la premiére croisade jusqu’a l’élec- 
tion de Godefroi de Bouillon. Paris, 1925. 

Chartrou, Jostphe. L’Anjou de 1109 4 1151. Paris, 1928. 

Chevalier, U. Répertoire des sources historiques du moyen age: Bio-bi- 
bliographie. New ed. 2 vols. Paris, 1905-1907. 

Colvin, Mary Noyes, ed. Godeffroy of Boloyne; or, The Siege and 
Conqueste of Jerusalem, by William, Archbishop of Tyre. Trans- 
lated from the French by William Caxton and Printed by Him in 
1481. London, 1893. Early English Text Society, Extra Series, 
Vol. LXIV. 

Corpus Juris Civilis, ed. by P. Kreuger and T. Mommsen, Vol. I. Berlin, 
1882. 

David, C. W. Robert Curthose, Duke of Normandy. Cambridge. 
1920. Harvard Historical Studies, Vol. XXV. 

Dawes, Elizabeth A. S., trans. The Alexiad of the Princess Anna 
Comnena. London, 1928. 

Delisle, L., ed. Chronique de Robert de Torigni, abbé du Mont-Saint- 
Michel. 2 vols. Rouen, 1872-1873. 

Diehl, C. Figures byzantines, 2d Series: Byzance et l’Occident a 
l’époque des croisades. 3d ed. Paris, 1909. 

DuCange, Charles du Fresne, Sieur. Les Familles d’outre-mer. Paris, 
1869. Collection de documents inédits sur Vhistoire de France. 
Duncalf, F. “The Peasants’ Crusade,” American Historical Review, 

XXVI (1920-21), 440-53. 

“The Pope’s Plan for the First Crusade,” The Crusades and 
Other Historical Essays Presented to Dana C. Munro, pp. 44-56. 
New York, 1928. 

Duncalf, F., and A. C. Krey. Parallel Source Problems in Medieval 
History. New York and London, 1912. 

Dussaud, R. Topographie historique de la Syrie antique et médiévale. 
Paris, 1927. Haut-commissariat de la République Francaise en 
Syrie et au Liban. Service des antiquités et des beaux-arts. Biblio- 
théque archéologique et historique, Vol. IV. 

Eginhard. “Annales Laurissenses et Einhardi,” Monumenta Germaniae 
historica, Scriptores, I, 124-218. Hanover, 1836. 

“Vita Karoli Imperatoris,”” Monumenta Germaniae historica, 
Scriptores, II, 426-63. Hanover, 1829. 

Emerton, E. Mediaeval Europe (814-1300). Boston, 1894. 

Fliche, A. Le Régne de Philippe Ter, roi de France, 1060-1108. Paris, 
1912. 








BIBLIOGRAPHY 515 


Funk, P. Jakob von Vitry, Leben und Werke. Leipzig and Berlin, 
1909. Beitrage zur Kulturgeschichte des Mi§ttelalters und der 
Renaissance, H.3. 

Gibb, H. A. R., trans. The Damascus Chronicle of the Crusades; Ex- 
tracted and Translated from the Chronicle of ibn al-Qalanisi. 

London, 1932. University of London Historical Series, Vol. V. 

Gibbon, E. The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire. 
Ed. by J. B. Bury. 7 vols. London, 1896-1900. 

Gindler, P. Graf Balduin I von Edessa. Halle, 1go1. 

Giry, A. “Les Chatelains de Saint--Omer (1042—-1386),” Bibliothéque 
de ’Ecole des chartes, XXXV (1874), 325-55. 

Gjerset, K. History of the Norwegian People, Vol. I. New York, 1915. 
Gregorovius, F. A. History of the City of Rome in the Middle Ages. 
Trans. by Lady Hamilton. 8 vols. in 13. London, 1894-1902. 
Groéber, G. Grundriss der romanischen Philologie. 2d ed. 2 vols. Strass- 

burg, 1904-1914. 

Grousset, R. Histoire des croisades et du royaume franc de Jérusalem. 
3 vols. Paris, 1934-1936. 

Hagenmeyer, H. ‘“Chronologie de la premiére croisade (1094-1100),” 
Revue de POrient latin, VI (1898), 214-93, 490-549; VII 
(1899), 275-339, 430-503; VIII (1900-1901), 318-82. 

“Chronologie de Vhistoire du royaume de Jérusalem, régne de 

Baudouin I (1101-1118),” Revue de POrient latin, IX (1902), 

384-465; X (1903-4), 372-405; XI (1905-8), 145-80, 

453-85; XII (1909-11), 68-103, 283-326. Incomplete. 

Peter der Eremite. Leipzig, 1879. 

Hagenmeyer, H., ed. Anonymi gesta Francorum et aliorum Hierosoly- 

mitanorum. Heidelberg, 1890. 

Ekkehardi Uraugiensis abbatis Hierosolymita. Tiibingen, 1877. 

Epistulae et chartae ad historiam primi belli sacri spectantes quae 

supersunt aevo aequalis ac genuinae. Innsbruck, I1go1. 

Fulcheri Carnotensis historia Hierosolymitana (1095-1127). 

Heidelberg, 1913. 

Galterii Cancellarii bella Antiochena. Innsbruck, 1896. 

Halphen, L. Le Comté d’Anjou au XIe siécle. Paris, 1906. 

Haskins, C. H. The Normans in European History. Boston and New 

York, 1915. 

The Renaissance of the Twelfth Century. Cambridge, 1927. 

Hefele, H., trans. Albert von Aachen, Geschichte des ersten Kreuzzugs. 
2 vols. Jena, 1923. 























516 | BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Heyd, W. von. Histoire du commerce du Levant au moyen-age. Ed. and 
trans. by Furcy Raynaud. 2 vols. Leipzig, 1885-1886. 

Hildt, J. C. “The Ministry of Stephen of Perche during the Minority 
of William II of Sicily,’ Srmith College Studies in History, III 
(1918), 139-86. 

Hitti, P. K. History of the Arabs. 2d ed. London, 1940. 

Hitt, P. K., trans. An Arab-Syrian Gentleman and Warrior in the 
Period of the Crusades; Memoirs of Usamah ibn-Munqidh. New 
York, 1929. Records of Civilization, Sources and Studies. 

Husseini, S. A. S. “Inscription of the Khalif El-Mustansir Billah 458 
A.H. (=a.D. 1065),” Palestine, Department of Antiquities, Quarterly, 
IX (1942), 77-80. 

Iskenderian, Galust Ter-Grigorian. Die Kreuzfahrer und ihre Bezie- 
hungen zu den armenischen Nachbarfiirsten bis zum Untergange 
der Grafschaft Edessa. Weida i. Th., 1915. 

Joranson, E. “The Alleged Frankish Protectorate in Palestine,” 
American Historical Review, XXXII (1926-27), 241-61. 

“The Great German Pilgrimage of 1064-1065,” The Crusades 

and Other Historical Essays Presented to Dana C. Munro, pp. 3-43. 

New York, 1928. 

“The Palestine Pilgrimage of Henry the Lion,’ Medieval and 
Historiographical Essays in Honor of James Westfall Thompson, pp. 
146-225. Chicago, 1938. 

King, E. J. The Knights Hospitallers in the Holy Land. London, 
1931. 

Klein, C. Raimund von Aguilers. Berlin, 1892. 

Knappen, M. M. “Robert II of Flanders in the First Crusade,” The 
Crusades and Other Historical Essays Presented to Dana C. Munro, 
pp. 79-100. New York, 1928. 

Kohler, C. “Chartes de Abbaye de Notre-Dame de la Vallée de 
Josaphat en Terre-Sainte (1108-1291),” Revue de P?Orient latin, 
VII (1899), 108-222. 

Kretschmayr, H. Geschichte von Venedig. 3 vols. Gotha, 1905- 
1934. 

Krey, A. C. “A Neglected Passage in the Gesta,” The Crusades and 
Other Historical Essays Presented to Dana C. Munro, pp. 57-78. 
New York, 1928. 

“William of Tyre: The Making of a Medieval Historian,” 
Speculum, XVI (1941), 149-66. 

Krey, A. C., trans. The First Crusade. Princeton, 1921. 











BIBLIOGRAPHY 517 
Kugler, B. Albert von Aachen. Stuttgart, 1885. 


Analecten zur Geschichte des zweiten Kreuzzugs. Tiibingen, 

1878. 

Analekten zur Kritik Albert’s v. Aachen. Tiibingen, 1888. 

Geschichte der Kreuzziige. Berlin, 1880. 

Neue Analecten zur Geschichte des zweiten Kreuzzugs. 

Tiibingen, 1883. 

Studien zur Geschichte des zweiten Kreuzzugs. Stuttgart, 1866. 

La Monte, J. L. Feudal Monarchy in the Latin Kingdom of Jerusalem, 
1100 to 1291. Cambridge, 1932. Mediaeval Academy of America, 
Monograph IV. 

“Rise and Decline of a Frankish Seigneury in Syria in the Time 

of the Crusades,” Revue historique du Sud-Est Européen, Année 

XV (1938), pp. 301-20. 

“Some Problems in Crusading Historiography,” Speculum, KV 

(1940), 57-75. 

“The Viscounts of Naplouse in the Twelfth Century,” Syria, 

XIX (1938), 272-78. 

“The Lords of Le Puiset on the Crusades.” Speculum, XVII 
(1942), 100-18. 

Lane-Poole, S. The Mohammedan Dynasties. Westminster, 1894. 

Lawrence, T. E. Crusader Castles. 2 vols. London, 1936. 

Revolt in the Desert. New York, 1927. 

Lees, Beatrice A., ed. Anonymi gesta Francorum et aliorum Hierosoly- 
mitanorum. Oxford, 1924. 

Records of the Templars in England in the Twelfth Century. 
London, 1935. British Academy, Records of the Social and Eco- 
nomic History of England and Wales, Vol. IX. 

Le Quien, M. Oriens Christianus. 3 vols. Paris, 1740. 

Luard, H. R., ed. Matthaei Parisiensis, monachi Sancti Albani, chronica 
majora. 7 vols. 1872-1883. 

Luchaire, A., ed. Louis VI le Gros: annales de sa vie et de son régne, 
1081-1137. Paris, 1890. 

Lundgreen, F. Wilhelm von Tyrus und der Templerorden. Berlin, 
1911. Historische Studien, H. XCVII. 

“Das Jerusalem des Wilhelm von Tyrus und die Gegenwart,” 
Neue kirchliche Zeitschrift, XX (1909), 973-92. 

Madden, F., ed. Matthaei Parisiensis, monachi Sancti Albani, historia 
Anglorum, sive, ut vulgo dicitur, historia minor. 3 vols. London, 


1866-1869. 






































518 BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Manitius, M. Deutsche Geschichte unter den sachsischen und salischen 
Kaisern, 911-1125. Stuttgart, 18809. 

Geschichte der lateinischen Literatur des Mittelalters. 3 vols. 
Munich, 1911-1938. 

Mansi, J. D., and others, eds. Sacrorum conciliorum nova et amplissima 
collectio. 53 vols. Paris, etc., 1759-1927. 

Mas Latrie, L. de. “Essai de classification des continuateurs de 
histoire des croisades de Guillaume de Tyr,” Bibliothéque de l’Ecole 
des chartes, XXI (5th ser., Vol. I; 1860), 38-72, 140-78. 

Mas Latrie, L. de., ed. Chronique d’Ernoul et de Bernard le Trésorier. 
Paris, 1871. 

Merriman, R. B. The Rise of the Spanish Empire in the Old World 
and the New. 4 vols. New York, 1918-1934. 

Michaud, J. F., ed. Bibliothéque des croisades. 2d ed. 4 vols. Paris, 
1829-1830. 

Molinier, A. Les Sources de l’histoire de France des origines aux euenes 
d’Italie. 6 vols. Paris, 1901-1906. 

Mommsen, T., ed. C. Julii Solini collectanea rerum memorabilium. 
Berlin, 1864. 

Morris, W. Britain and the Holy Land Prior to the Third Crusade. 
Unpublished Ph.D. thesis, University of Minnesota, 1940. 

Munro, Dana C. “Did the Emperor Alexius I Ask for Aid at the 
Council of Piacenza, 1095?” American Historical Review, XXVII 
(1921-22), 731-33. 

The Kingdom of the Crusaders. Student’s ed. New York, 1935. 

“The Speech of Pope Urban II. at Clermont, 1095,” American 
Historical Review, XI (1905-6), 231-42. 

Munro, Dana C., and others. Essays on the Crusades. Burlington, Vt., 
1903. 

Muratori, L. A., ed. Rerum Italicarum scriptores ab anno aerae Chris- 
tianae 500 ad 1500. 25 vols. in 28. Milan, 1723-1751; new ed. 
1900-. References are to the original edition. 

Nicholson, R. L. Tancred. Chicago, 1940. 

Norgate, Kate. England under the Angevin Kings. 2 vols. London and 
New York, 1887. 

Oman, Charles. A History of the Art of War in the Middle Ages. 2d ed. 
2 vols. London, 1924. 

Ordericus Vitalis. The Ecclesiastical History of England and Normandy. 
Trans. by Thomas Forester. 4 vols. London, 1853-1856. 


Pantaleon H., ed. Historia belli sacri verissima ... authore olim 











BIBLIOGRAPHY 519 


Willelmo Tyrio . . . una cum continuatione . . . Cum praefatione 
Henrici Pantaleonis atque ipsius authoris vita. Basel, 1564. 

Paris, P. Guillaume de Tyre et ses continuateurs. 2 vols. Paris, 1879. 

Pastoret, Claude. “Guillaume de Tyr,” Histoire littéraire de la France, 
XIV (1817), 587-96. 

Pocock, Edward, ed. _ Contextio gemmarum, sive Eutychii . . . annales 

. Interprete Edwardo Pocockio. Arab. & Lat. Oxford, 1650. 

Potthast, A. Bibliotheca historica medii aevi. 2d ed. 2 vols. Berlin, 1896. 

Preston, Helen G. Rural Conditions in the Kingdom of Jerusalem during 
the Twelfth and Thirteenth Centuries. Philadelphia, 1903. 

Prutz, Hans. Entwicklung und Untergang des Tempelherrenordens. 
Berlin, 1888. 

Die geistlichen Ritterorden; ihre Stellung zur kirchlichen, poli- 

tischen, gesellschaftlichen, und wirtschaftlichen Entwicklung des 

Mittelalters. Berlin, 1908. 

Kulturgeschichte der Kreuzziige. Berlin, 1883. 

“Studien uber Wilhelm von Tyrus,” Gesellschaft fiir altere 
deutsche Geschichtskunde, Neues Archiv, VIII (1882), 93-132. 

Rashdall, H. The Universities of Europe in the Middle Ages. 2 vols. in 3. 
Oxford, 1895. 

Recueil des historiens des croisades. 16 vols. Paris, 1841-1906. 
Documents arméniens, 2 vols. 
Historiens grecs, 2 vols. 
Historiens occidentaux, 5 vols. 
Historiens orientaux, 5 vols. 
Lois, assises de Jérusalem, 2 vols. 

Rey, E.G. Les Colonies franques de Syrie aux XIIme et XIIIme siécles. 
Paris, 1883. 

Riant, Paul, Comte. Expéditions et pélerinages des Scandinaves en Terre 
Sainte au temps des croisades. Paris, 1865. 

“Tnventaire sommaire des manuscrits de l’Eracles,” Archives de 
POrient latin, I (1881), 247-56. 

Rohricht, R. Die Deutschen im Heiligen Lande. Innsbruck, 1894. 

Geschichte des ersten Kreuzzuges. Innsbruck, 1901. 

Geschichte des Kénigreichs Jerusalem, 1100-1291. Innsbruck, 
1898. 

Rohricht, R. ed. Regesta regni Hierosolymitani, 1097-1291. Innsbruck, 
1893. 

Regesta regni Hierosolymitani, 1097-1291. Additamentum. 

Innsbruck, 1904. 























520 BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Roziére, E. de, ed. Cartulaire de l’église du Saint Sépulchre de Jérusalem. 
Paris, 1849. 

Salloch, Marianne. Die lateinische Fortsetzung Wilhelms von Tyrus. 
Greifswald, 1934. 

Salmon, F. J., comp. Palestine of the Crusades; a Map of the Country. 
Pub. by Palestine Exploration Fund. Jaffa, 1937. 

Schlumberger, G. L. Renaud de Chatillon. Paris, 1898. 

Siedschlag, Beatrice N. English Participation in the Crusades, 1150- 
1220. Menasha, Wis., 1939. 

Simonsfeld, H. Jahrbiicher des deutschen Reiches unter Friederich I, 
Vol. I: 1152-1158. Leipzig, 1908. 

Spinka, M. “The Effect of the Crusades upon Eastern Christianity,” 
Environmental Factors in Christian History, ed. by J. T. McNeill 
and others, pp. 252-85. Chicago, 1939. 

Steenstrup, J. C. H., and others. Danmarks Riges Historie, Vols. I-VI. 
Copenhagen, 1896-1907. 

Stevenson, W. B. ‘The Crusaders in the East. Cambridge, 1907. 

Sybel, H. von. Geschichte des ersten Kreuzzugs. Diisseldorf, 1841; 2d 
ed., Leipzig, 1881. ; 

Thorndike, L. A History of Magic and Experimental Science in the 
Middle Ages, Vols. I-II. New York, 1923. 

Tiedau, W. Geschichte der Chanson d’Antioche des Richard le Pélerin 
und des Graindor de Douay. Gottingen, 1912. 

Vacandard, E. Vie de Saint Bernard, abbé de Clairvaux. 3d ed. 2 vols. 
Paris, 1902. 

Vasiliev, A. A. History of the Byzantine Empire. Trans. by Mrs. S. 
Raggin. 2 vols. Madison, Wis., 1928-1929. Wisconsin Studies in the 
Social Sciences and History, nos. 13-14. 

Wiet, G. L’Egypte arabe de la conquéte arabe 4 la conquéte ottomane, 
642-1517 de lére chrétienne. Paris, 1937. Vol. IV of Gabriel 
Hanotaux, ed., Histoire de la nation égyptienne. 

Wilken, F. Geschichte der Kreuzziige nach morgenlandischen und 
abendlandischen Berichten. 7 vols. Leipzig, 1807-1832. 

Yewdale, R. B. Bohemond I, Prince of Antioch. Princeton, 1924. 

Zacher, Gustav, ed. Die Historia orientalis des Jacob von Vitry. 
Konigsberg, 1885. 


INDEX 


INDEX 


Abbas [Habeis], slays caliph of Egypt, 
II: 251; killed, 252 

Abdallah [Boaldelle], envoy of Assassins 
to Amaury I, is slain by Knights Tem- 
plars, II: 392 

Abgar, king, I: 189; Tl: 144 

Abraham of Nazareth, II: 439 

Absalom, bishop of Ascalon, removed by 
pope, II: 233 

Abu-Bakr, I: 602; II: 323 

Achard, prior of the Temple, I: 536 

Acheldama, burial place for pilgrims, 
I: 342 

Acre, pilgrims camp near: conditions 
under which governor promises to re- 
sign city, I: 332; besieged by Bald- 
win I, 453, 4543 city described, 453; 
Genoese lend aid: city falls, 455; safe 
approach opened to, 456; Venetian fleet 
at, 550; privileges granted to Vene- 
tians, 554; city conferred upon Fulk, 
II: 51; bishoprics recovered by Fulcher, 
66; emperor, kings, and nobles assem- 
ble at, 183; general council, 184; de- 
cision to lay siege to Damascus, 186; 
assigned to Baldwin III in division of 
kingdom, 205 

Adam, archdeacon of Acre, chosen bishop 
of Banyas, II: 112; at council of Acre, 


185 

Adana, I: 181; Il: 275 

Adelaide, countess of Sicily, Baldwin I 
induced to marry, while wife is living, 
I: 489; lands at Acre, 496; sent back 
to her own land, 514; death, 523 

Adéle, wife of Stephen of Blois, daughter 
of William the Conqueror, I: 1487, 
225N, 3862, 431” 

Adhemar, bishop of Puy, I: 94, 95, 96, 
172; in Dalmatia, 139; captured: re- 
leased, 142; resumes pilgrimage: ar- 
rives at Nicaea, 147, 155; at Antioch, 
207, 210, 215; decrees a fast, 220; 
forestalls attempts at desertion, 267; 
rebukes would-be deserters, 280; offers 
himself as sacrifice to the Lord, 286; 
leads his followers and those of count 
of Toulouse, 287; restores churches 
of Antioch, 296; death, 299; seen in 
Holy City, 374 


Adid, caliph of Egypt, I: 320”; appear- 
ance, disposition, 321; slain, 359 

Agnes, abbess, II: 245 

Agnes, daughter of Louis VII, weds Alex- 
ius, son of Emperor Manuel, I: 449; 
crowned, 467 

Agnes, niece of William de Bury, II: 77 

Agnes, wife of Amaury I, king’s separa- 
tion from, I: 11, II: 300; son, Baldwin 
IV, legitimized, I: 14; influence, 21; 
children, II: 53, 300; birth of son, 286; 
relationship between Amaury and: gen- 
ealogy: weds Hugh d’Ibelin, 301; al- 
liance with Renaud of Sidon, 302; Jos- 
celin III restored to liberty through 
efforts of, 4143 influence in behalf of 
Heraclius, 4517; Baldwin IV shame- 
lessly influenced by, 460; urges corona- 
tion of Baldwin V, so01 

Aicard, prior of the Temple of the Lord, 
I: 556 

Aicard de Montmerle, I: 356 

Aimery, elected patriarch of Antioch, suc- 
ceeds Ralph, II: 122; as protector of 
afflicted land, 200; shamefully abused 
by Renaud de Chatillon, 235; repairs to 
Jerusalem, 236; celebrates marriage 
rites of Baldwin III and Theodora, 275; 
government of land committed tem- 
porarily to, 287; Maronites repair to, 
and return ‘to unity of catholic church, 


458 

Al-Afdal [Emireius], I: 326, 3933; in- 
vades kingdom, 464; put to flight, 466; 
murdered, 5467 

Alan Fergant, I: 149 

Albara, capture of, and Peter of Narbonne 
made bishop of, I: 309 

Albered de Cagnano, I: 134 

Albericus, bishop of Ostia, sent to investi- 
gate trouble in church at Antioch, II: 
110-22 

Albericus, brother of William of Grand- 
mesnil, I: 266, 267 

Albert, bishop of Bethlehem, II: 430, 456; 
delegate to general synod at Rome, 436 

Albert, count, Jaffa given to, II: 71 

Aleppo, given to Aqsunqur, I: 204; in- 
jury done to, by Christians, 545; be- 
sieged, II: 22; Turks encamped near, 


524 


Aleppo (Continued) 
57; Emperor John plans to take, 93; 
Joscelin II dies in prison, 201; de- 
stroyed by earthquake, 370; taken over 
by Saladin, 410; bequeathed to Thebet, 
lord of Mosul, 457; acquired by Sal- 
adin, 489 

Alexander III, pope, I: 20; ordained: dan- 
gerous schism arises in church of Rome, 
II: 281; Emperor Frederick becomes 
reconciled to, 281, 4353 sends legate to 
Orient, 285; dies, succeeded by Lucius 
II, 457 

Alexander, count of Conversana and of 
Gravina, II: 347, 361, 420 

Alexandria, seized by Shirkuh: blockaded 
by Amaury, II: 334; famine: city de- 
scribed, 335; Pharos tower, 336, 3413 
Christians level orchards, 337; surren- 
dered to king, 341; tribute imposed 
upon, 343; fleet of king of Sicily suffers 
enormous loss before, 399 

Alexandria Minor, captured, I: 186 

Alexandrium [Scandalium], fortress, I: 
514 

Alexius I Comnenus, Byzantine emperor, 
reign, I: 123 ff., 378; refuses to release 
nobles of Godfrey’s army from prison, 
123; Godfrey refuses to go to: hostility 
arises, 124 treachery, 127; Bohemond 
I warns duke against: Godfrey’s reply, 
129; sends son as hostage: Godfrey 
goes to emperor: peace restored, 130; 
prepares to entrap Bohemond, 133; let- 
ter to Bohemond: secret attack on his 
camp: evil designs disclosed, 135; hon- 
ors Robert, count of Flanders, 138; 
sends deputation to meet Raymond, 
count of Toulouse, 141; orders attack 
on count’s army, 1433 repents action, 
144; treachery revealed: invited to ac- 
company Christian leaders, 146; hon- 
ors Robert, count of Normandy, and 
Eustace, 148; rewards Christians for 
heads of Turks, 157; proposal to sur- 
render Nicaea to, 166; sends envoy to 
receive city, 167; Stephen of Chartres 
visits, 2743; sets out for Antioch with 
aid for Christians, 275; Stephen’s deceit- 
ful speech to, 275; returns home: dis- 
misses force, 277; envoys from, com- 
plain of Bohemond, 326; emperor’s 
neglect to fulfil agreement with leaders, 
envoys beg army to await his arrival, 
3273 causes Turks to set ambushes for 


INDEX 


pilgrims, 432; foul play, 470; fear of 
Latins: treaty with Bohemond, 471; 
death, 523; John II recalls agreement 
with, II: 83; first to break pledges, 84 

Alexius II Comnenus, Byzantine emperor, 
weds Agnes, daughter of Louis VII, 
II: 449; succeeds to throne of Manuel 
under mother’s guardianship, 453, 4615 
nobles conspire against, 453; sought ad- 
vice of Latins, 462; character, 462; 
crowned, 467 

Alexius, son of Emperor John, dies, II: 
123 

Alexius Contostephanus [Megalducas], 
II: 3617, 367; deserts Emperor Alex- 
ius II, 463 

Alexius the chamberlain, II: 277 

Alexius the  protosebastos, conspires 
against Alexius II, II: 453; affairs of 
empire administered by, 4613; plot to 
drive from control, 463; blinded and 
mutilated, 464 

Ali, son of Abu-Talib, I: 607, II: 323 

Alice, daughter of Baldwin II, I: 522; 
married to Bohemond II, II: 33; plan 
to rule Antioch: refuses king admission 
to city, 44; determined to disinherit 
daughter, 44, 533; granted Laodicea 
and Jabala, 45; wickedness revealed, 
543 marches to Antioch and assumes role 
of sovereign: deceived by patriarch, 
783 retires, 79 

Alix, queen of France, II: 451 

al-Mahdi [Almahadi], II: 324 

al-Malik al-Salah [Melehe Salah], II: 


404 

Alp Arslan [Belfeth], lays waste the 
Christian empire, I: 77, 78% 

Alphonse, count of Toulouse, I: 454, I: 
181 

Amalfi, I: 242; makes offering to hospi- 
tal at Jerusalem, 244 

Amalfitani, II: 241; area at Jerusalem set 
aside for, 242; establish monastery and 
convent, 243 

Amalrich, patriarch of Jerusalem, I: 20; 
death: succeeded by Heraclius (g.v.), 
22, Il: 451; election to succeed Fulcher 
(g.v.) causes strife among bishops, 2715 
receives pallium in recognition of office, 
2723 carries cross into Egypt, 372; at 
Gaza, 373; Baldwin IV crowned by, 


399 
Amalrich, bishop of Sidon, succeeds Ber- 
nard, II: 225; goes to Rome, 246 


INDEX 


Amaury I, king of Jerusalem, separation 
from Agnes, I: 11, Il: 300; in Egypt, 
I: 12, 133 weds Greek princess Maria, 
12, II: 344; selection of William as his 
historian, I: 12; interest in Muslim his- 
tory, 16; supplied Arabic accounts, 16, 
30, 56; William’s sorrow at death of, 
16; marriage to Agnes: children, II: 
53) 300; age at death of Fulk, 135; as 
count of Jaffa: loyalty to mother, 206; 
city of Ascalon bestowed upon, 233; 
received by Emperor Manuel, 279; son, 
Baldwin, born to, 286; succeeds Bald- 
win III (¢.v.), 293; reign, Bks. XIX— 
XX; characteristics, life, and manners, 
296 ff.; physical traits, 298, 3003 ques- 
tions future resurrection, 299; children 
by Agnes legitimized: genealogy, 300; 
coronation, 344; cupidity, 358; visits 
Constantinople, 377-83; death, 395 

Amida, bishoprics, II: 65; seized by Sala- 
din, 489 

Anacletus, consecration, I: 61; death, 62, 
1132 

Anar [Ainardus], governor of Damascus, 
begs Fulk’s aid against Zangi: condi- 
tions offered, II: 105; at siege of Banyas, 
107, 109; secret negotiations with amir, 
111; wisdom and fidelity, 112; au- 
thority in Damascus, 146; temporary 
peace between Baldwin III and, 147; 
daughters and sons-in-law: efforts to 
gain favor of Christians, 148; king 
sends envoy to, 154; Turk blinded by, 
1573; death, 224 

Anastasius IV, pope, II: 

Anavarza, II: 64, 275 

Andreas, count of Rapacanina, H: 238, 
247, 250 

Andronicus I Comnenus, Byzantine em- 
peror, receives Beirut: abducts Theo- 
dora, II: 345; in plot to drive Alexius, 
the protosebastos from control of em- 
pire, 463; kills nobles, seizes palace 
and Constantinople, 464; in possession 
of Constantinople: has Emperor Alex- 
ius II (g.v.) crowned, 467 

Andronicus, son of Emperor John, dies, 
II: 123 

Andronicus Angelus, II: 420; deserts Em- 
peror Alexius II, 463 

Anfred, I: 484 

Anna Comnena, I: 123%, 160”, 219” 

Ansaldus, I: 476; Jubail surrenders to, 


477 


236, 241” 


525 


Anselm, bishop of Bethlehem, TI: 118, 
126 


Anselm, constable of Tower of David, I: 


484 

Anselm de Brie, II: 54 

Ansélm de Pass, HI: 372 

Anselm de Ribemont, I: 286, 289, 323 

Antioch, a tributary of infidels, I: 79; 
communication with Edessa opened: 
citizens lay ambush for pilgrims, 195; 
history and description of city, 199 ff.; 
converted to Christianity, 200, 240; 
Yaghi Siyan (q.v.) ruler, 204; siege 
and capture by Crusaders, 204-60; de- 
scription of mountain, 2613; town scant- 
ily provisioned and strongly fortified, 
261; Karbuqua’s (g.v.) advance guard 
before, 262; besieged by Karbuqa, 266- 
95; peace and order established, 
churches restored, 296; towers held by 
count of Toulouse seized by Bohemond 
I, 313; Tancred summoned to take 
over care of, 399, 428; Bohemond I 
returns, 451; invaded by Turks, 489; 
Roger, son of Richard, succeeds to prin- 
cipality, 492; earthquakes, 500, II: 
370; ravished by Bursuq, I: 500, 503; 
invasion by Il-Ghazi, 528; Christian 
army defeated, 530; principality com- 
mitted to king, 535; Balak’s invasion, 
539; privileges granted to Venetians, 
556; invaded by Bursuqi, Il: 23, 31; 
king goes to aid of, 24; restored to 
Bohemond II (g¢.v.), 33; death of 
prince, 43; king refused admission to, 
443 people appeal to king against mach- 
inations of Alice, 53; affairs put in 
safe condition: left in charge of Renaud 
Masoier, 55; King Fulk summoned: 
aids Pons, 56; undertakes administra- 
tion, 58; suffragan bishops under juris- 
diction of church of, 64; independent 
metropolitans and archbishops under, 
65; conspiracy against king, 70; Ray- 
mond of Poitou (g.v.) marries Con- 
stance, becomes prince, 79; besieged by 
Emperor John, 83; treaty with John, 
933 emperor again demands citadel, 97- 
100; legate of church of Rome sent to 
investigate trouble between Ralph 
(q.v.), patriarch, and canons, 110 ff.; 
synod held at, 118; emperor demands 
city, 124; clergy oppose reéstablish- 
ment of Greek hierarchy, 125; Louis 
VII conducted with pomp into city, 179; 


526 


Antioch (Continued) 
departs ignominiously, 181; extent of 
principality, 182; Nureddin invades 
land: victory at Neva, 196; Prince 
Raymond slain, 198; Nureddin burns 
vicinity, 199; Baldwin III hastens to 
relief of country, 200; Emperor Manuel 
sends army to, 208; church of, loses 
three archbishoprics, 212; Renaud de 
Chatillon (g.v.), weds Constance, be- 
comes prince, 224; Emperor Manuel 
comes to, 275-80; Bohemond III (g.v.), 
prince of, 307; Amaury assumes 
charge of, 310; land placed under inter- 
dict, 456-573 patriarchs, see Aimery; 
Bernard; John; Ralph 

Apamea, I: 309, 449, Il: 30, 64, 198% 

Apulia, II: 31, 78; Emperor Manuel in- 
vades, 247; King William of Sicily 
defeats Greek forces, 250 

Agsunqur, Aleppo given to, I: 204 

Arabia, I: 607, 340, 429, Il: 5; fortresses, 
I: 506, II, 127 

Arabs, Syria seized by, I: 60 ff.; wife of 
chief taken prisoner, is courteously 
treated, 429; he vows to be faithful to 
Baldwin I, 4303; rescues king, 4453 
alliance with Tughtigin, 538; a chief 
is killed, II: 155; captured by Baldwin 
III in defiance of treaty, 255; fight with 
lances only, 3313; avoid dangers of 
combat, attach themselves to victor, 
4333 attacked by Guy de Lusignan, 508 

Arados, I: 319, II: 5, 68, 448 

Archard, deacon, I: 482, 484 

Arda, wife of Baldwin I, I: 416; put 
aside, 461; king vows to restore to dig- 
nity, 514 

Ariano, bishop of, I: 401 

Arius, I: 152, II: 167 

Arka, TI: 5, 68, 4473 pilgrims camp near, 
I: 317; description of, 318; siege of, 
317-29 

Armenians, open gates of Artasium, I: 
196; at Antioch, 227, 258; cut off head 
of Yaghi Siyan, 259; attacked on Eu- 
phrates, 474; privileges granted to, in 
Jerusalem, 538; rescue Baldwin II, 
5413 put to sword by Balak, 543 

Arnold, prior of Mt. Sion, I: 536, 556 

Arnold of Toroge, II: 456 

Arnulf de Choques, patriarch of Jerusa- 
lem, character, reputation, I: 324, 359, 
380, 417, 4893 raised to patriarchate, 
384; election made null and void, 402; 


INDEX 


intimacy with Baldwin I, 417; disturbs 
peace of Daimbert, 425, 452; Daimbert 
driven out through machinations of, 
4673 plots to put Gibelin in patriarchal 
chair, 468; goes to Rome, 482; succeeds 
Gibelin as patriarch: introduces canons 
in church at Jerusalem, 489; scheme 
contrived to deceive countess of Sicily 
and supplement resources of king, 489, 
4973; escapes Turks, 494; deposed, 505; 
goes to Rome: reinstated, 506; in con- 
ference on appointment of king, 519; 
death, 524 

Arnulf, bishop of Lisieux, at council of 
Acre, II: 185 

Arnulf of Calabria, II: 61; becomes bishop 
of Cosenza: treachery, 113; indulges 
rage against patriarch, 114, 116; at 
synod of Antioch, 119 

Arnulf of Turbessel, TI: 340 

Arsequinus [Asclettin? ], II: 248 

Arsuf, besieged, I: 409, 4343; seized by 
Baldwin I, 435; king escapes to, 446 

Artasium [Artah], siege of, I, 195-97; 
battle between Tancred and Ridwan, 
463; Roger, prince of Antioch, at, 528; 
bishopric of, II: 68 

Ascalon, captured and fortified, I: 12; 
Egyptians, Arabs, and Turks encamp 
before, 394; are put to flight, 397; ex- 
pedition of Baldwin I against, 426; 
people join Egyptians, 443; Egyptian 
army arrives, 464, 523; church subject 
to see at Bethlehem, 482; still in power 
of Egyptians, 547; grants to Venetians, 
5553 victory of Baldwin II, I: 25; 
Egyptians periodically reinforce garri- 
son, 26, 203, 220; subject to Egyptian 
potentate, 80; effort to make a barrier 
between Christian state and Egypt, 81; 
encircled by impregnable forts, 130 ff.; 
capture of, 184-234; Baldwin III be- 
sieges, 202-34; situation of city, 219; 
church organized, granted to bishop of 
Bethlehem, 2333 possessions distributed: 
city bestowed upon Amaury, 233; ref- 
ugees attacked and robbed by Turk, 
234; soil produces sixtyfold crop, 2363 
given to William of Montferrat, 415; 
Saladin takes position before: Baldwin 
IV goes out to meet him, 426, 429; 
gates of city closed against king, 508 

Ascalonites, fall into trap laid for pil- 
grims, I: 468; assault Jerusalem, 495, 
II: 12, 17; besiege Jaffa, I: 502; forays 


INDEX 


into kingdom, II: 73; fortress built to 
check, 80, 130, 1313 attacked and 
robbed, 234 

Aschetinus, bishop of Bethlehem, I: 482, 
536, 556; villages granted to, 483 

Assassins, Banyas held by, II: 77; sect de- 
scribed, 390; send peace envoy to Am- 
aury I, 392; envoy killed by Knights 
Templars, 392; king roused to violent 
anger by outrage, 393; is able to clear 
his own honor, 394 

Athanasius, II: 336 

Attalia, II: 123, 178 

Attard, archbishop of Nazareth, seeks wife 
for Baldwin III, II: 265; dies, 273 

Ayyubid dynasty, II: 358-597 

Azot, I: 465, 524 


Baalbec, I: 198, 403; taken over by Sala- 
din, II: 405, 409; Raymond III of 
Tripoli’s depredations, 413 

Babilyun [Babylon], II: 315, 334 

Bacades, bandits from, II: 437 

Baccar, valley of, II: 107; laid waste by 
Baldwin, 412; entered by Saladin, 476 

Bagdad, caliph promises assistance to 
Yaghi Siyan, I: 205; visited by Shir- 
kuh, II: 313; commands princes to 
lend him aid, 314; why caliph of 
Egypt is adversary of, 323 

Bait Nuba [Bettenuble], fortress, II: 58 

Balak, Turkish prince, invades land of 
Antioch, I: 539-43; dream fulfilled, II: 
16 

Balas, ruler of Seruj, I: 194, 306 

Balbis, attacked and claimed by Shirkuh, 
II: 305; claimed by Hospital at Jerusa- 
lem, 350; seized and pillaged, 351 

Balduk, ruler of Samosata, I: 192, 194, 


308 

Baldwin I, king of Jerusalem, pilgrimage, 
I: 95, 116, 131, 1723 given as hostage 
to Coloman, 120; puts Greeks to flight, 
128; withdraws from main army, 1753 
death of wife, 177, 415; quarrel with 
Tancred at Tarsus, 179-85; seizes 
northern Syria to Euphrates, 187 ff.; 
reprimanded for treatment of Tancred: 
makes amends, 187; summoned to 
Edessa, 189; relations with ruler: aids 
city against oppression of Turks, 191; 
lays siege to Samosata, 192; made count 
of Edessa: buys Samosata, 193; seizes 
Seruj, 194; sends gifts to chiefs at An- 
tioch, 237; forces infidels to relinquish 


527 


attack on Edessa, 245; summonded to 
aid Ezaz, 301; citizens of Edessa con- 
spire against, 305; their punishment, 
306; Balas plots against, 306; declines 
alliance with Turks, 308; genealogy, 
3853; goes to Jerusalem to celebrate the 
Lord’s nativity, 400; Malatia given to, 
4123 reign as king of Jerusalem, Bks. 
X-XI incl.; laid aside clerical habit to 
become a soldier, 415; physical and 
moral characteristics, 416; crowned, 
4273; wounded, 453; puts away legit- 
imate wife, Arda, 461; marriage with 
Adelaide, countess of Sicily, 489, 496- 
97; repents treatment of Arda, sends 
Adelaide back to Sicily, 513-14; death, 


515 

Baldwin II (Baldwin du Bourg), king of 
Jerusalem, I: 95, 116, 127, 131, 287, 
369; wins lasting glory, 173; with- 
draws from main army, 175; becomes 
count of Edessa, 422; marriage to 
Morfia, daughter of Duke Gabriel: 
generosity to Joscelin de Courtenay, 
450; in siege of Haran, 456; wrangles 
with Bohemond over rule of Haran, 
458; taken prisoner, 459; returns: 
stirs up war against Tancred, 474; 
visits father-in-law, 478; cunning 
scheme to get money, 479; forces Jos- 
celin to leave Edessa, 498; onslaught 
against Bursuq, 504; reign, Bks XII- 
XIII; genealogy, 517; elected king, 
5203; appearance, personality, 521; 
crowned, 522, 535; taken prisoner by 
Balak, 540; liberated by Armenians, 
5423 retaken by Balak, 543; released, 
II: 21; illness, death, 45-46; difficulties 
with Alice at Antioch, 53 

Baldwin III, king of Jerusalem, I: 9, 12, 
16; as boy summoned before king, II: 
46; reign, Bks. XVI—XVIII incl.: joint 
rule with Melisend, 136-83; succeeds 
Fulk of Anjou (¢.v.), 1363 personal 
appearance, life, and habits, 137; 
crowned, 204; marriage, 264, 273-753 
poisoned, 292; death, 293; built 
stronghold at Gaza, 374 

Baldwin IV, the leper, king of Jerusalem, 
William appointed tutor to, I: 14, II: 
3973 legitimized, I: 14; afflicted with 
leprosy, 14, II: 398, 446, 460; crowned, 
I: 16, II: 399; William’s career in reign 
of, I: 16-25; death, 25; son of Amaury 
and Agnes, II, 53; birth, 286; geneal- 


528 


Baldwin IV (Continued) 
ogy, 301; reign, Bks. XXI—XXIII incl.; 
character, appearance, 398; intellect, 
398, 492 

Baldwin V, king of Jerusalem, I: 25; 
crowned, II: 501 

Baldwin, archbishop of Caesarea, I: 3927, 
438, Il: 185, 218, 247 

Baldwin, bishop of Beirut, II: 67, 118 

Baldwin, canon of the Sepulchre of the 
Lord, IT: 475 

Baldwin, count of Hainault, I: 95, 116, 
208, 232, 289; sent as envoy to Alex- 
ius: disappears, 298 

Baldwin Calderon, I: 158 

Baldwin de Lille, responsibility of realm 
entrusted to, II: 269 

Baldwin d@Ibelin of Ramlah, I: 536, II: 
87, 131, 204; an adherent of Raymond 
III of Tripoli, 400; goes out to meet 
Saladin, 430; captured, 443; in Con- 
stantinople, 453; prowess in battle, 
474) 4973 urges coronation of Baldwin 
V, sor 

Baldwin du Bourg, see Baldwin II 

Baldwin of Ghent, I: 158 

Baldwin of Marash, Il: 158, 161 

Baldwin of Ramlah, see Baldwin d’Ibelin 

Balearic Isles, II: 458 

Balian d’Ibelin of Ramlah, the Elder, I: 
73) 131, 204; at council of Acre, 185 

Balian d’Ibelin of Ramlah, the Younger, 
I: 38-397, II: 131, 204; weds Maria, 
widow of King Amaury, 302, 425; fa- 
vors regency of Raymond III of Trip- 
oli, 401; given city of Nablus, 425; 
goes out against Saladin, 430; prowess 
in battle, 487; urges coronation of 
Baldwin V, 501 

Balian of Jaffa, II: 261, 402 

Balian of Nablus, see Balian d’Ibelin of 
Ramlah 

Banyas, in hands of enemy, II: 74; prison- 
ers taken at, restored, 76; city held by 
Assassins, ceded to Christians, 77; same 
as Caesarea Philippi, 186; Damascenes 
promise to restore, 106; history: block- 
ade, 107; provision of surrender, 1113 
besieged by Nureddin, 225, 257, 262, 
309; Arabs and Turks attacked near, 
in defiance of treaty, 255; Humphrey 
of Toron grants half of city to Hospital- 
lers, 256; supplies captured by infidels, 
Hospitallers withdraw from agreement, 
257; Baldwin III raises siege, 258; re- 


INDEX 


mains until city is restored, 259; king 
summons prince and nobles to relieve, 
263; situation, history, 309; falls to 
Nureddin, 310; Amaury lays siege to: 
truce concluded, 395 

Barac, physician, poisons Baldwin III, I: 
292 

Bari, II: 247 

Barison, constable of Jaffa, I: 536 

Baswaj, Damascenes under, invade land of 
Tripoli, II: 82; pillages and burns Na- 
blus, 88 

Bavarians, I: 208 

Beatrice, wife of Joscelin II, II: 53; gov- 
ernment of Edessa in hands of, 201; 
Emperor Manuel offers annual revenue 
in exchange for fortresses, 208; taken 
under protection of Baldwin ITI, 209 

Beauvoir, castle of, II: 473 

Bedar, I: 483 

Bedegene taken by Baldwin IV, II: 412 

Beersheba, II: 81, 131 

Beherslin, TH; 282 

Beirut, I: 331; Baldwin meets pilgrims at, 
442; besieged and captured, 484 ff.; 
Egyptian fleet at, II: 32, 448; bishop- 
rics, 66; Egyptian fleet aids Saladin, 
he invests city, 476-79 

Belfast, II: 442 

Belgrade, Teutons at, I: 111 

Benedict, archbishop of Edessa, I: 456, 459 

Benevento, siege of, II: 238, 248, 250 

Beni-Zerra family, I: 241 

Berengar, bishop of Orange, sent to Syria 
as papal legate, I: 505 

Berengar, count of Sulzbach, daughters 
married emperors Conrad and Manuel, 
Il: 174 

Bernard, patriarch of Antioch, formerly 
bishop of Artasium, I: 297, 452, 456, 
5443 first Latin incumbent, 309, 522; 
resents privilege granted to Gibelin, 
5103 Paschal II’s replies to accusations, 
510, 5113 peacemaker, II: 34; admon- 
ished to restore suffragans of church at 
Tyre, 373 dies, 60 

Bernard, bishop of Lydda, formerly abbot 
of Mt. Tabor, II: 359, 372 

Bernard, bishop of Nazareth, I: 536, 556 

Bernard, bishop of Sidon, II: 67, 118, 162, 
2253 at council of Acre, 185; dies, 
225 

Bernard de Neufchatel, II: 554 

Bernard de St. Valéry, I: 3697 

Bernard d’Estampes, II: 151 


INDEX 


Bernard de Tremelay, Il: 218, 227 

Bernard of Clairvaux, I: 525”, 526, II: 
62, 193%; preaches Second Crusade, 164 

Bernard the Treasurer, I: 39, 43 

Bernard Vacher, II: 104, 149 

Beroea, destroyed by earthquake, II: 370 

Bertha of Sulzbach, or Irene, wife of Em- 
peror Manuel, II: 2877, 288, 450 

Berthold of Andechs, II: 184 

Bertrada [Bertelea], mother of King 
Fulk, I: 47; deserted Fulk IV, le 
Rechin, for Philip I of France, 48; 
begs Fulk IV to restore paternal in- 
heritance to son, 49 

Bertram, count of Tripoli, I: 463, Il: 403; 
comes to Syria, I: 475; quarrel with 
William Jordan, 475-76; fealty to 
Baldwin I, 478; invited to join in siege 
of Beirut, 485; goes to aid of Tancred, 
4913 Pons his successor, 492; called to 
aid in battle against Mawdud, 493; 
blames king for disaster, 494 

Bertram, son of Alphonse of Toulouse, 
captured by Nureddin, II: 1972; re- 
leased, 280 

Bertrand, son of Count Gislebert, II: 457 

Bertrand de Blanquefort, II: 261 
Bethany, Queen Melisend builds convent, 

~ TI: 132 

Bethbezan, I: 483 

Bethlehem, sends envoys to pilgrims, I: 
70, 335; Lancred, dispatched to city, 
takes possession, 336; the Lord’s na- 
tivity celebrated in, 401; church raised 
to dignity of a cathedral, 481 

Bethune, advocate of, effort to bring about 
marriage between daughters of King 
Amaury and his sons, I: 18, I: 419 

Bettegene, destroyed by our army, II: 485 

Beugnot, A., I: 44 

Bile, fortress given into power of Greeks, 
II: 209 

Bilin, II: 18, 3747 

Bithynia, Peter the Hermit encamps in, I: 
106; Tancred moves his legions into, 
1373; taken by Andronicus, II: 463 

Blachernae palace, I: 125, 127, 1285 I: 
382 

Blanchegarde, fortress, II: 132 

Boello de Chartres, I: 134 

Bohemond I, prince of Antioch, as prince 
of Taranto, I: 96; message to Godfrey, 
129; hastens to Constantinople: nobles 
in his train: Alexius prepares to en- 
trap, 133 ff.; biography, 133%; legions 


529 


plunder and murder heretics, 1343 vis- 
its emperor, 136; advice to count of 
Toulouse, 145; arrives at Nicaea, 147, 
156, 157; leaders separate, 169; at- 
tacked by Turks, 170; rescued by 
Tancred, 171; at Antioch, 207, 215, 
229, 230, 231, 265; scheme to remove 
spies, 221; reputation as master of 
guile and courage, 222, 22373 returns 
stolen pavilion given him by Pakrad, 
238; friendship with Firuz: plot con- 
trived between them, 242; asks that 
Antioch be conceded to him, 244, 248; 
makes known a secret, 247; chiefs con- 
cede city to, 249; urges Firuz to com- 
plete work, 255; first to scale wall, 
256; placed in supreme control, 266; 
forestalls attempts at desertion, 267; 
sets fire to city, 279; given command, 
2873 aids in rout of Qilij Arslan, 293; 
known as prince of Antioch, 297; 
makes himself master of Cilicia, 300; at 
Ezaz, 303; at Maara, 310; controversy 
with count of Toulouse, 3123 seizes 
towers held by count at Antioch, 313; 
at Laodicea, 320; envoys from Alexius 
complain of, 326; upheld by chiefs, 
327; goes to Jerusalem to celebrate the 
Lord’s nativity, 400; friendship with 
Daimbert, 402”; received investiture 
of principality from Daimbert, 403; 
taken prisoner at Malatia, 411; Daim- 
bert’s appeal to, 419; released, returns 
to Antioch: resigns principality to Tan- 
cred, 4513 assigns benefice to Daimbert, 
4523 wrangles with Baldwin du Bourg 
over Haran, 458; Joscelin’s land under 
care of, 4593 entrusts principality to 
Tancred: goes to France: marries Con- 
stance, daughter of Philip I, 460; en- 
ters land of Greeks, pillages cities, 470; 
treaty with Alexius, 471; returns to 
Apulia, dies, leaving heir, 472 (see 
Bohemond II) 

Bohemond II, prince of Antioch, I: 4727; 
to be given Antioch on demand, 492; 
inheritance usurped, 531; as prince of 
Taranto arrives at Antioch, II: 32; 
lands restored to: marries Alice, daugh- 
ter of Baldwin II, 333; genealogy: be- 
sieges Kafartab, 33; enmity between 
Joscelin and, 34; at siege of Damas- 
cus, 40; death, 43 

Bohemond III, prince of Antioch, I: 21; 
at siege of Harim, II: 307; cast into 


530 


Bohemond III (Continued) 
prison, 308; restored to liberty, raises 
ransom for hostages: gifts from Em- 
peror Manuel, 311; Nureddin’s mo- 
tive in freeing, 311; declares war 
against Malih, 387; aids in siege 
against Harim, 425; raises siege, 435; 
causes Baldwin IV alarm, 446; leaves 
wife to marry Sibyl, 452 f.; continues 
wicked course, is excommunicated, 454; 
patriarch and prelates try to find a 
remedy, 455-573 arranges exchange 
of Tarsus with Rupen, 491; urges cor- 
onation of Baldwin V, 501 

Bohemond, castle of, I: 128 

Bohemond, staircase of, I: 201 

Bosphorus, I: 126 

Bostrum, bishoprics, Il: 64; governor of- 
fers to surrender to Baldwin III, 146; 
king finds city occupied by Turks, 151; 
besieged by Saladin, 409; our army 
raids territory near, 485 

Brethren of the Soldiery of the Temple, 
see Knights Templars 

Bulgarians, disturbances between pilgrims 
and, I: 98, 100, 101, 102; overrun 
countries from Danube to Adriatic, 121 

Burdinus, archbishop of Braga, I: 527 

Buria, assailed by Saladin, II: 469; peo- 
ple are carried into captivity, 470 

Bursuq [Bursequinus], ravishes land of 
Antioch, I: 500, 503; forces flee, 504 

Busuqi [Bursequinus], Turkish prince, in- 
vades Antioch, II: 23, 31; defeat, 25; 
death, 31 

Butella, I: 349 


Caesarea, I: 332; description, 4353; cap- 
tured, 436; citizens massacred by Chris- 
tians, 437; governor and kadi held for 
ransom, 438 

Caicapha, I: 483 

Cairo, description: founder, II: 315; Cru- 
saders protect, 328-32, 339; Amaury 
encamps near, 352 

Calabria, bishop of, I: 380 

Caliph, title, TI: 323 

Calixtus II, pope, I: 527; death, II: 22 

Calogenbar, besieged, II: 1 

Campania, II: 247, 250 

Canestrivum, II: 57 

Cannaie des Etourneaux, II: 431 

Carmel, Amaury I holds army in, II: 389 

Castle Arnold, II: 58 

Castle Nepa, II: 265 


INDEX 


Castoria, I: 134 

Catholici, 1: 200, Il: 122 

Cavea Roab, II: 156 

Cave beyond Jordan, surrendered to Shir- 
kuh by Knights Templars, II: 312 

Cave of Tyre seized by Shirkuh, II: 312 

Caxton, William, I: 43 

Cecilia, daughter of Philip I of France, 
bride of Tancred, I: 460; marries 
Pons, 492; genealogy, Il: 48; dowry, 
54; appeals to king to aid Pons, 56 

Cerep, I: 528, 532, II: 22 

Chalcedon, Godfrey’s legions camp at, I: 
1333 fourth synod held at, 133, II: 166 

Charlemagne [Charles, emperor], I: 63, 
64; I: 3007 

Chastel Neuf, II: 263 

Chastel Rouge, II: 265 

Chatz, I: 548 

Choelin, II: 478 

Chosroes, churches overthrown by, I: 60; 
invasion of Syria, 60, 61 

Church councils: Antioch, I: 296-97, II: 
117-22; Chalcedon, I: 133, II: 166; 
Jerusalem, I: 467, 505-6, II: 122; 
Nablus, I: 535-36; Nicaea, 152, 200, 
341, Il: 167; Rome, 436, 4383 Troyes, 
I: 525, I: 40 

Cilicia, province, I: 178; invaded, 186; 
Bohemond I makes himself master, 300; 
earthquake, 500; Emperor John in, II: 
83, 94; Thoros raids, 253; land seized 
by Thoros: emperor appears suddenly, 
275; fortress surrendered to emperor, 
278; Knights Templars dispossessed of 
holdings in, 387 

Civitot, besieged, I: 109 

Clarebold de Vendeuil, I: 112, 124, 246 

Clement III, antipope, see Guibert, arch- 
bishop of Ravenna 

Clermont, council of, I: 87-88; leaders 
who offered themselves for pilgrimage, 
93 

Coats of arms, early instance of use of, 
I: 3722 

Coelesyria, province of, I: 200, II: 4; Bur- 
suqi enters, 31; earthquake, 370; cities 
of, brought under rule of Saladin, 404 

Colman [Calamanus], governor of Ci- 
licia, at seige of Harim, II: 307; cast 
into prison, 308 

Cologne, outrages of pilgrims at, I: 113 

Coloman, king of Hungary, kindness to 
pilgrims, I: 97; Godfrey’s relations 
with, 117-21 


INDEX 


Conan, count of Brittany, I: 369, II: 48 

Conon, de Montague, I: 116, 127, 131, 
149, 208, 369 

Conon Roto, I: 287 

Conrad, emperor of the Romans, wears 
token of cross, II: 164; arrives with 
army at Constantinople, 165; disastrous 
march in Asia Minor, 167-73; returns 
to Constantinople, 174; reception in 
Jerusalem, 181; at council of Acre, 
184; remarkable feat of, 189; returns 
to his own land: dies, succeeded by Fred- 
erick I (q.v.), 195 

Constance, daughter of Bohemond II, 
Alice plans to disinherit, Il: 44, 53; 
Antioch and dependencies held for, 45; 
Raymond of Poitou invited to marry, 
593; marriage, 79; in charge of state 
and principality of Antioch, 199; king’s 
advice to marry not heeded, 213; weds 
Renaud de Chatillon, 224 

Constance, daughter of Philip I, married 
to Bohemond I, I: 460, 472; mother of 
Bohemond II, II: 33 

Constance of Castile, Il: 196” 

Constantine I, emperor, I: 66 

Constantine IX, Monomachus emperor, I: 
69, 406 

Constantine X, emperor, I: 406 

Constantine, bishop of Lydda, II: 247 

Constantine, palace of, Constantinople: 
approach described, II: 379 

Constantinople, description of site, I: 125; 
army quartered outside: ambushed by 
Greeks, 127-30; visit of Amaury I, II: 
377-82; nobles conspire against Alex- 
ius II, 450-613; uprising in which An- 
dronicus (g.v.) prevails, 461 ff.; causes 
of dissension, 462 

Contostephanus [Gundostephan], II: 287 

Coritium, church held by infidels, TI: 212 

Cresson, II: 52, 282 

Cross, sign of, worn by pilgrims, I: 93 

Cross of the Lord, brought from Persia 
by Heraclius, I: 60; taken to Persia 
by Chosroes, 61; found, 385; carried 
before troops, 439, 465; sent back to 
Jerusalem, 535; miracle wrought by, 
TI: 154 

Crusading expeditions 

Peasants Crusade, led by Peter the 
Hermit, I: 43, 82-108; Walter the 
Penniless, 97-99, 109; Gottschalk, 110- 
11; Count Emicho, 113, 115 

— First Crusade, Bks. I-VIII; God- 





531 


frey and Baldwin, I: 43, 57, 95, 96, 
117-76; Raymond of Toulouse and 
Adhemar, bishop of Puy, 95, 96, 139, 
141, 143-46, 155, 1583; Robert of Nor- 
mandy and Stephen of Blois, 95, 148, 
169; Robert of Flanders, 95, 138, 145, 
147, 149, 156, 1573; Bohemond and 
Tancred, 96, 129, 133 ff., 145 ff., 156, 
1573; Svein, 217; Emperor Alexius, 
275-77 
Crusade of the Faint-Hearted, led 
by William of Poitou, Stephen of Blois, 
Stephen of Burgundy, with bands from 
Lombardy and Germany, I: 430-33 
Second Crusade, led by Conrad III 
and Louis VII, I: 163-96 
Other expeditions: Crusade of Bohe- 
mond against Alexius, I: 470-72; Ber- 
tram of Toulouse, 475-76; Scandina- 
vian crusade, led by Sigurd, 486-88; 
Adelaide of Sicily, 496; Bohemond II, 
II: 32-33; Crusade of the Templars led 
by Hugh de Payens, 40-42; Raymond 
of Poitou, 77-79; Emperor John, 83- 
84, 92-102; second expedition led by 
Emperor John, 123-28; Emperor Man- 
uel, 208-12; Thierry of Flanders, 264- 
713 second expedition led by Emperor 
Manuel, 275-81; second expedition led 
by Thierry of Flanders, 308; Stephen, 
son of Theobald of Blois, and Stephen, 
son of William de Saéne, 384; third 
expedition led by Emperor Manuel, 
414-15; William Long Sword, 415; 
Philip of Flanders, 417-25, 434-35 
Naval contingents, see Fleets 
Cyprus, provides help for Christians, I: 
330, 3343 seized by Renaud de Chatil- 
lon, II: 253; atrocities committed, 25435 
he makes amends, 275 
Cyril, II: 336 














Dacia, I: 122 

Daimbert, patriarch of Jerusalem, I: 401, 
4023 strife over possession of tower of 
David, 403-4; neither city nor tower 
surrendered to, 417; letter to Bohe- 
mond, 419; retires to church of Mt. 
Sion, 425; reconciliation between Bald- 
win I and, 427; takes refuge with 
Bohemond, 452; in siege of Haran, 
456; unfolds wrongs at Rome, 461; 
given apostolic letter to resume see: 
death, 467 

Dalmatia, I: 139, 140 


532 


Dalmatians, murder sick and aged pil- 
grims, I: 140; count of Toulouse or- 
ders hands and feet cut off, 141 

Damascenes in battle with Hugh de St. 
Omer, I: 469; capture Banyas, II: 74; 
treaty with Fulk, 76; under command 
of Baswaj (g.v.), 82, 88; aided by 
Fulk, 105-6 

Damascus, seized by Omar, I: 61; given 
to Duqaq, 204; Tughtigin (qv.), 
king of, goes to aid of Tyre, II: 13; 
invaded by Baldwin II, 25, 27, 40; 
bishoprics, 65; Zangi’s attempt against, 
105-6; besieged by Second Crusade, 
186-93; taken by Nureddin, 224; Bald- 
win III invades, 282-83; taken by 
Saladin, 404; Baldwin IV invades and 
ravages country, 411; invasion of Bald- 
win IV, 481, 485 

Damietta, besieged, II: 363; famine, 366; 
pilgrims shipwrecked at, 468 

Dan, river, II: 27 

Danes, under Svein, annihilated by Turks, 
I: 217 f.; fleet of, arrives in Syria, 
486 

Danishmand, Turkish satrap, captures 
Bohemond I: lays siege to Malatia, I: 
411 

Daria, II: 186, 187; our army lays waste, 


4 

Daron, Saladin lays siege to fortress, II: 
3713 described, 372; Saladin’s brother 
invades vicinity, 477; attack on Arabs, 
508 

David, Tower of, I: 343, 383, 3847, 417, 
II: 428 

Dead sea, I: 339, II: 390 

Deserters, I: 267, 2743 vigorous reproach 
to, 280 

Dioscurus, patriarch of Alexandria, I: 133 

Dirgham [Dargam], sultan of Egypt, 
goes out to meet King Amaury: forced 
to retreat, II: 302; fate of, 303-5 

Djawali, II: 3682 

Dodo de Conti, I: 116 

Dog river, I: 422, 442 

Domenigo Michieli [Dominicus Mich- 
aelis], doge of Venice, sails for Syria, 
I: 548; agreement with barons on siege 
of Tyre, 550; treaty, 552; places con- 
firmed to, 554 

Domfront, castle, II: 60 

Dorylaeum, battle of, I: 169% 

Drogo de Monci, I: 287 

Drogo de Nesle, I: 124, 246 


INDEX 


Dubais [Dabais], I: 528, 534 
Duqagq, I: 204, 422 


Ebremar, patriarch of Jerusalem, I: 452, 
556; carries Cross into battle, 465, 533; 
visits Rome: deposed, 467; granted 
church of Caesarea, 468; at council of 
Nablus, 535 

Edessa, Baldwin, summoned to (see Bald- 
win I): the city and its people, I: 189; 
Baldwin made ruler, 190-93; free com- 
munication with Antioch opened, 195; 
Persians, Turks, and Kurds lay siege 
to: forced to retire, 245; citizens con- 
spire against Baldwin, 305; left in care 
of Baldwin du Bourg (see Baldwin II), 
422; Turks ravage country of, 472- 
73; Joscelin becomes count of, 522; 
bishoprics, II: 64; Zangi captures, 140- 
433 location described, 140; Joscelin II 
(g.v.) attempts to recover, 157-603 
extent of county, 182; sultan of Iconium 
invades land, 200; countess governs 
people, 201, 207; in power of enemies, 
204; sultan of Iconium siezes region 
bordering on his territory, 206; Bald- 
win III repairs to, 207; Emperor 
Manuel demands and obtains country, 
208; king takes those who wish to 
leave under his protection, 209; Nured- 
din stops exodus, 210; siezes region, 
212; church held by infidels, 212; seized 
by Saladin, 480 

Egypt, Amaury’s adventures in, I: 12, 13; 
Constantinople urges conquest of, 18; 
strife with Persia, 65; condition of 
Christians in, 70; Malik Shah’s sus- 
picion of, 204; enmity between Orien- 
tals and Egyptians, 223; caliph sends 
envoys to pilgrim chiefs, 223, 229, 
325; envoys sent by our chiefs return, 
325; change of attitude toward pil- 
grims, 326; prince of, wrested sover- 
eignty of Jerusalem from Turks, 333; 
attacks against Christians, 393-97, 4393 
Tyre regarded as bulwark of, II: 7; 
palace revolution, 251-52; Amaury I 
(q.v.) makes expedition into, 302-3; 
Amaury’s campaigns to assist Shawar, 
314-42; Amaury’s struggle for, in al- 
liance with Emperor Manuel, 344-963 
subjection by Turks, 356; relations with 
kingdom changed for worse, 358, 3603 
Philip of Flanders thwarts proposed 
invasion, 420-22 


INDEX 


Egyptians, and Turks draw together, I: 
3943 sinister story at Jaffa, 441; defeat 
Baldwin I, 443; take citadel of Ramlah, 
446; invade kingdom, 464, 523, 5455 
put to flight, 466, 547; return to Egypt, 
524; arrive before Ascalon, II: 26; 
periodically reinforce Ascalon, 26, 203, 
220; attack Gaza, 203 

Eleanor of Aquitaine, queen of France, II: 
179; plot to separate from king, 180; 
marriage with Louis VII annulled: be- 
comes wife of Henry, duke of Nor- 
mandy, 196 

Elinandus of Tiberias, II: 142, 185 

Elvira, wife of Count Raymond, I: 454 

Embriaco, Genoese family, I: 476% 

Emelota, wife of Hugh, count of Jaffa, I: 
48oqn, II: 71 

Emicho, Count, I: 113, 115 

Emir-Ali, ruler of Assassins, II: 77 

Emmaus, see Nicopolis 

English sea, I: 386 

Enguerrand, son of Lord Hugh of St. Pol, 
I: 116, 287, 314 

Ephesus, II: 174 

Ercarselle, II: 335 

Eremberge [Guiberg], wife of Fulk, II: 
48, 49 

Ernoul, I: 387, 39, 40, Hl: 4517” 

Eschiva, wife of Raymond III of Tripoli, 
TI: 404 

Eudes de Montfaucon, II: 105 

Eudes de Saint-Amand, II: 261; Master 
of Knights Templars, 393; Amaury I 
demands satisfaction for outrage against 
envoy, 393; goes out to meet Saladin, 
430; in battle with Saladin, 442; taken 
prisoner, 443 

Eugenius III, pope, II: 139, 1623 solici- 
tude for East, 163 

Euphrates, Christians attacked on banks 
of, I: 473 

Eustace II, count of Boulogne, I: 
386 

Eustace III, count of Boulogne, I: 95, 
172; honored by Alexius, 148; biog- 
raphy, 1482; at Antioch, 208, 231, 
232, 287, 289; at Maara, 310; at Jeru- 
salem, 366, 368; genealogy, 385; at 
Nablus, 395; lawful successor to Bald- 
win I, 519; offered throne of Jeru- 
salem, 520 

Eustace Cholet, II: 332 

Eustace Grenier, I: 484, 536; granted 
Sidon, 488; Arnulf confers niece upon, 


116%, 


533 


489; administration of kingdom en- 
trusted to, 541; concentrates troops to 
meet Egyptians, 546; death, 547; 
widow marries Hugh, count of Jaffa, 
II: 71 

Eustace Grenier the Younger, II: 71, 409 

Eutyches, I: 133, I: 166 

Eutychius [Seith], son of Patricius, I: 56 

Evrard de Breteuil, II: 176 

Evrard du Puiset, I: 95, 198, 229, 266, 
287 

Ezaz [Hasarth], lord of, seeks duke’s help 
against Ridwan, I: 3013; besieged, I: 
243 Humphrey the constable sent to 
protect, 200 


Farama, II: 327, 363 

Firuz, betrays Antioch to Bohemond, I: 
241-56 

Fleet, Egyptian, appears at Jaffa, I: 357, 
465-66, 502; at Ascalon and Tyre, 524; 
doge of Venice forces retreat, 549; ex- 
pected at Tyre, II: 13; defeated at 
Beirut, 32; caliph orders prepared for 
action at Ascalon, 222-23; prepared by 
Saladin, 447-48; summoned by Saladin, 
lays siege to Beirut, 475 

Fleet, Genoese, arrives at Antioch, I: 229; 
at Jaffa, 355, 433; at Syria, 4543 lands 
aid in siege of Acre, 455; lands near 
Tripoli, 475; sails to Jubail, 476; city 
captured, 477 

Fleet, Greek, sent to Syria, II: 361; aids 
Amaury against Egypt, 362-68 

Fleet, Sicilian, loss before Alexandria, 
II: 399; wrecked, 458 

Fleet, Venetian, at the siege of Tyre, I: 
548-50, II: 14 

Fleets: of Guinemer from English Chan- 
nel, I: 184, 321; of pilgrims from 
vicinity of Ratisbon, 309; Pisan at 
Laodicea, 401; of Danes and Nor- 
wegians arrive at Syria, 486; aid in 
siege of Sidon, 487 

Fleets, royal, at Tyre, II: 10; at siege of 

Ascalon, 220, 222 

Florus, son of Philip I of France, II: 48 

Forbelet, II: 472, 495 

Franco of Hierapolis, II: 117, 119 

Franco of Malines, I: 273 

Frederick I, Barbarossa, emperor of the 
Romans, as duke of Swabia, II: 173, 
184; succeeds to throne of Conrad 
(g.v.), 195; crowned at Rome, 236; 
siege of Tortona, 237; urged to seize 


534 


Frederick I, Barbarossa (Continued) 
Sicily, 238; losses in Italy, 247; recon- 
ciled to Pope Alexander, 281, 4353 
Amaury I and bishops appeal to, 360, 


377 

Frederick, archbishop of Tyre, I: 11; 
as bishop of Acre, II: 218, 235, 2463 
secures favor of pope for Amalrich, 
2723 succeeds Peter as archbishop of 
Tyre, 304; in Egypt, 337; bestows 
office of archdeacon of Tyre upon Wil- 
liam, 3453 embassy to princes of West, 
360; returns unsuccessful, 384; death, 
402; succeeded by William II, 411 

Frisians, I: 208 

Fulcher, patriarch of Jerusalem, I: 10, 
12, 20; as archbishop of Tyre, II: 62; 
desire to receive pallium, 63; rank in 
church at Jerusalem, 64; pope com- 
mands his suffragans to obey him, 65; 
at siege of Banyas, 110; at synod of 
Antioch, 118; succeeds William as 
patriarch of Jerusalem: succeeded as 
archbishop of Tyre by Ralph the king’s 
chancellor, 162; receives Emperor Con- 
rad, 181; meets Louis VII, 183; at 
council of Acre, 185; admonishes Bald- 
win III to desist from wicked project, 
206; at siege of Ascalon, 218; alterca- 
tion with Hospitallers, 239; goes to 
Rome to visit Hadrian IV, 245; death, 
269; opposed marriage of Agnes and 
“Amaury I, 300 

Fulcher of Chartres, I: 15 

Fulcher [Fulbert] of Chartres, I: 308 

Fulcher of Orléans, slain, I: 109 

Fulk, king of Jerusalem, William’s error 
regarding age, I: 9; ancestry, 4607; 
as count of Anjou lands at Acre and 
weds Melisend: endowed with Tyre 
and Acre, II: 38; in siege of Damascus, 
40; unbars gate of Antioch, 45; reign, 
Bks. XIV-—XV incl.; succeeds Baldwin 
IT: character, genealogy, 473 first mar- 
riage, 48; second marriage, 49; pil- 
grimage to Jerusalem, 50; invited to 
espouse daughter of Baldwin II: Tyre 
and Acre conferred upon as wife’s 
dowry, 51; crowned, 51; death, 134 

Fulk IV, le Rechin, count of Touraine 
and Anjou, II: 47 

Fulk of Tiberias, II: 471 


Gabriel, ruler of Malatia, I: 411, 450, 
478-79, 522 


INDEX 


Gadara, II: 156 

Galen of Calvo Monte, I: 96 

Galeran, I: 540, 541, 544 

Galilee, I: 399; Amaury I advances into, 
II: 3833; overrun, 469 

Galo de Chaumont, I: 173, 287 

Galo de Lille, I: 158 

Garinus Gainart, II: 457 

Garnier de Grey, count, I: 95, 116, 229, 
287, 3993 siezes tower of David, 417; 
message to Baldwin: death, 417 

Gaston de Béarn, I: 95, 173, 357 

Gaston de Béziers, I: 95, 287, 337, 369 

Gastun, I: 124 

Gauchiers de Montjoy, II: 176 

Gaudentius, archbishop of Caesarea, II: 
118 

Gaza, seized by Omar, I: 61; rebuilt: city 
described: committed to care of Knights 
of the Temple, II: 202; attacked by 
Egyptians, 203; Amaury I engaged 
in battle at, 372-75 

Gelasius II, pope, I: 522, 5233; death, 527 

Geldemar Carpinel, I: 356, 3997” 

Genealogy: William, archbishop of Tyre, 
I: 6; Tancred, 13772; Godfrey of 
Bouillon, 385; Baldwin I, 385; Bald- 
win II, 517; Bohemond IT, Il: 33; Fulk, 
473 Ibelin, 131, 204, 301; Amaury I, 
Agnes, 301; Raymond III of Tripoli, 
402; William the Younger, marquis of 
Montferrat, 416; see also names of 
individual nobles from the West 

Genoese, capture green vase for their 
church, I: 437; in siege of Acre, 455 
(see also Fleet, Genoese); join our 
forces, II: 496 

Geoffrey, abbot of the Temple of the 
Lord, I: 9, II: 126, 277 

Geoffrey de Rancogne, IH: 175 

Geoffrey Fulcher, II: 319, 3517 

Geoffrey Martel, Il: 47, 49 

Geoffrey Plantagenet, II: 49 

Geoffrey the Monk, I: 529, II: 52 

George, St., I: 332 

George Sinaites [Georgius of Sinai], II: 
420 


Gerald, bishop of Bethlehem, II: 185, 218, 


233 
Gerald, bishop of Tripoli, II: 82 
Gerald, master of the hospital at Jeru- 
salem, I: 335, II: 245 
Gerald Jeberrus, II: 59 
Gerard, bishop of Angouléme, II: 62 
Gerard, bishop of Laodicea, II: 119, 276 


INDEX 


Gerard, prior of the Sepulchre of the 
Lord, I: 536, 556 

Gerard, the chamberlain, I: 484 

Gerard de Cherisi, I: 96, 173, 246 

Gerard de Pougy, II: 328, 333, 378 

Gerard de Roussillon, I: 96, 287, 369 

Gerard of Corice, II: 119 

Gerard of Sidon, II: 77, 218, 302; at 
council of Acre, 185; fleet placed in 
command of, 220; attempt to hinder 
progress of Egyptian fleet, 223 

Gerard of Tripoli, II: 66 

Gerasa destroyed, I: 539 

Gervaise, bishop of Rheims, I: 517; re- 
nounced office to become count of 
Rethel, 518 

Gesta Amalrici regis (William II, arch- 
bishop of Tyre), I: 15, 27, 28, 33 

Gesta Hiersolymitanorum regum (Wil- 
liam II, archbishop of Tyre), I: 15, 
16, 27) 29, 30, 33, 40 

Gesta orientalium principum (William 
II, archbishop of Tyre), I: 16, 26, 27, 
30, 40, 65 ; 

Gibelin, patriarch of Jerusalem, as arch- 
bishop of Arles, sent to Jerusalem, I: 
467, 482; character, 483; deposes 
Ebremar, 467; made patriarch, 468; 
dies, 489; Paschal II grants a privilege 
to, and his successors, 509 

Gilbert d’Assaily [Gerbert Assallit], II: 
350 

Gilbert de Lacy, II: 306 

Gilbert de Montclair, I: 175, 185 

Gilbert de Tréves, I: 356 

Gilduin, abbot-elect of St. Mary in the 
Valley of Jehoshaphat, I: 536, 556 

Giles, bishop of Tusculum, II: 37 

Gislebert, I: 369 

Godechaux [Godescalous and Gottschalk] 
de Turout, II: 393, 439 

Godehilde [Gutuera], wife of Baldwin 
I, I: 177, 415 

Godfrey, bishop of Langres, II: 185 

Godfrey, count of Vendéme, I: 442 

Godfrey, duke of Lorraine, uncle of God- 
frey of Bouillon, I: 386 

Godfrey Burel, I: 108 

Godfrey Charpulu, II: 86 

Godfrey de St. Omer, I: 525 

Godfrey d’Esch, I: 116; sent with mes- 
sage to king of Hungary, 117 

Godfrey Martel, II: 306 

Godfrey of Bouillon, first Latin ruler 
of Jerusalem, I: 43, 57) 95) 96, 2325 


535 


287, 415; pilgrimage: nobles who went 
with him, 116 ff.; biography, 1167; 
journey through Hungary, 117-20; 
legions advance into Greek empire, 121- 
28; message from Bohemond I, answer, 
129; reconciliation with Alexius, 130; 
legions encamp around Chalcedon, 132; 
conducts Bohemond to Alexius, 136; 
resumes pilgrimage: at Nicaea, 1473 
notable feat, 162; aids Bohemond, 172; 
encounters bear, 176; at Antioch, 208, 
244, 247, 287; illness, 216, 221; plan 
of retaliation for slaughter of pilgrims, 
230; clove knight in two, 234; to 
receive revenues from lands in his pos- 
session, 238; demands return of gift 
sent to Bohemond, 2383 position at 
Antioch, 262; vanquished, 264; re- 
bukes would-be deserters, 280; sugges- 
tion to Peter the Hermit, 284; routes 
strongest cohort of enemy: hurries to 
Bohemond’s aid, 292; aids in route of 
Qilij Arslan, 293; has no horses, 295; 
sets forth to aid Ezaz, 301; at Edessa, 
304; destroys fortresses of traitors, 305; 
at Maara, 310; falls into an ambush 
but escapes, 312; at Laodicea, 320; 
effects release of Guinemer, 320; invests 
Jabala: forced to abandon siege, 321; 
hurries to Arka, 322; camp at Jeru- 
salem, 349, 366; leads way into city, 
368; defender of the Holy Sepulchre: 
precarious tenure of Jerusalem and 
Antioch, 379-414; chosen ruler of Jeru- 
salem, 382; demands citadel from count 
of Toulouse, 383; genealogy, 385; 
character, 3873; in single combat, 388; 
reign, Bk. IX; death, 414; last wishes 
disregarded, 417 

Godfrey of Villeneuve, II: 475 

Gorgon, pilgrims camp in valley, I: 169 

Gormond, patriarch of Jerusalem, I: 550, 
553, 556; character, 524; at council 
of Nablus, 535; death; succeeded by 
Stephen, II: 39 

Goscelon, son of Conon de Montague, I: 
195) 197 

Goshen, II: 330 

Gottschalk, Teuton priest, outrages against 
Hungarians, I: 110; army destroyed, 
III 

Greater Syria, II: 4 

Greek Orthodox Church, preparatory 
negotiations for union with Roman 
Catholic Church, I: 20; difference in 


536 


Greek Orthodox Church (Continued) 
sacraments between Roman Catholic 
Church and, a cause of jealousy, II: 
462; effect of Manuel’s approval of 
union with Latin church, 4652 

Greeks, wretched condition: empire over- 
run by Bulgarians, I: 121; privileges 
granted to, in Jerusalem, 538; Latins 
aroused against, II: 100, 1017; up- 
rising against Latins in Constantinople, 
461 ff.; characteristics, 462; atrocities 
committed by, 464 

Gregory I (Gregory the Great), pope, I: 
62 

Gregory VII, pope, controversy with Em- 
peror Henry, I: 85; vigorous policies, 
380; rescused by Robert Guiscard, 420 

Gregory VIII, antipope, see Burdinus 

Gregory, cardinal deacon of St. Angelo 
becomes pope, see Innocent II 

Guarmond of Tiberias, II: 378 

Guelf, duke, at council of Acre, II: 184 

Guelf, seizes Adana, I: 181 

Guerricus, bishop of Petra, II: 346 

Guibert, archbishop of Ravenna, I: 86 

Guichard de Lisle [Giscard de Lille], I: 


457 

Guido, brother of Bohemond, I: 277 

Guinemer of Boulogne, I: 184, 321, 330 

Guy, count of Blandras, II: 184 

Guy de Brisebar, II: 51, 87 

Guy de Fremelle, I: 529 

Guy de Lusignan, count of Jaffa, marriage 
to Sibylla, I: 21, II: 446; in power as 
regent, I: 24-25, Il: 492-501; rift with 
Baldwin IV, I: 24, II: 501, 507-9; 
coronation, I: 25 

Guy de Troussel, I: 267 

Guy of Beirut, II: 185, 207, 218 

Guy of Florence, II: 185 

Guy of Garland, I: 96 

Guy of Ponthieu, II: 174 

Guy of Possessa, I: 96, 157, 158 

Guy of Scandalium, II: 263 


Hadrian IV, pope [Adrian III], II: 163; 
elected pope, 236; enmity between King 
William of Sicily and, 2373; negotiates 
with both emperors to seize Sicily, 238; 
Patriarch Fulcher and bishops of the 
East visit, 245; Emperor Manuel at 
suggestion of, invades Apulia, 247; 
receives Hospitallers cordially: bribed 
by gifts, refuses justice to Fulcher, 249; 


INDEX 


concludes peace with king of Sicily, 
250; death, 281 

Hadrian, emperor of the Romans, moved 
Jerusalem to top of mountain, I: 341; 
grants privileges to Beirut, 484 

Haifa, bestowed upon Tancred, I: 399; 
relinquished, 428 

Hakim, caliph of Egypt, I: 65 

Hama, II: 93, 370; taken over by Saladin, 
405, 409 

Hantab, fortress, II: 209, 210 

Haran of Mesopotamia, history: siege, I: 
456-59; seized by Saladin, 480 

Harim, attacked by Fulk, II: 57; fortress 
of, seized by Nureddin, 199; Baldwin 
III lays siege to, 200; captured, 268; 
delivered to prince of Antioch, 271; 
besieged by Nureddin, 306-7; count of 
Flanders attacks, 425; task abandoned, 


434 
Hartman [Hermann], count, I: 113, 159, 


295 

Harun-al-Rashid, king of Persia, I: 35, 
63 

Havedic, II: 15 

Hebron, tombs of patriarchs, I: 340; mas- 
sacre of Christians, II: roq-5; church 
established, 346 

Hélie [Elia], count of Maine, II: 48, 49 

Hélie, son of King Fulk, II: 49 

Helim, I: 513 

Heliopolis, see Baalbec 

Henry IV, emperor of the Romans, I: 
378; controversy with Pope Gregory 
VII, 85; victory over Rudolph, 389 

Henry V, emperor of the Romans, I: 86, 
527, Il: 492; death, 31 

Henry I, king of England, I: 398, I: 49, 


59 

Henry II, king of England, II: 49; mar- 
riage, 1967; Amaury I and bishops ap- 
peal to, 360, 377 

Henry, bishop of Toul, II: 184 

Henry, count of Troyes, at council of 
Acre, Il: 185; embassy sent to, 360; 
arrives in Syria, 443; goes with king to 
Tiberias, 444; negotiations with duke 
of Burgundy, 445 

Henry, duke of Austria, II: 184 

Henry, duke of Burgundy, II: 385; agrees 
to come to kingdom: promised king’s 
sister as wife: refuses to fulfil promise, 
4363; negotiations renewed: declines to 
come, 445 

Henry, duke of Louvain, II: 497 


INDEX 


Henry son of Henry I, king of England, 
II: 50 

Henry d’Esch, I: 95, 116, 127, 159, 287; 
gains possession of tower, 272; saved 
from hunger, 295; death, 299 

Henry the Lion, I: 77, II: 385, 3932 

Heraclius, patriarch of Jerusalem, suc- 
ceeds Amalrich (q.v.), I: 22, II: 451; 
succeeded Hernesius as archbishop of 
Caesarea, 412; delegate to general 
synod at Rome, 436; sent to Antioch 
to remedy conditions, 455; intercedes 
for Guy de Lusignan on bended knees: 
forestalls movement to invite princes 
beyond mountains to aid kingdom, 508 

Heraclius, emperor of the Romans, I: 60 

Herbert, bishop of Tiberias, II: 247 

Hereditary succession, I: 519”, 555” 

Herluin, I: 282 

Herman de Canni, I: 134 

Hermann, margrave of Verona, II: 184 

Hermengarde, II: 47 

Hernesius, archbishop of Caesarea, II: 271, 
344; embassy to princes of West, 360; 
dies: succeeded by Heraclius, 412 

Hiaroquin, Turkish satraps, determine to 
seize Jerusalem, II: 215; defeated, 216 

Hierapolis, besieged by Balak, II: 16; 
bishoprics, 64; church held by infidels, 
212 

Hims, bishoprics, II: 65; Emperor John’s 
promise to restore to prince of Antioch, 
93; destroyed, 370; taken by Saladin, 
405, 409; refugees beg aid: hostages 
in citadel, 409 

Hippodromes, II: 450 

Hodierna, daughter of Baldwin II, I: 522, 
TI: 213, 214, 283, 403 

Hodierna, wife of Herbrand of Herges, I: 
517 

Holy Lance, see Lance of the Lord 

Honorius II, pope, I: 525, If: 22, 36, 61 

Hospitallers, fortress granted to, II: 82; 
altercation between patriarch and, 239- 
40; origin and development, 241 ff.; 
granted half of Banyas, 256; supplies 
captured by Nureddin, they return city 
to Humphrey of Toron, 2573; responsi- 
bility for campaign in Egypt, 35035 ef- 
fort to avoid encounter with Turks, 447 

Hubald, bishop of Ostia, succeeds Alex- 
ander III as Pope Lucius III, I: 457 

Hugh, bishop of Jabala, II: 119 

Hugh, count of Jaffa, accused before king, 
II: 70; marriage to Emelota, 713; chal- 


537 


lenged by Walter of Caesarea, 72; takes 
refuge with enemy, 73; exiled: 
wounded, 74; in Apulia, 75; granted 
county of Gargan: death, 76 

Hugh, count of Rethel, I: 95, 517 

Hugh Cholet, count of Roussy, II: 70 

Hugh de Lusignan, brother of Raymond 
of Toulouse, I: 442 

Hugh de Lusignan the Elder, surnamed 
the Brown, pilgrimage, II: 306; cast 
into prison, 308; father of Guy, 446 

Hugh de Payens, I: 525, II: 40 

Hugh de St. Omer (Falkenberg), I: 428, 
447; builds fortress: battle with Da- 
mascenes, 469; death, 470 

Hugh de Vermandois, the Great, brother 
of King Philip I, I: 95; in prison, | 
1223 Godfrey demands his release, 123; 
liberated, 124; at Durazzo, 149; at 
Nicaea, 158; aids Bohemond, 172; at 
Antioch, 207, 230, 232, 244, 2893 
command, 286; position in battle for- 
mation, 288; puts enemy to flight, 293; 
sent as envoy to Alexius I, 298; under- 
takes a fresh crusade, 430; death, 433 

Hugh d@’Ibelin of Ramlah, at Ascalon, II: 
218; taken prisoner, 261; released: 
visits Emperor Manuel, 279; weds 
Agnes, former wife of Amaury I, 301; 
completes bridge over Nile, 327; sent 
to protect Cairo, 328, 339 

Hugh du Puiset, H: 70, 71 

Hugh Embriacus, I: 476, 477 

Hugh of Caesarea, envoy to caliph of 
Egypt, II: 319; taken prisoner, 332; 
confers with Shirkuh about peace, 339; 
arranges terms of treaty, 340 

Hugh of Creona, II: 332 

Hugh of St. Pol, count, I: 95, 116, 169, 
232, 287, 369 

Hugh of Tiberias, II: 443, 474 

Hugo, archbishop of Edessa, II: 143 

Huitiers, count of Rethel, I: 518 

Humphrey, son of Ralph, I: 134 

Humphrey of Montescaglioso, I: 134 

Humphrey of Toron, the elder, II: 19 

Humphrey of Toron, the younger, the 
royal constable, Il: 87, 200, 205, 207, 
210, 211, 274, 401; at council of Acre, 
185; at siege of Ascalon, 218; grants to 
Hospitallers half of Banyas, 256; seeks 
wife for Baldwin III, 265; Banyas a 
possession of, 309; with Amaury I in 
Egypt, 326, 3533; put in charge of 
army, 388; favors regency of Raymond 


538 


Humphrey of Loron, the younger (Cont.) 
IIL of Tripoli, 400; accused of friend- 
ship with Saladin, 410; weds Philippa, 
416; illness, 417, 4273; wounded pro- 
tecting king, 439; death, 440 

Humphrey III of Toron, betrothed to 
Isabelle, sister of Baldwin IV, II: 451; 
made exchange of patrimony with king, 
452; Petra attacked during nuptial 
celebration, 499 

Hungary, Walter the Penniless in, I: 97; 
Peter the Hermit’s march through, 99; 
outrages of Gottschalk in, 110; letter of 
king to Gottschalk: host destroyed, 111 
pilgrims ask permission to cross, 113; 
Wieselburg besieged, 114; closed be- 
cause of outrages of Christians, 115; 
Emperor Conrad honorably received, 
Il: 165 


Ibelin, I: 396, 546, If: 130 

Iberians, crush pride of Persians, I: 490 

Ibn Jubair, I: 307” 

Iconium, pilgrims come to, I: 1773 in- 
vaded by Nureddin, I: 282; Emperor 
Manuel ignominiously defeated at, 4145 
antagonism of sultan, II: 166-67 

Ida, mother of Duke Godfrey, I: 
prediction, 387 

Il-Ghazi [Gazi], invades land of Anti- 
och, I: 528-34; again invades land, 
536; death, 537 

Innocent II, pope, II: 61; letters to Wil- 
liam, patriarch of Jerusalem, 63, 65; 
commands Fulcher’s suffragans to obey 
him, 65; letters to patriarch of Antioch 
and to bishops retained by patriarch of 
Jerusalem, 67; favors adversaries of 
Patriarch Ralph, 114; sends legate to 
bring patriarch’s case to a conclusion, 
117 

Investiture Struggle, I: 85, 309, 5277 

Irene, wife of Emperor Manuel, II: 2877, 
288, 450 

Iron bridge, fortress, II: 291 

Isaac, son of Emperor John, II: 123; 
claim to throne set aside, 128; daughter 
marries Baldwin III, 274 

Isabella, daughter of Joscelin II, sent as 
hostage to emperor, II: 124 

Isabelle, sister of Baldwin IV, weds 
Humphrey III of Toron, II: 451, 499 

Isoard, count of Die, I: 95, 287, 370 

Itiers de Meingnac, II: 177 

Iven, I: 500 


386, 


INDEX 


Ives de Nesle, count of Soissons, II: 185, 
205, 213 

Iveta, daughter of Baldwin II, I: 522, I: 
271%, 283, 3087, 399; superior of con- 
vent at Bethany, 132 

Ivo, I: 266 

Izz-al-Din, IT: 457-58” 

Izz-al-Din abu-al-Asakin, II: 967 


Jabala [Gabulum], I: 321; given to Alice, 
II: 45; destroyed by earthquake, 370 

Jacob’s ford, fortress beyond Jordan, built, 
II: 4373 committed to care of Templars: 
razed by Saladin, 444 

Jaffa, I: 339; fleet from Genoa arrives 
at, 355) 4333 Egyptian fleet appears: 
city abandoned, 357; part of, resigned 
to church, 404; sinister story terrifies 
citizens, 441; battle near, 448; king 
commands all forces to assemble at, 
464; besieged by Ascalonites, 502; be- 
stowed upon Hugh du Puiset: later 
given to Count Albert, Il: 71; besieged: 
nobles treat for peace, 73; given to 
William of Montferrat, 415 

Jawhar [Johar], founder of Cairo, II: 
316; subjugates Egypt, 324 

Jehoshaphat, valley of, monks in train of 
Godfrey located in, I: 392 

Jericho, I: 339, 348 

Jerusalem, prospects of kingdom steadily 
improving, I: 12; Saladin’s invasion of, 
19; court party alienating loyalty of 
barons, 23; captured by Saladin, 26; 
first Latin ruler, 43, 57, 95, 96, 232; 
287, 415 (see also Godfrey of Bouil- 
lon); plans for relief of, 60-115; in- 
vaded by Arabs, 62; Temple of the 
Lord rebuilt by Omar, 63; under power 
of caliph of Egypt: destruction of 
church, 65; conditions of Christians 
in, 67, 79) 333) 354, 4053 church of 
Holy Resurrection built, 70, 343; de- 
livered again into hand of Turk, 79; 
aid given by monastery of St. Mary of 
the Latins, 80; tribute imposed on Chris- 
tians who entered, 80, 82; coming of 
Peter the Hermit, 82; fortified, 333; 
army arrives, 3373; situation and sur- 
rounding country, 339 ff.; in arid spot 
without water, 340, 346, 352; names 
by which city has been called, 340; 
history, description, 341 ff.; siege and 
capture by Crusaders, 349-76; city 
cleansed, 377; Godfrey elected ruler, 


INDEX 


demands surrender of citadel, 383; 
Syrian Christians introduced into, 507; 
citizens granted full liberty, 537; pro- 
visions brought in without tax, 538; 
legate holds synod, dedicates Temple 
of the Lord, II: 122 

Jerusalem, patriarchate, I: 384, 402, 468, 
489, 523, Il: 43, 161; see also Amal- 
rich; Arnulf; Daimbert; Fulcher; Gi- 
belin; Gormond; Heraclius; Stephen; 
William 

Jevelino, satrap, II: 368, 428 

Jikirmish, lord of Mosul, I: 4597 

John, St., the Almoner, I: 80; altar in 
honor of, II: 244 

John II Comnenus, Byzantine emperor, 
called Porphyrogenitus, sent as hostage 
to Godfrey, I: 130; returned, 132; 
succeeds Alexius I: character, 
marches upon Antioch and seizes all 
Cilicia: recalls agreement with Alexius, 
II: 83; treaty with Raymond of Poitou, 
prince of Antioch, 93; seeks to extend 
influence over Latin States, 94-1353 
lays siege to Shayzar, 94; Antioch, 97, 
1023; again in Syria, summons prince 
to carry out covenant, 123-26; fatally 
wounded, 127; proclaims Manuel em- 
peror: dies, 128; appearance, charac- 
ter, 129 , 

John, Greek patriarch of Antioch, vol- 
untarily leaves office, succeeded by 
Bernard, I: 297 

John, bishop of Acre, II: 67 

John, bishop of Banyas, II: 360 

John, bishop of Beirut, II: 162 

John, cardinal-priest of church of Rome, 
sent as legate to Syria, raises altercation 
among bishops, II: 285 

John, subdeacon of holy Roman church, 
Il: 465 

John Carianis, I: 69 

John Contostephanus, II: 2877 

John Gaetanus, see Gelasius II 

John Gomani [Gotmanus], II: 152, 261 

John of Arsuf, II: 378 

John of Pisa, archdeacon of Tyre, II: 162 

John of St. Martin, II: 249 

John of Salisbury, I: 34, 37 

John the Megaltriarch [sic], Il: 420 

John the protosebastos, Il: 129, 2773 
daughter, Maria, weds Amaury I, 3443 
sent to meet Amaury, 379; generosity, 
383; killed, 414 

Jordan river, I: 27 


5233 ° 


539 


Joscelin I (de Courtenay), count of 
Edessa, extensive possessions conferred 
upon, I: 450; character, 451; in siege 
of Haran, 456; taken prisoner, 459; 
returns: stirs up war against Tancred, 
474; forced to leave Edessa, 498; 
Tiberias granted to, 499; effort to 
put Baldwin, count of Edessa, on 
throne, 520; made count of Edessa, 
522; aid sought by prince of Antioch, 
§28; captured by Turks, 540; im- 
prisoned in Kharpart, 541; freed, sets 
out to bring aid to king, 542; collects 
large force, 544; alarmed at disaster, 
disbands army, 545; defeats Balak, II: 
16; estate near Tyre, 20; goes to aid 
of Antioch, 24; enmity between Bohe- 
mond II and, 34; in siege of Damascus, 
40; unbars gate of Antioch for king, 
4553 goes on litter to meet enemy, 51; 
puts them to flight: dies, 52 

Joscelin II, count of Edessa, character, II: 
52, 53, 2013; appearance, marriage, 
children, 53; tries to oppose King Fulk, 
54; refugees at Montferrand appeal to, 
for aid, 87; goes to relief of king, 88; 
trouble with Emperor John, 94-99; 
comes to aid siege of Banyas, 109; 
invites patriarch of Antioch to visit 
him, 116; emperor demands hostages 
of, 124; feud between Raymond and, 
140, 1413; gives up home in Edessa, 
140; Citizens appeal to, 157; appears 
before Edessa, 158; pursued by Nured- 
din: army massacred, 160; besieged by 
sultan of Iconium, releases prisoners 
and concludes peace: goes to Antioch 
to thank king, 200; captured, dies, 
201 

Joscelin III, count of Edessa, perpetrated 
coup d’état by which Guy de Lusignan 
was made king, I: 25; genealogy: 
seneschal of Amaury I, II: 3013; cast 
into prison, 308; released, 414; goes 
out against Saladin, 430; in Constan- 
tinople, 453; shamelessly influenced 
Baldwin IV, 460; prowess in battle, 497 

Joscelin of Samosata, II: 334 

Joscelin Pisellus, II: 274, 277 

Joscius, bishop of Acre, succeeds William 
in office, II: 386; delegate to general 
synod at Rome, 436 

Joseph, made inhabitants of Egypt subject 
to the pharaoh, II: 322; built dykes, 
levelled off ground, 330 


540 


Joufier de Lastours [Guelferus of the 
Towers], I: 311 

Jubail [Biblos], I: 330, 476; surrendered 
to Genoese, 4773; bishoprics, II: 66 


Kafartab [Cafarda], I: 504, II: 24, 33 

Kamil [Chemel], son of Shawar, II: 
326, 328 

Karbuqa [Corbagath], sent to aid An- 
tioch (q.v.), lays siege to Edessa, I: 
245; Christians anxious over approach 
of, 2453; besieges Antioch, 262-94 

Kerak, see Petra of the Desert 

Kharpart [Quartapiert], Baldwin II cast 
into fortress, I: 540; Joscelin and 
Galeran imprisoned in, 541 

Kingship, hereditary succession, I: 5197, 
555% 

Knights Templars, established, I: 524; 
habit assigned, 525; Gaza committed 
to care of, II: 202; cupidity at Ascalon: 
suffer death, 227; carry off plunder, 
252; sell prisoner, 253; brothers of, 
surrender stronghold and are hanged, 
312; decline to take part in campaign 
against Egypt, 350; stronghold at Gaza 
given to, 3743 dispossessed of holdings 
in Cilicia, 387; kill envoy of Assassins, 
392-94; join Baldwin IV against Sala- 
din, 429; effort to avoid encounter with 
Turks, 447 

Kogh Vasil [Corasilius], I: 304, 451” 

Kurds, sent to Syria, I: 245 


La Boquea, II: 265 

Lambert, archdeacon of Antioch, II: 61, 
113, 117, 118, 119 

Lambert, bishop of Ostia, elected pope, IT: 
22; see also Honorius II 

Lambert, son of Conon de Montague, I: 
287, 369 

Lambert the Poor, I: 267 

Lance of the Lord discovered, I: 280, 
287; doubts arise, 324; Amaury per- 
mitted to view, II: 381 

Laodicea of Asia Minor, I: 449 

Laodicea of Syria, I: 320, 401; Tancred 
receives control of, 449; destroyed by 
earthquake, II: 370 

Lateran Council, Third, I: 20, 26, II: 
2817, 436, 438 

Lawrence, T. E., I: 46 

Lebanon, forest of, II: 255 

Leo, pope, I: 133, I: 166 


INDEX 


Leo the Armenian, II: 52 

Le Prevost, A., I: 44 

Letard, prior to the canons of Nazareth, 
made archbishop, II: 273 

Little Gerin, II: 495 

Locusts, plague of, I: 535 

Longobards, join our forces, II: 496 

Lorraine, duke of, see Godfrey of Bouillon 

Lothair, emperor, II: 31 

Lotharingians, II: 208 

Louis VII, king of France, wears token 
of cross, II: 164; disaster to army in 
Asia Minor, 169-78; king and nobles 
leave people nearly perished, go by 
boat to Syria, 179; quarrel with Ray- 
mond at Antioch, 179-81; proceeds to 
Jerusalem, 182; at council of Acre, 
185; tarries in Syria, 1953; decides to 
put wife away: espouses Constance 
[Maria], daughter of emperor of 
Spain, 196; Amaury I and bishops ap- 
peal to, 360, 377; dies: succeeded by 
Philip II, 451 

Lucius III, pope, succeeds Alexander III 
(q.v.), IL: 457 

Ludolf, I: 369 

Ludovic de Moncons, I: 287, 369 

Luke, apostle, I: 200 

Lycaonia, pilgrims cross, I: 177 

Lydda, I: 332; seized by Jevelino, II: 428 


Maara, siege and capture, I: 310; strife 
between count of Toulouse and Bohe- 
mond I, 312; granted to bishop of 
Albara: destroyed, 313, 504 

Machedolus, begs emperor to save Shay- 
zar, II: 96 

Mahadan, son of Shawar, II: 328, 333 

Mahalla, island, II: 327 

Mahaza, son of sultan, II: 351 

Mainard, bishop of Beirut, II: 411 

Mainz, outrages of pilgrims at, I: 113 

Majd al-Din [Megedin], II: 284 

Malatia, I: 411, 478 

Malih [Milo], Armenian renegade, way- 
lays Stephen of Blois, I: 384; drives 
out Thomas: dispossesses Knights 
Templars: alliance with Nureddin, 386- 
87 

Malik Salah [Melechsalah], son of Nu- 
reddin, Saladin rises against, II: 408; 
then makes peace with, 425; permitted 
to retain only a few strongholds, 426, 
457; dies: bequeathes patrimony to 
Thebeth, 457 


INDEX 


Malik Shah [Solimannus], sultan of 
Persia, I: 78, 204; territory seized by, 
153) 223 

Mamilia, wife of Hugh du Puiset, I: 
70; becomes wife of Count Albert, 71 

Mamistra, seized by Tancred, I: 181; 
Baldwin arrives, 184; earthquake, 500; 
seized by Thoros, II: 275 

Mamluks, TI: 431 

Manasses, count of Rethel, I: 517 

Manasses of Herges, the constable, I: 517, 
II: 142, 185, 204, 206 

Manuel I Comnenus, Byzantine emperor, 
I: 13; friendship for West, 20; with 
Emperor John (g.v.) in Cilicia, II: 
123; proclaimed emperor, 128; rela- 
tions with Emperor Conrad (q.v.), 
166-743; sends army to Antioch, 208; 
Edessa surrendered to, 209; urged to 
seize Sicily, 238; invades Apulia, 247; 
comes to Antioch, 275; reception of 
king, 277; Thoros swears fealty to, 
278; entry into Antioch, 279; liberal- 
ity toward citizens: skill as surgeon, 
280; arranges with Nureddin for re- 
lease of prisoners, 280; returns to his 
own realm, 281; arouses wrath of 
count of Tripoli, 288-91; struggle for 
Egypt (g.v.) in alliance with Amaury I 

qg-¥.), 344-96; treaty with Amaury for 
conquest of Egypt, 347-48; sends fleet 
to Syria (see also Fleet, Greek), 361- 
69; negotiations with Amaury at Con- 
stantinople, 378-83; defeated ignomin- 
iously at Iconium, 414-15; negotiations 
for Egyptian expedition frustrated by 
Philip of Flanders, 420-23; death, 452; 
succeeded by Alexius II, 453; attitude 
toward Latins, 461 

Manuel, son of elder Andronicus, II: 453 

Manuel Sebastos [Manuel Comnenus], 
TI: 344 

Manzikart, battle of, I: 78 

Marash, pilgrims arrive at, I: 177, 195; 
destroyed by earthquake, 500; falls 
under power of Nurredin, II: 282 

Maria, daughter of Emperor Manuel 
weds Renier, son of William of Mont- 
ferrat, II: 450; conspires against Alex- 
ius II, 453 

Maria, niece of Emperor Manuel weds 
Amaury I, Il: 344; weds Balian d’Ibe- 
lin, 302, 425 

Maria of Antioch, marries Emperor Man- 
uel, II: 288; regent, 461 


541 


Maronites, return to unity of Catholic 
Church, II: 458 

Marrim, forest, II: 212 

Martian, emperor, I: 133, II: 166 

Mary, daughter of Emperor Maurice, I: 
62 

Mary Magdalene, 
243 

Mas Latrie, L. de, I: 41, 44 

Matilda, daughter of Fulk, II: 50 

Matilda, daughter of Henry I of England, 
II: 49 

Matilda, wife of castellan of Vitry, I: 


built, I: 


convent 


517 

Matilda of Boulogne, I: 386 

Matthew Paris, I: 42 

Maurice, emperor of the Romans, slain, 
I: 62 

Maurice, Greek noble, IT: 361 

Maurice, nephew of Paganus, II: 499 

Maurice of Montreal, II: 218 

Mawdud [Menduc], invades kingdom, I: 
493; defeats Baldwin I, 4943 assassi- 
nated, 495 

Maximus, bishop of Armenia, II: 122 

Maximus, bishop of Jerusalem, I: 66 

Medan, plain of, I: 27 

Melisend, queen of Jerusalem, daughter 
of Baldwin II, I: 522; marriage: 
dowry: crowned, II: 51; good fame be- 
smirched, 71, 76; builds convent at 
Bethany, 132; joint rule with Bald- 
win III, 135-39; discord between 
mother and son, 204-7; effort to recon- 
cile Raymond II of Tripoli and his 
wife, 214; stronghold recovered 
through efforts of, 269; influenced 
election of Amalrich to patriarchate, 
271; illness: wise rule, 283; death: 
burial place, 291 

Melisend, daughter of Raymond II of 
Tripoli, II: 215; jilted by Manuel, 288- 
89 

Melisend, countess of Rethel, mother of 
Baldwin II, I: 517 

Memphis, II: 316 

Mergisafar, II: 28, 40 

Mesopotamia, invaded by Turks, I: 472; 
a province of Syria, I: 4; entered by 
Saladin, 480 

Michael Hydruntinus of Otranto, II: 347 

Michel, lake, II: 259, 260 

Milon de Plancy, I: 16, 17, Il: 326; evil 
council, 354; refused citizens of Gaza 
admission to fortress, 374, 3753 affairs 


542 


Milon de Plancy (Continued) 
of kingdom brought under direction 
of, 400, 401; character: death, 401 

Mirabel, besieged by Baldwin III, II: 206 

Modestus, bishop of Jerusalem, I: 60, 63, 
66 

Monachus, archbishop elect of Caesarea, 
II: 456 

Monastery of the Latins, II: 243 

Montferrand, besieged by Zangi, II: 56, 
85, 87, 89, 90 

Montreal, fortress, built in Arabia Ter- 
tia, I: 506; besieged by Saladin, II: 
388 

Morel, Arab satrap, II: 155 

Morfia, daughter of Gabriel of Malatia, 
wife of Baldwin du Bourg, I: 450, 522 

Mosul, Saladin takes fortresses of prince 
of, corrupts people, HI: 480 

Mount Cassius, I: 201 

Mount Galaad, fortress near, besieged, 
II: 103; captured, 105 

Mount Lebanon, victory of Raymond II 
at, II: 82 

Mount Nigra, I: 531 

Mount of Olives, I: 359; sign from 
heaven appears on, 366, 367 

Mount of the Pilgrims, I: 454, 462; bat- 
tle near, II: 82 

Mount Orontes, I: 201 

Mount Parnassus, I: 201 

Mount Tabor, II: 495 

Muhammad, pernicious doctrines of, I: 
60, 61; prophets of, rejected by Anti- 
och, 241; successors, II: 323 

Mv’in al-Din [Mehen-Eddin], see Anar 

Muizz [Mehezedin-alla], ruler in Africa, 
II: 316; subjugates Egypt through 
Jawhar, 324 

Mujir al-Din [Mejeredin], king of Da- 
mascus, II: 146, 148 

Muslims, causes for change in relations of 
Latins and, between First and Third 
Crusades, II: 406 ff. 

Musrat al-Din [Mirmiran], Aleppo sur- 
rendered to, II: 268 

Mustansir (Bomensor Elmostensab), I: 


407 
Myrokephalion, disaster of, II: 4157 


Nablus, council held at, I: 535; pillaged 
and burned, II: 88; assigned to Meli- 
send, 205; seized by Baldwin III, 206; 
given to Balian d’Ibelin, 425 


INDEX 


Najm al-Din [Negem-ed-Din], II: 282, 
358 

Names of places and persons, translitera- 
tion of, I: 44 ff. 

Nasr al-Din [Nosceredinus], II: 251; falls 
into hands of Templars, 2523 sold, 253 

Nazarenes become known as Christians, 
I: 200 

Nazareth, I: 399, HI: 5 

Negem-ed-Din, see Najm al-Din 

Neva, Nureddin decides to invest for- 
tress, II: 197; Raymond, prince of Anti- 
och, slain, his forces flee, 198 

Nicaea, pilgrim armies to meet at, I: 96; 
depredations of Peter the Hermit’s 
army, 106; pilgrim bands reach, 147; 
entire host stationed before, 151; siege, 
152-73; description of city, 1523 coun- 
cils of, 152”, II: 167; conferred upon 
Qilij Arslan by Malik Shah, 204 

Nicephorus, patriarch, I: 70 

Nicephorus I, emperor, I: 121 

Nicephorus III Botoniates, I: 123 

Nichosius, gift to Godfrey, I: 238 

Nicopolis [Emmaus], I: 335, 339 

Niketas [Nichita], duke of the Bulgar- 
ians, I: 100 

Nile, river, Egyptians break dykes, I: 
302; Christians build bridge over, 325, 
3273; number of mouths, 327 

Nineveh, II: 409 

Nish, I: 121, 122; Peter the Hermit 
reaches, 100; disturbance between pil- 
grims and Bulgarians, 101 

Nocquinus, II: 234 

Norwegians, fleet of, arrives in Syria, I: 
486 

Nuara, Damascenes at, I: 106 

Nureddin, sultan of Syria, I: 43; succeeds 
Zangi, II: 145; distrusted by Anar, 
148; seizes throne of Damascus, 149; 
arrives at Bostrum, 153; attacks Edessa, 
1593 pursues Joscelin, massacres his 
army, 160; invades land of Antioch, 
196; victory at Neva, 1973; treatment 
of region, 199, 208; stops exodus from 
Edessa, 210; seizes whole region, 212; 
learns of death of Anar, marches 
against Damascus, 224; city surrenders 
voluntarily, 225; besieges Banyas, 225; 
captures Hospitallers’ supplies: besieges 
Banyas, 257-58; lays ambush in for- 
est, 259; again besieges Banyas, 262- 
64; serious malady, 265-66; lays siege 
to cave near Sawad, 272; Emperor 


INDEX 


Manuel arranges with, for release of 
prisoners, 280; invades Iconium, 282; 
tribute to Baldwin III, 294; sends 
Shirkuh into Egypt to aid Shawar, 303, 
352; defeated near Tripoli, 306; lays 
siege to Harim: departs, 307; captures 
Banyas, 309-11; collusion with An- 
dronicus, 345; becomes a serious men- 
ace, 360; lingers in vicinity of Banyas, 
3833 Malih joins forces with: they rav- 
age Antioch, 386; lays siege to Petra, 
387-88; death: character, 394; widow 
concludes truce with Amaury, 395; son 
of Kara Arslan, 490 


Obelet, II: 503 

Octavianus, see Victor IV, anti-pope 

Octavius, II: 249 

Odo, archbishop of Tyre, I: 5527, II: 20, 
62 

Odo, bishop of Bierut, II: 457 

Odo, bishop of Sidon, consecration, II: 
414 

Old Man, chief of the Assassins, II: 391 

Omar, son of Catab (Khattab), II: 323; 
conquest of Syria, I: 60; circumstances 
which enabled him to seize East, 61; 
ordered Temple of the Lord at Jeru- 
salem rebuilt, 63, 344 

Orestus, I: 66 

Orontes, river, I: 198 

Otto, bishop of Freising, II: 184 

Otto of Risberg, II: 289 


Paganus [Payens], II: 127, 185, 499 
Pakrad [Pancratius], I: 188, 238, 304 
Palaeologus, Lord [George Palaeologus], 


Paramus, Turkish satrap, II: 172 

Paschal II, I: 482, 483; magnanimity to- 
ward Arnulf, 506; privilege granted 
to Gibelin and his successors, 509; re- 
sponse to accusations of patriarch of 
Antioch, 510, 511; letter to Baldwin I, 
512; death, 523 

Patritius, count, II: 49 

Pavilion of Karbugqa, I: 294 

Payens, king’s chancellor, I: 536, 553 

Payens, see Paganus 

“Peasants Crusade,” I: 97”; see also Cru- 
sading expeditions 

Pelagonia, I: 134 

Pepper, found at Caesarea, I: 438” 

Persia, strife between Egypt and, I: 65; 
provinces seized by sultan, 153, 223; 


543 


promises assistance to Yaghi Siyan, 
205; prince of, sends host to Syria, 239, 
245 

Persians, condition of Christians under 
rule of, I: 70; seized country as far as 
Hellespont, 77; regarded with suspi- 
cion by Egyptian monarch, 223; in- 
solence, 490; refuse battle, 4913; again 
invade kingdom, 493 

Pestilence, at Antioch, I: 215, 220, 299, 
304, 314; at St. Simeon, 309 

Peter, apostle, I: 200, 283, TI: 448 

Peter, archbishop of Apamea, I: 531 

Peter, archbishop of Lyons, TI: 110, 117 

Peter, archbishop of Tyre (Peter of 
Barcelona), I: 9 ff. passim, Il: 220, 
225, 228, 229, 246, 273, 285, 436, 
456; replaces Ralph, the king’s chan- 
cellor (g.v.) as archbishop, 163; at 
siege of Ascalon, 218, 220, 228, 229; 
dies: succeeded by Frederick, 304 

Peter, abbot of Mt. Tabor, I: 536 

Peter, prior of the canons of the Holy 
Sepulchre, see Peter, archbishop of 
Tyre 

Peter, count of Stenay, brother of Count 
Reinard, I: 116, 175, 287 

Peter Armoin, II: 120, 123 

Peter Bartholomew, revelation, I: 280; 
goes through ordeal of fire, 3243; death, 
325 

Peter de Courtenay, brother of Louis VII, 
TI: 443 

Peter Latinator, I: 45 

Peter Leo, chosen pope, to succeed Ho- 
norius II, I: 61 

Peter of Narbonne, bishop of Albara, I: 
309; receives Maara, 313, 370; on 
march to Jerusalem, 315, 316; at 
Arka, 328; Tower of David placed in 
charge of, 384 

Peter the Hermit, I, 43, 3593; coming of: 
conference with Patriarch Simeon, 82; 
offers to help Jerusalem, 83; revela- 
tion made to, 84; received by Pope 
Urban II, 85; exhortations in West, 
$7; joins pilgrimage, 96; disturbances 
between followers of, and Bulgarians, 
98, 100, 101, 102, 104; proceeds to 
Constantinople, 104; encamps_ in 
Bithynia: depredations of army around 
Nicaea, 106; Teuton followers perish, 
1073 army, aroused against Qilij Ars- 
lan, is destroyed, 108; joins other lead- 
ers: tells of disaster, 147; followers im- 


544 


Peter the Hermit (Continued) 
prisoned by Qilij Arslan restored, 166; 
sent as envoy to Karbuqa, 282; his 
conditions spurned, battle is declared, 
284; tribute to, 376 

Petra of the Desert, II: 127; church estab- 
lished at, 346; Nureddin lays siege to, 
387; Baldwin IV camps near, 469; 
Saladin takes by force, 498-500; Bald- 
win IV goes to relief of, 503 

Pharamia, seized by Baldwin I, I: 515 

Pharas, tower of, II: 336 

Philae [Phium], II: 330 

Philip I, king of France, I: 87, 378; put 
aside wife for Bertrada, II: 48 

Philip II, king of France, 
Louis VII, Il: 451 

Philip, bishop elect of Beauvais, arrives 
in Syria, IT: 443 

Philip, count of Flanders, I: 18, 19, II: 
49; embassy sent to, 360; arrives in 
kingdom: refuses power and adminis- 
tration of realm, 4173; refuses cam- 
paign into Egypt, 418, 423; lays siege 
to Harim, 425; forsakes siege for de- 
lights of idleness, 434; sets sail for 
home, 435 

Philip, son of Herod, Hl: 309 

Philip, son of Philip I of France, I: 48 

Philip of Nablus, IT: 142, 206, 218, 260, 
378, 452, 499; at council of Acre, 
185; joins Amaury I in Egypt, 326 

Philippa, daughter of Prince Raymond, 
weds Humphrey of Toron, I: 416; 
death, 417 

Phocas Caesar, I: 62 

Phoenicia, II: 4; earthquake, 370 

Phoenicians, II: 1 

Physicians, Eastern princes scorn practice 
of Latin, II: 292 

Piacenza, council of, I: 87 

Pierre, son of Gisla, I: 266 

Pigeons, deliver message, I: 302 

Pilgrims, treatment at gates of Jerusalem 
(g.v.), I: 79; condition on arrival, 80; 
wore sign of cross, 93; convent estab- 
lished in Jerusalem to minister to 
women pilgrims, 243; condition of 
earlier, on reaching Holy City: hos- 
pital offered food and shelter, 244 

Pirie-Gordon, H., I: 3, 41 

Pisans, join our forces, II: 496 

Pisidia, lack of water: suffering of army, 
I: 173 

Poitou, count of, see William of Poitou 


succeeds 


INDEX 


Pons, count of Tripoli, marries widow 
of Tancred, I: 492; goes to aid of Anti- 
och, 501, 528, 5313 declines service to 
Baldwin II, 539; at siege of Tyre, II: 
11, 14; bestows knighthood upon 
bearer of Balak’s head, 16; goes to aid 
of Antioch, 24; seizes Raphania, 30; in 
siege of Damascus, 40; opposition to 
King Fulk, 54; put to flight, 55; king 
goes to aid of, 56; taken prisoner, 
slain, 82 

Pons de Balazune, I: 323 

Purple, Tyrian, II: 2 

Puthaha, battle of, II: 273 


Qilij Arslan [Soliman], puts Teutons to 
sword, I: 1073; victorious over Chris- 
tians: lays siege to Civitot, 109; rul- 
ing at Nicaea (q.v.), gathers army of 
Turks to fight against pilgrims, 
152 ff.; encourages citizens under at- 
tack, 154; army defeated, 156; wife 
and sons taken prisoners, 165; re- 
stored, 168; with great host he again 
encounters Christians, 168; army per- 
ishes, 171; Nicaea conferred upon by 
Malik Shah, 204; attacks at Antioch, 
291; fierce onset on Bohemond, 292- 
93; Alexius invokes aid of, 470 

Qutb al-Din, brother of Nureddin, II: 


408, 409 


Rainbald, count of Orange, I: 95, 287, 
369 

Rainulf, brother of Richard of the Prin- 
cipate, I: 134 

Ralph, patriarch of Antioch, archbishop 
of Mamistra, succeeds Bernard, II: 60; 
character, 60, 613; controversy with 
William, patriarch of Jerusalem, 64; 
circumstances which gave rise to con- 
troversy, 68; deceives Alice, 78; dis- 
cord between Raymond of Poitou and, 
79; legate of church of Rome sent to 
investigate trouble with canon, 110; 
departs for Rome, 113; taken prisoner 
by Duke Roger: reconciliation: reaches 
Rome, 114; trial and deposition, 115- 
21; appearance and character: escape 
to Rome: death, 121; succeeded by 
Aimery, 122 

Ralph, bishop of Sebaste, delegate to gen- 
eral synod at Rome, II: 436 

Ralph, brother of William, archbishop of 
Tyre, I: 8 - 


INDEX 


Ralph, king’s chancellor, imposed as arch- 
bishop upon church of Tyre, II: 161; 
decision rendered null and void, 162; 
later became bishop of Bethlehem, 163, 
333) 3723 envoy to Renaud de Chiatil- 
lon, 2353 opposed election of Amalrich 
as patriarch, 271; carries cross into bat- 
tle, 388; death, 394, 404; succeeded as 

- chancellor by William, 404 

Ralph, son of Godfrey, I: 287 

Ralph de Beaugency, I: 95 

Ralph de Fontenay, I: 266 

Ralph de Mauleon, prowess in battle, I: 


497 

Ralph de Merle, If: 213, 214 

Ralph of Foritaneto, viscount of Pisellus, 
Ts 484 

Ramlah, Godfrey sent to, I: 332; place 
found deserted, 333; duke musters 
forces at, 394; described: abandoned 
by citizens, 438; carnage wrought by 
pilgrims: victory granted from on high, 
440; Baldwin I retreats into citadel, 
4453 citadel taken by Egyptians, 446; 
Egyptians enter land of, 465; burned, 
TI: 428 

Ranculat, fortress given to Greeks, II: 209 

Raphania, seized by Pons, II: 30 

Rasaline [Raseline], Zangi camps at: 
withdraws, II: 106, 473 

Ravendal, fortress given to Greeks, II: 
209 

Raymond, bishop of Beirut, II: 414, 457 

Raymond, count of Toulouse and St. 
Gilles, I: 95, 96; in Dalmatia, 139; 
biography, 139%; at Durazzo, 1413 
troubles with Alexius, 143-46; at 
Nicaea, 155, 158; attempt to weaken 
tower, 161; aids Bohemond, 172; sick 
unto death, 177, 287; at Antioch, 
207 ff., 229, 230, 232, 247, 265; as- 
sumes care of new fortress, 2353 re- 
fuses to concede Antioch to Bohemond, 
244, 249; resigns care of fortress, 268; 
at Ezaz, 303; takes Albara, 309; at 
Maara, 310; controversy with Bohe- 
mond, 312; his towers at Antioch 
seized, 313; drives off enemy’s cattle: 
starts march to Jerusalem, 314; army 
attacked by brigands, 316; forces duke 
to abandon siege of Jabala, 321; Tan- 
cred brings grave charges against, 322, 
323; hearts of other chiefs estranged 
from, 3233; advises waiting for Alexius, 
327; vain effort to take Arka, 328; re- 


545 


luctant to abandon siege, 329; camp at 
Jerusalem, 349, 358; paid wages from 
private treasury, 3513; sends escort to 
meet fleet, 356; disagreement with Tan- 
cred, 358; attacks Jerusalem, 367-78; 
choice of many for secular leader, 382; 
duke demands citadel, 383; prepares 
to return home, 384; returns to Con- 
stantinople, 397; guides new contin- 
gent of pilgrims, 432; Tortosa resigned 
to: remains in city, 433, 442; builds 
fortress before Tripoli, 454; death, 
462; lauded, 463; son joins pilgrims, 
II: 181 

Raymond II, count of Tripoli, succeeds 
Pons: avenges death of father, II: 82; 
tortures prisoners, 83; taken prisoner 
at Montferrand, 85; released, 91; en- 
mity arises between countess and: death 
of count, 214; children, 215 

Raymond III, count of Tripoli, as regent, 
I: 17; retires from regency, 18; enters 
Jerusalem, 21; relations with Bald- 
win IV, 23; again regent, 24; urged to 
go to relief of Antioch, II: 263; trouble 
with Manuel, 288-91; at siege of 
Harim, 307; cast into prison, 308; re- 
turns from prison: territory restored, 
390; demands regency of realm, 400; 
undertakes regency: lineage, 402; ap- 
pearance, character, 403; weds Es- 
chiva, 404; marches toward Coelesyria 
to oppose Saladin, 405; camps near 
Arka, 408; refugees in citadel of Hims 
beg aid, 409; agreement with Saladin: 
returns home, 410; in vicinity of Heli- 
opolis burning everything, 413; aids 
in siege against Harim, 425; in battle 
with Saladin, 442; causes Baldwin IV 
alarm, 446; truce with Saladin, 448; 
goes to Antioch to influence Bohe- 
mond III, 456; hostility between king 
and, 459; peace reéstablished, 460; 
against his advice the king marched 
out against Saladin, 469; responsible 
for fortress in Sawad, 471; illness, 473; 
raid near Bostrum, 485; prowess in 
battle, 497; urges coronation of Bald- 
win V, 501; he alone capable of under- 
taking regency, 502; made commander 
of whole army, 504; could Jerusalem 
be saved by? 505-5093 personality, in- 
tellect, 5097 

Raymond, master of the hospital at Jeru- 
salem, II: 218, 2453; at council of Acre, 


546 


Raymond (Continued) 
185; at siege of Ascalon, 229; causes 
trouble to prelates of church, 239 

Raymond of Poitou, prince of Antioch, 
invited to marry Constance, daughter of 
Bohemond II, II: 59; arrives secretly at 
Antioch, 77; effort of duke of Apulia 
to waylay: Alice strives to prevent al- 
liance, 78; marries Constance and be- 
comes prince of Antioch: relations with 
patriarch, 79, 110, 113 ff.; manners 
and appearance, 80; refugees at Mont- 
ferrand appeal to, 87; goes to relief 
of king, 88; returns, finds Antioch be- 
sieged by Emperor John, 92; treaty 
with emperor, 93; marches with em- 
peror to war, 943; conduct incenses 
John, 95; Joscelin II tries to bring em- 
peror’s displeasure upon, 97; emperor’s 
wrath excited against: envoys offer ex- 
cuses, 101; comes to aid siege of Ban- 
yas, 109; effort to ascertain legate’s 
intention concerning patriarch, 112; 
conspires with adversaries of patriarch: 
breaks oath of fealty, 113 ff.; troubles 
with emperor, 123-25; feud between 
Joscelin II and, 140, 1413; delays ren- 
dering aid to Edessa, 142, 1433 quarrel 
with Louis VII, 179-80; at Damascus, 
194; exposes himself to enemy, 197; 
forces flee: he is slain: character, 198; 
head sent to all Turkish satraps, 199; 
succeeded by Renaud de Chitillon 
(q.v.), 224 

Raymond Pilet, I: 287, 356, 370 

Raynald, abbot of Mt. Sion, II: 436 

Raynald, bishop of Hebron, II: 346 

Raynerus, bishop of Lydda, II: 359 

Reibald Creton, I: 266 

Reinard, count of Toul, I: 116, 175, 208, 
246, 287 

Reinhold von Ammersbach, I: 287, 299 

Renaud, ruler in Apulia, II: 31 

Renaud de Beauvais, I: 173, 287 

Renaud de Chatillon, I: 19; at siege of 
Ascalon: served king for pay, II: 218; 
weds Lady Constance, becomes prince 
of Antioch, succeeding Raymond of 
Poitou, 224; Aimery shamefully abused 
by, 235; seizes Cyprus, 253; despoils 
inhabitants, 254; summoned to relief 
of Banyas, 263; invited to invade en- 
emy’s country, 265; demands that lord 
of Shayzar pledge fealty to him, 268; 
Harim delivered to, 271; makes amends 


INDEX 


for outrages, 275; disgusts all with vio- 
lent impulses, 277; plunders and robs 
Christians, 283; captured and im- 
prisoned by Turks, 284; released, 4145 
constituted regent of realm and com- 
mander in chief of army, 418; goes out 
to meet Saladin, 430; negotiates mar- 
riage of stepson, 4523; accompanies 
patriarch to Antioch, 456; charged 
with breaking truce with Saladin, 
4682; prowess in battle, 497; goes to 
protect Petra, 499; rash tactics, 500 

Renaud de Nephins, II: 378 

Renaud Masoier [Rainald Mansour], I: 
530; Antioch left in charge of, II: 55; 
retires to fortress because of Bohe- 
mond III’s conduct, 454 

Renaud of Marash, II: 53, 198 

Renaud of Sidon, II: 77; alliance with 
Agnes, 302; a partisan of Raymond III 
of Tripoli, 401; goes out against Sala- 
din, 430, 4423; prowess in battle, 497; 
urges coronation of Baldwin V, s5o1 

Renaud the Bishop, II: 87 

Renier, bishop of Sebaste, II: 247 

Renier, son of William the Elder of 
Montferrat, weds Maria, daughter of 
Emperor Manuel, II: 450 

Renier de Brus, slain, I: 109; Banyas: 
wife captured, II: 74; restored, 76; 
marriage to Agnes: Banyas granted to, 
773; a refuge at Montferrand, 87; tem- 
poral jurisdiction of Banyas restored 
to, 112 

Renier de Maron 4 Mareuil [Rainerius 
of Marum], II: 440 

Resurrection, William answers question 
concerning a future, II: 299 

Rhinococura [al-Arish], I: 550 

Richard, son of Count Rainulf, I: 134 

Richard of the Principate, I: 134, 175, 
185 

Ridwan, prince of Aleppo, lord of Ezaz 
seeks help against, I: 301; flees, 303; 
invades Antioch, 463; defeated, 464; 
again invades Antioch, HI: 43 

Robert, archbishop of Nazareth, II: 154, 
185, 218 

Robert, bishop of Ramlah, I: 333 

Robert II, count of Flanders, I: g5; ar- 
rives at Constantinople: honored by 
Alexius I, 138; biography, 1387; ad- 
vice to count of Toulouse, 145; re- 
sumes pilgrimage: arrives at Nicaea, 
147) 156, 157; at Durazzo, 149; siege 


INDEX 


of Artasium [Artah], 195, 197; at 
Antioch, 207, 215, 230, 232, 244, 247, 
266, 289; scales wall, 256; sets fire 
to fort, 268; command, 286; to march 
out ahead of main army, 288; puts 
enemy to flight, 293; at Maara, 310; 
at Laodicea, 320; abandons siege of 
Arka, 329; sent to Ramlah, 332; camp 
at Jerusalem, 349; enters city, 369; 
at Ramlah, 395; returns to own land, 


397 

Robert, count of Normandy, I: 95, 169; 
arrives at Constantinople: honored by 
Alexius, 148; biography, 1487; storms 
bridge on road to Antioch, 198; at 
Antioch, 207, 230, 231, 232, 244, 247, 
289; command, 286, 288; to march out 
ahead of main army, 288; puts enemy 
to flight, 293; at Maara, 310; on 
march to Jerusalem, 315, 316; aban- 
dons siege of Arka, 329; camp at 
Jerusalem, 349; enters city, 369; re- 
turns to own land, 397; finds Henry 
king: demands kingdom: dies in 
prison, 398 

Robert, count of Perche, II: 185 

Robert, master of the Knights of the 
Temple, II: 185 

Robert, murderer of bishop of Acre, I: 
385, 386 

Robert, son of Gerard, I: 287 

Robert, son of Tostan, I: 134 

Robert de Roziéres, I: 195 

Robert de Sourdeval, I: 134, I: 210 

Robert Guiscard, duke of Apulia, I: 86, 
96, 1357, II: 33, 60 

Robert Mansel, II: 306 

Robert of Anzi, I: 134, 175, 185 

Robert of Bassavilla, count of Sicily, II: 
238, 2473; seized land of Apulia, 250 

Robert of Paris, I: 171 

Robert of St. L6, I: 530 

Robert of Sorrento, prince of Capua, II: 
238, 247, 250, 251 

Robert the Burgundian, II: 104 

Roger I, king of Sicily, surnamed Bursa, 
I: 1337, 496; Il: 59 

Roger II, king of Sicily, I: 496; angered 
at Baldwin I’s treatment of countess 
of Sicily, 514; struggle for power in 
Sicily, II: 31; sets sail for Africa, 35; 
claims on Antioch, 59-60; receives 
Hugh, count of Jaffa, 75; gives him 
county of Gargan, 76; plans to waylay 
Raymond of Poitou, 78; takes patriarch 


547 


of Antioch prisoner, 115; honors him, 
118 

Roger, prince of Antioch, succession to 
principality: condition, I: 492; called 
to aid in battle against Mawdud, 493; 
blames king for disaster, 494; asks aid 
of king and Tughtigin against Bursuq, 
sot; forces Turks to flee, 503; warned 
of Il-Ghazi’s approach, 528; plunges 
army into destruction, 529; death, 530; 
character, 531 

Roger, bishop of Lydda, I: 536, 556, II: 
87 

Roger, canon of church of Banyas, II: 310 

Roger de Barneville, I: 96, 149, 157, 1983 
valor: death, 262, 266 

Roger des Moulins, II: 456 

Rohard, castellan of citadel of Jerusalem, 
II: 126, 378, 401 

Rohard of Jaffa, II: 261, 401 

Rohard of Nablus, II: 76, 206 

Roland, cardinal-priest of church of St. 
Peter, ordained pope under name Alex- 
ander (q.v.), II: 281 

Romain de Puy, conspires against king, 

2 70 

Roman Catholic Church, preparatory 
negotiations for union with Greek Or- 
thodox Church, I: 20; dangerous schism 
arises, II: 61-70; circumstances which 
gave rise to controversy, 68; legate sent 
to investigate trouble in church at An- 
tioch, 110; Ralph, patriarch, refuses to 
acknowledge see of Antioch as subject 
to church of Rome, 115; papal legate 
dies at Acre, 117; legate summons patri- 
arch and bishops to synod at Antioch, 
118; legate deposes Ralph, 121; Mar- 
onites return to unity of, 4583; jealousy 
caused by difference in sacraments of 
Greek Orthodox Church and, 462; ef- 
fect of Manuel’s approval of union 
with Greek church, 465; see also under 
names of popes 

Romania, ill fortune of pilgrims in, I: 
433, 442 

Romanus III, Byzantine emperor, I: 69 

Romanus IV Diogenes, Byzantine em- 
peror, I: 77, 78 

Romanus, bishop of Tripoli, II: 436 

Rome, general synod at (Third Lateran 
council), I: 20, 26, II: 436, 438 

Rorgo, bishop of Acre, II: 185 

Rosetta, city, II: 327 

Rosinolo, count of, I: 134 


548 


Rotrou, count of Perche, I: 95, 149, 287, 
II: 49, 346 

Rudolph, pseudo-king of Saxony, I: 389 

Rugia, chiefs meet at, I: 312; combat be- 
tween Fulk and Pons, II: 55 

Rupen III [Rupinus], Armenian chief, 
II: 457; Bohemond III arranges ex- 
change of Tarsus with, 491 


Saint Anna, convent of, I: 461 

Saint Elias, Greek monastery, defended by 
monks, II: 495 

Saint George, order of, II: 87 

Saint Simeon, monastery of, Nureddin’s 
unrestrained license at, II: 199 

Saint Simeon, port, I: 309, II: 179 

Saladin, I: 43, Il: 332, 335; invasion of 
Jerusalem, 19, 24; uniting Muslim 
world, 23; resumed hostilities, 25; cap- 
ture of Jerusalem, 26; appeals to Shir- 
kuh, 338; guarded from insults, 342; 
succeeds Shirkuh as sultan of Egypt: 
character, 358, 405; slays caliph and 
his children, seizes wealth and power, 
359; invades our land, lays siege to 
Daron, 371; halts before Gaza, 374; 
atrocities of Turks under: returns to 
his own land, 375; besieges Montreal, 
388; lays waste entire country beyond 
Jordan, 389; seizes Damascus and other 
parts of region, 404, 409; all king- 
doms about us obey, 408; had risen 
against Nureddin’s son, his rightful 
lord, 408; lays siege to Bostrum, 409; 
seizes Aleppo and citadel of Hims: re- 
quests count not to interfere with his 
progress: returns hostages, 410; Hum- 
phrey of Toron accused of friendship 
with, 410; makes peace with son of 
Nureddin, departs for Egypt, 425; in- 
vades Egypt, 426; takes position before 
Ascalon: arrogance, 4273 put to flight, 
430; bodyguard, 4313 returns stricken 
by divine hand, 433; invades land of 
Sidon, 440; defeats Christians, takes 
many prisoners, 442; attacks Tiberias, 
446; concludes truce with Baldwin IV 
on equal terms: lays waste land of 
Tripoli, 447; truce with Raymond III 
of Tripoli, 448; fears Sicilian fleet, 
458; revokes treaty with king, 467; 
imprisons shipwrecked Christians, 468 ; 
assaults Buria, carries people into cap- 
tivity, 4693; seizes cave in Sawad, 470; 
invades our land, 472; battle at For- 


INDEX 


belet, 474; summons fleet from Egypt, 
lays siege to Beirut, 475; devastates 
land, raises siege, 479; in Mesopotamia, 
480; increase of power viewed with 
great alarm, 486, 491; acquires Aleppo 
under agreement, 489; encamps near 
Scythopolis, 493; detached bands range 
over district, 494 ff.; encampment at 
Tubania, 494; remains without opposi- 
tion in vicinity of our army: takes Petra, 
498; raises siege, 504 

“Saladin tithe,” model for, II: 4892 

Saljugs, origin, I: 73 

Salome, II: 28 

Samaria, I: 340 

Samosata, Baldwin lays siege to, I: 192; 
citizens conspire to slay ruler, 193; 
sold to Baldwin, 194; given to Greeks, 
II: 209 

Samsadolus, I: 309 

Sandstorm, H: 317 

Saphet, castle, II: 473 

Sardona, besieged, I: 532, I: 24 

Sarmata, refugees in, surrender to II- 
Ghazi, I: 531 

Satalia, II: 178 

Sawad [Suita], Nureddin besieges, II: 
272; Saladin seizes cave in, 4703; Chris- 
tians take cave by siege, 482 

Sawar, II: 437 

Saxons, I: 208; refuse to endure yoke of 
Roman Empire, 389 

Sayf al-Din [Seifedin], care of Egypt 
committed to, II: 404 

Scandalium, fortress, I: 514; district, I: 


Scandinavians: Danes under Svein annihi- 
lated by Turks, I: 217 f.; Danes and 
Norwegians arrive in Syria, 486; aid 
in siege of Sidon, 487 

Scythopolis, II: 473; Saladin encamps 
near, 493 

Second Crusade, II: 163 ff. 

Seiher de Mamedunc, II: 393 

Seleucia, bishoprics, II: 64 

Semlin [Malevilla], treatment of pilgrims 
at, I: 98; revenge, 99; captured, 100; 
Godfrey’s army reaches, 120 

Sephorie, Amaury I assembles army at, II: 
383; a custom of his ancestors, 384, 
4915; our forces concentrate at fountain, 
491, 493, 494, 498 

Serbia, revolt, II: 348 

Sergiopolis, bishoprics, TI: 65 

Serlo of Apamea, offers protection to 


INDEX 


Patriarch Ralph, II: 119; is deposed: 
dies, 120 

Seruj, seized by Baldwin, I: 194; Balas 
demands return of, 307 

Severus, emperor, I: 1 

Seylon, I: 483 

Shams al-Dula [Semsedolus] marches out 
against Baldwin IV, II: 413 

Shawar, sultan of Egypt, driven out of 
office by Dirgham: begs aid of Nured- 
din, II: 303; defeats Dirgham: be- 
comes sultan, 305, 310; enters into 
agreement with Amaury I: sends Shir- 
kuh out of country, 305; terrified 
at sudden appearance of Amaury: mar- 
vels at loyalty of Christians, 315; re- 
news treaty with king, 318; approves 
pact with Shirkuh, 341; triumphant 
entry into Alexandria, 342; again 
implores Nureddin’s aid, 350; over- 
whelmed by outrages of Christians, 
352; sum offered for ransom of kin 
and withdrawal of troops, 353; with- 
draws from agreement: seeks aid of 
Turks, 354; murdered, sons put to 
death, 357; succeeded by Shirkuh, 357 

Shayzar, II: 93; siege of, 943 citizens 
beg for a truce, 96; situation, 266; 
besieged and taken, 267; destined for 
Thierry, count of Flanders: Prince 
Renaud raises difficulties: enterprise 
abandoned, 268; destroyed by earth- 
quake, 370; taken by Saladin, 405, 409 

Shiites, I: 66, II: 323 

Shirkuh [Siraconus], II: 272; sent into 
Egypt: character, appearance, 303; de- 
feats Dirgham: attacks Balbis: driven 
out of Egypt, 305, 3103; strongholds 
surrendered to, 312; goes into Egypt 
with a mighty force: enlists aid of 
caliph of Bagdad, 313; Amaury 
marches forth to meet, 317; seizes is- 
land: troops perish, 326; flees into 
desert, 327; seizes Alexandria, 334; 
confers with Hugh of Caesarea about 
peace, 339; treaty with Amaury, 340; 
sent again into Egypt, 3525; seizes 
Egypt, kills Shawar, 356; made sultan, 
3573 slain: succeeded by Saladin, 358 

Sibylla, countess of Flanders, lands at 
Beirut, II: 49, 264; influenced election 
of Amalrich to patriarchate, 271 

Sibylla, sister of Baldwin IV: marriage 
to William of Montferrat, I: 18; mar- 
riage to Guy de Lusignan, 21, TI: 446; 


549 


parentage, children, 53; brought up 
in convent, 399; king demands annul- 
ment of marriage to Guy, 507 

Sicily, attacked by Africans, II: 34-35 

Sidon, I: 3315 siege of, 486; described, 
4875; surrenders: granted to Eustace 
Grenier, 488; bishoprics, II: 66; Sala- 
din invades, 440 

Siegmar of Malines, I: 273 

Sigurd, I: 3, 486 ff. 

Siloam, fountain of, I: 348, 352 

Simeon, patriarch of Jerusalem, I: 82, 
376% 

Simon of Tiberias, II: 218 

Sisium, II: 275 

Smoke screen, I: 290 

Sophronius, bishop, I: 62 

Stephania, abbess, II: 301 

Stephanie, widow of younger Humphrey, 
given as wife to Milon de Plancy, II: 
401 

Stephen, patriarch of Jerusalem, I: 525; 
character: claims against king, II: 39; 
death, 40, 43 

Stephen, king of England, I: 386 

Stephen, archbishop of Tarsus, II: 119 

Stephen, bishop of Metz, II: 184 

Stephen, chancellor of king of Sicily, II: 
346, 347 

Stephen, count of Blois, rejects King 
Amaury’s plan to make him his son- 
in-law: falls into an ambush, II: 384 

Stephen, count of Burgundy, I: 431, 442, 
443, 444 

Stephen, count of Chartres and Blois, I: 
95, 148, 158, 169; biography, 1487; 
at Antioch, 207; infamous act, 239; 
visits emperor of Constantinople, 274- 
75; memory abhorred, 279; undertakes 

‘a fresh crusade, 430, 442, 443; killed, 


444 

Stephen d’Aumale, count, I: 95, 149, 287 

Stephen of Saéne, count, II: 384 

Stralicia, I: 121, 122 

Sugar, II: 6 

Sukman Ibn Ortugq, I: 4597 

Sunnites, I: 65, II: 323 

Sunstroke, deaths by, II: 475 

Svein, son of king of Danes, killed, I: 217 

Swabians, I: 208 

Symon, son of the duke, I: 484 

Syracuse seized by Africans, II: 35 

Syria, seized by Arabs under Omar, son 
of Catab, I: 60; invaded by Chosroes, 
61; under yoke of servitude, 63; cru- 


559 


Syria (Continued) 
saders overrun northern part, 187-224; 
begin siege of Antioch (q.v.), 195 ff.; 
province of Coelesyria, 200; Christians 
of, recommend shore road to Jerusalem, 
3303 prince of Egypt marches into, 393; 
put to flight, 397; army of Egyptians 
invades, 464; earthquake, 500, II: 370; 
troubles in northern: reign of Baldwin 
II, I: 517-56; lands and extent, II: 4; 
troubles in northern: reign of Fulk, 
47-943; seized by Saladin, 489 

Syrians, privileges granted to, in Jeru- 
salem, I: 538; betray Pons, II: 82; in 
Phoenicia return to unity of Catholic 
Church, 458; characteristics, 471 

Syria Sobal, Baldwin IV in, II: 470 


Taj-al-Muluk Buri [Tegelmeluch], king 
of Damascus, captures Banyas, II: 74 
Tancred, I: 43, 96, 134; puts Alexius’ 
army to flight, 136; moves his legions 
into Bithynia, 137; genealogy, 1377; 
at Nicaea, 157; leaders separate, 169; 
barely escapes death, 171; separates 
from main army, 175; lays siege to 
Tarsus, 178; his standard raised over 
tower, 179; torn down by Baldwin, 
180; retires to Adana, 181; takes pos- 
session of Mamistra, 181; combat with 
Baldwin, 185; invades Cilicia, 186; 
universal praise of valor, 187; at 
Artasium, 197; to build and guard 
fort at Antioch, 236; scales city wall, 
256; causes heads of victims to be cut 
off, 266; command, 287; hurries to 
Bohemond’s aid, 292; aids in rout of 
Qilij Arslan, 293; at Maara, 310; on 
march to Jerusalem, 315, 316; charges 
against count, 322, 323; abandons siege 
of Arka, 329; kills shepherds, takes 
cattle, 337; camp at Jerusalem, 349, 
358; disagreement with count of Tou- 
louse, 358; enters city, 369; carnage 
and plunder in Temple, 371; at Nablus, 
395; Tiberias, Galilee, and Haifa be- 
stowed upon, 399; establishes churches: 
called to principality of Antioch, 399; 
Baldwin distrusts, 424; mindful of 
wrong done him by Baldwin: gives up 
Tiberias and Haifa, retires to Antioch, 
428; receives pilgrims, 433; asked to 
hasten to Jaffa, 441; receives Apamea 
and Laodicea, 449; Bohemond resigns 
principality of Antioch to, 451; in siege 


INDEX 


of Haran, 456; Edessa placed under 
care of, 4593 Cecilia destined bride of, 
460; attacks Ridwan, 463; compels him 
to flee, 464; goes to relief of Edessa, 
473; Baldwin du Bourg and Joscelin 
stir up war against, 4743 valiant re- 
sistance against Turks, 489; dies, leaves 
principality to Roger, son of Richard, 
492, 531; buried in portico of church 
of the Apostles, 493 

Tanis, I: 515 

Tantais, Turkish satrap, offers to sur- 
render Bostrum to Baldwin III, I: 146, 
147 

Taranto, II: 247 

Tarsus, Tancred lays siege to, I: 178; 
taken by Baldwin: pilgrims die before 
gates, 182; fleet from West, 183; 
bishoprics, II: 64; seized by Thoros, 
275; Bohemond III arranges exchange 
of, with Rupen, 491 : 

Taticius, becomes associated with Chris- 
tian leaders, I: 150; advice to citizens 
of Nicaea, 165; leaves army, 218 

Tax, method of collecting in Jerusalem, 
II: 487 

Tekoah, our army defeated at, II: 103 

Temple, military order of the, see Knights 
Templars 

Thaddeus, apostle, II: 144 

Thebans, II: 330 

Thebeth, lord of Mosul, Aleppo be- 
queathed to, II: 457 

Theobald, cardinal-priest, II: 22 

Theobald II of Chartres, II: 185, 360 

Theodora, niece of Emperor Manuel, 
weds Baldwin III, I: 273; king’s devo- 
tion to, 275; Acre given to as dowry: 
abducted by Andronicus, 345 

Theodora, wife of Bohemond III, II: 453 

Theodora Calusina, II: 453 

Theodosiopolis, bishoprics, II: 65 

Theodosius, patriarch of Constantinople, 
II: 450 

Theophilus, I: 200 

Theophylact [Trifulus], I: 287 

Theopolis, Antioch called, I: 200 

Theotwin, bishop of Porto, II: 184 

Thessaly, Latin atrocities in, II: 466 

Thierry, count of Flanders, married to 
Sibylla, daughter of Fulk, II: 49; pil- 
grimage to Jerusalem, 102; at council 
of Acre, 185; at Damascus, 193; lands 
at Beirut with Sibylla, 264; goes to 
Antioch with Baldwin III, 265; king 


INDEX 


destines Shayzar for: refuses to swear 
fealty to prince of Antioch, 268; de- 
cides to return home, 2773 arrives in 
Syria, 308; goes to aid of Antioch, 310 

Thomas, apostle, II: 144 

Thomas, nephew of Thoros, placed in 
possession of uncle’s domain, II: 386; 
driven out by Malih, 387 

Thomas 4 Becket, archbishop of Canter- 
bury, slain, II: 376 

Thomas de La Fére, I: 96, 112, 173, 287, 
369 

Thoros I, Armenian prince, I: 416; raids 
upon Cilicia, II: 253; joins Christians 
in besieging Shayzar, 266; seizes Ci- 
licia: Emperor Manuel takes, by sur- 
prise, 275; an understanding is brought 
about: takes oath of liege fealty to 
emperor, 278; advice disregarded, with- 
draws from battle, 308; death: Malih 
(q.v.) takes possession of domains, 386 

Thoros, ruler of Edessa, I: 1907, 191; 
dethroned and killed, 193 

Tibenin, I: 469 

Tiberias, bestowed upon Tancred, I: 399; 
relinquished: given to Hugh de Falken- 
berg, 428; region laid waste, 538; army 
to assemble at, II: 106; camp near, 147; 
attacked by Saladin, 446; he encamps 
at Cavan, 473 

Titus, I: 341 

Toron, I: 469 

Tortona, besieged, II: 237 

Tortosa [Antarados], seized, I: 319; cap- 
tured and given over to count of Tou- 
louse, 433, 442, 4543 bishoprics, Il: 66 

Toulouse, count of, see Raymond IV of 
St. Gilles; Alphonse, count of Toulouse 

Trachonitis, II: 151, 412 

Tripoli, prisoners at, send word that Arka 
should be besieged, I: 318; battle pro- 
posed by governor of, 328; he is de- 
feated, 329; obtains treaty at great 
cost, 329; Mount of the Pilgrims built, 
4543 siege continued by William Jor- 
dan, 462; Bertram becomes count of, 
475; rivalry between William Jordan 
and Bertram for possession of, 476; 
Baldwin I besieges and captures, 4773 
Montferrand fortress besieged by Zangi, 
II: 56; bishoprics, 66; Count Pons 
(g.v.) slain, succeeded by Raymond II 
(qg.v.): Damascenes invade land, 82; 
extent of country, 182; Baldwin WI 
calls a general council at, 213; king 


551 


and Melisend try to reconcile count and 
wife: Raymond killed, 214; nobles 
swear allegiance to countess, 214; earth- 
quake, 370; laid waste by Saladin, 447 

Troyes, council of, I: 525, I: 40 

Tubania, Saladin established at springs 
of, II: 494; famine in our army, 496; 
event worthy of record, 4983; count of 
Jaffa’s conduct of affairs, 501 

Tughtigin [Doldequinus], king of Da- 
mascus, I: 496, 501; joins Egyptians, 
5233; invades land of Antioch, 528; 
flight, 534; lays waste land of Tiberias, 
538; arrives at Tyre, II: 13, 18; pro- 
posals of peace, 19; alliance with 
Bursuqi, 24; marches out to meet our 
army, 27; attack upon foraging party, 
41; betrayed by magistrate, loses 
Banyas, 107 

Turbessel, I: 490, 545; Emperor John 
encamps before, II: 123; Joscelin II 
establishes residence at, 140; sultan of 
Iconium lays siege to, 200; given into 
power of Greeks, 209 

Turcopoles, II: 331, 477 

Turkomans, I: 72, 74, 528; captured by 
Baldwin III in defiance of treaty, I: 
255 

Turks, condition of Christians under rule 
of, I: 70, 793; origin and ancestry of 
race, 71; in Persia, 71; ordered out 
of country: elect Saljuq king, 73; con- 
quer Orient, invade Egypt, subjugate 
Jerusalem, 74; sovereignty of Jeru- 
salem wrested from, 333 

Tyre, city of refuge for Latins: base of 
operations for siege of Acre, I: 39; 
camp near, 331; fortress built over- 
looking, 469, 514; failure of siege, 491; 
agreement between barons of kingdom 
and doge of Venice on siege of, 550; 
treaty, 552; grants to Venetians, 555; 
siege and capture of, II: 1-21; de- 
scribed, 1, 8; environs, 5; history, 7; 
status and condition of citizens, 8; con- 
ferred upon Fulk, 51; bishoprics, 64; 
place among suffragans of church at 
Jerusalem, 65; assigned to Baldwin III 
in division of kingdom, 205; Frederick, 
archbishop of, dies, 402; William II 
succeeds him, 411; archbishops, see 
Frederick; Fulcher; Peter; Ralph, the 
king’s chancellor; William I; William 
II 

Tyre, cave of, seized by Shirkuh, II: 312 


552 


Tyre, diocese of, in hands of Christians, 


II: 19 


Ubaydullah [Abdallah], TI: 324 

Umar, see Omar 

Urban II, pope, I: 3783; reception of 
Peter the Hermit, 85; crossed Alps into 
France, 87; sermon on behalf of pil- 
grimage, 88 ff.; enthusiasm aroused by, 


93 

Usamah ibn-Mungqidh, I: 16, Il: 96m, 
252” 

Uthman, II: 323 


Valenia, I: 322 

Valley of Moses, fortress, I: 144 

Varennes, count of, II: 176 

Venetians, treaty with princes of Jerusalem 
in matter of siege of Tyre, I: 552 (see 
also Domenigo Michieli; Fleet, Vene- 
tian); privileges granted to, in Jeru- 
salem, 553; in Acre, 554; lawsuits: 
grants in Tyre and Ascalon, 555; third 
of Tyre assigned to, HI: 21; join our 
forces, 496 

Victor III, pope, I: 86 

Victor IV, antipope, Octavianus consti- 
tuted pope under name of: schism arises 
in church, II: 281, 285 


Walter de Dommedard, I: 287 

Walter de Falkenberg, castellan of St. 
Omer, II: 205, 213, 218 

Walter de Quesnoy, II: 310 

Walter de Verra, I: 331 

Walter du Mesnil [Maisnilio], II: 393 

Walter of Caesarea, II: 71; challenges 
Hugh, count of Jaffa, 72; at council 
of Acre, 185; prowess in battle, 497 

Walter of Garland, I: 157 

Walter the Penniless, in Hungary, I: 97; 
reaches Constantinople, 99; slain, 109 

Wieselburg [Meseburg], pilgrims reach, 
IT: 113; besieged, 114 

William, patriarch of Jerusalem, succeeds 
Stephen: character, II: 43; effort to 
prevent Fulcher from going to Rome, 
63; letters of Innocent II to, 63, 653 
controversy with Ralph, patriarch of 
Antioch, 64; causes of dispute, 68; 
mediates between King Fulk and Hugh, 
count of Jaffa, 73; summoned to 
Montferrand, 87; goes to relief of 
king, 88; at siege of Banyas, 110; at 
synod of Antioch, 118; crowns Baldwin 





INDEX 


III and Melisend, 139; dies, succeeded 
by Fulcher, 161 

William I, king of Sicily, enmity between 
Pope Hadrian IV and, II: 236; orders 
siege of Benevento, 238; defeats Greek 
forces in Apulia, 250; dies, 312 

William II, king of Sicily, Amaury I 
and bishops appeal to, II: 360, 3773 
sends fleet to Alexandria: suffers enor- 
mous loss, 399 

William I, archbishop of Tyre, appoint- 
ment to office, II: 35; character, 36; 
pallium conferred upon, 37; death, 62 

William II, archbishop of Tyre, I: 3; 
first comprehensive history of crusades, 
4; life and writings, 4-26; contributors 
to reconstruction of career, 5; influence 
on later writers, 37-44; love of country, 
55; growth as an historian, 3477; 
answer to Amaury I on resurrection, II: 
299; sent to Constantinople, 347; goes 
to Rome, 369; tutor to Baldwin IV, 
397-98; succeeds Ralph as_ king’s 
chancellor, 404; indictment of con- 
temporaries, 406; confirmed as arch- 
bishop of Tyre, 411; officiates at funeral 
of William of Montferrat, 416; dele- 
gate to synod at Rome, 436; library, 
4382; returns from Constantinople, 
449; greatest disappointment of life, 
451; wearied by disasters, resolves to 
abandon pen, 505; urged to continue 
work, 506 

works, I: 26-28; account of Third 
Lateran Council, 26; Gesta Amalrici 
regis, 15, 27, 28, 333 Gesta Hiersolymi- 
tanorum regum, 15, 16, 27, 29, 30, 
33, 40; Gesta orientalium principum, 
16, 26, 27, 30, 40, 65 

William, bishop of Acre, embassy to 
princes of West, II: 360; accompanies 
Amaury I to Constantinople, 378; mur- 
dered, 385; succeeded by Joscius, 386 

William, bishop of Beirut, II: 185 

William, bishop of Orange, I: 94, 95, 177, 
312, 381 

William, brother of Godfrey, I: 387 

William, brother of Tancred, I: 171 

William, count of Forez, I: 95, 158 

William, count of Nevers, II: 347 

William, duke of Apulia, II: 32 

William, nobleman, captures 
Yaghi Siyan, I: 309 

William, son of Henry I of England, II: 
50 


wife of 


INDEX 


William, viscount of Melun, surnamed the 
Carpenter, I: 112, 124, 267 

William Amanjeu, I: 95, 287 

William Aversa, II: 45 

William de Barris, II: 274 

William de Bury, lord of Tiberias, I: 536, 
553, 556; kingdom administered by, 
547; at siege of Tyre, II: 14; estate 
near Tyre, 20; mission to King Fulk, 
38, 51; reckless behavior of foraging 
party under, 41; refugee at Montfer- 
rand, 87 

William de Grandmesnil, I: 267, 274, 277, 
279 

William de Mandeville, count, II: 419 

William de Montpellier, I: 95, 287 

William de Sabran, I: 356, 370 

William de Saéne [William de Sehunna], 
II: 53, 54 

William Embriacus, I: 358 

William Jordan, succeeds Raymond, count 
of Toulouse, I: 462; opposes claims 
of Bertram: cities conceded to, 4753 
death, 476 

William Long Sword, son of Geoffrey 
Martel, II: 49 

William of Cumliaco, I: 315 

William of Poitou, duke of Aquitaine, I: 
430, 433, 442, 443, I: 48, 59, 179 

William Rufus, king of England, I: 398 


533 


William the Elder, marquis of Montfer- 
rat, II: 184 

William the Younger, marquis of Mont- 
ferrat, marriage: death, I: 18; son of, 
recognized as heir to Baldwin IV, 24, 
25, II: 501; arrives in Syria, marries 
sister of Baldwin IV: receives Jaffa 
and Ascalon, 415; appearance, char- 
acter: genealogy: death, 416 


Yaghi Siyan [Aoxianus], Antioch con- 
ferred upon, by Malik Shah, I: 204; 
fortifies city: musters troops, 205; edict, 
2313; causes destruction of his forces, 
233; belief in Firuz, 250; killed, 259; 
wife captured and restored, 309 

Yaruk, governor of Ramlah, I: 66 


Zacharias, bishop of Jerusalem, I: 62 
Zahir [Daher], caliph of Egypt, I: 69 
Zangi [Sanguis], prince of Aleppo, II: 
43%; lays siege to Montferrand, 56, 
85, 87, 89; makes overtures of peace: 
fortress surrendered to, 913; aspires to 
conquer Damascus, 105; invades land 
as far as Rasaline: withdraws before 
our army, 106; failure to aid Banyas, 
110; lays siege to Edessa, 140; killed: 
succeeded by Nureddin (q.v.), 145 
Zeophir, I: 483 


